Title 8 - PLANNING[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Charter reference— Power to adopt land use plans and exercise subdivision regulations, § 8-114(14). State Constitution reference— Planning and zoning, Art. 9, § 2, para. 4; development authorities, Art. 9, § 6, para. 3. State Law reference— Urban redevelopment, O.C.G.A. § 36-61-1 et seq.; development authorities, O.C.G.A. § 36-62-1 et seq. 
CHAPTER 8-1. - ATHENS-CLARKE COUNTY PLANNING COMMISSION Sec. 8-1-1. Establishment; appointment; terms; compensation; removal. Sec. 8-1-2. Chairman; employees; rules of procedure and bylaws; meetings; records. Sec. 8-1-3. Powers; duties. Sec. 8-1-4. Land use plan adopted. Sec. 8-1-5. Reserved. 
Sec. 8-1-1. - Establishment; appointment; terms; compensation; removal.     There is hereby created a planning commission (referred to in this chapter as the "planning commission") to be known as the Athens-Clarke County Planning Commission. The planning commission shall consist of ten members who shall be residents of Athens-Clarke County and who shall be appointed by the mayor and commission. The members of the planning commission at the time this chapter takes effect shall be the initial members of the planning commission to be appointed by the mayor and commission, shall hold office for the balance of their terms then remaining as members of such commission, and their successors shall be appointed by the mayor and commission for a term of five years. Any vacancy in membership appointed by the mayor and commission shall be filled for the unexpired term by appointment by the mayor and commission as heretofore provided; no member of the planning commission shall serve more than two consecutive full, five-year terms; and the mayor and commission shall have the authority to remove any member of the planning commission appointed by it for cause, on written charges, after a public hearing. All members shall serve without compensation but may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in the performance of their duties. (Ord. of 10-6-92, § 1; Ord. of 7-2-96, § 1; Ord. of 7-6-99, § 1; Ord. of 3-4-2003, § 1) 
Sec. 8-1-2. - Chairman; employees; rules of procedure and bylaws; meetings; records.     The planning commission shall elect a chairman from among its members who shall serve for a term of one year and who shall be eligible for re-election as chairman. The planning commission shall be entitled to receive such assistance from the employees of the government, as it shall request. The planning commission shall make its own bylaws and rules of procedure and shall determine its time of meeting. All meetings of the planning commission at which official action shall be taken shall be open to the public and all records of the planning commission shall be public records and shall be kept in the custody of the clerk of commission or of such other public official of the mayor and commission, or of the planning commission, as the commission shall designate. (Ord. of 10-6-92, § 1; Ord. of 7-2-96, § 1; Ord. of 7-6-99, § 1; Ord. of 3-4-2003, § 2) 
Sec. 8-1-3. - Powers; duties.     The Athens-Clarke County Planning Commission shall have the power and duty: (1)  To initiate amendments to the text of the zoning ordinance of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia and to the official zoning map. (2)  To hear and make recommendations to the mayor and commission on proposed amendments to the zoning ordinance of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia, including rezonings and planned developments. (3)  To initiate amendments to the future development map and the Athens-Clarke County Comprehensive Plan. (4)  To hear and make recommendations to the Mayor and Commission on proposed amendments to the future development map and the Athens-Clarke County Comprehensive Plan. (5)  To hear and make recommendations to the mayor and commission on applications for special use permits. (6)  To hear and decide appeals and make decisions as authorized in the zoning ordinance of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia. (7)  To conduct surveys and studies of existing conditions and probable future developments, and to prepare and recommend to the mayor and commission any plans for physical, social and economic growth as will best promote the public health, safety, order, convenience, aesthetics, prosperity or the general welfare of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia. (8)  To perform other planning functions and duties as may be required by the mayor and commission. (Ord. of 10-6-92, § 1; Ord. of 7-2-96, § 1; Ord. of 7-6-99, § 1; Ord. of 3-4-2003, § 3; Ord. of 7-1-2008, § 14) 
Sec. 8-1-4. - Land use plan adopted.     The future development map of Athens-Clarke County, as amended, and The Athens-Clarke County Comprehensive Plan , as adopted by resolution of the Mayor and Commission, including amendments, is hereby adopted by reference. The Athens-Clarke County Comprehensive Plan is available for public inspection in the office of the Clerk of Commission of Athens-Clarke County, Room 204, City Hall, 301 College Avenue, Athens, Georgia. The future development map is incorporated into the zoning code in subsection 9-3-3(A)(2) and is available for public inspection in the office of the Clerk of Commission of Athens-Clarke County, Room 204, City Hall, 301 College Avenue, Athens, Georgia. For the purposes of this title, the phrase "future development map" is intended to be synonymous with the phrase "Future Land Use Map" as found in the rules and regulations of the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, Chapter 110-12-1 of the Official Compilation of the Rules and Regulations of the State of Georgia. (Ord. of 10-6-92, § 1; Ord. of 3-4-2003, § 4; Ord. of 7-1-2008, § 15; Ord. of 7-3-2018(2), § 1 ) 
Sec. 8-1-5. - Reserved. Editor's note— An ordinance adopted March 4, 2003, deleted § 8-1-5, which pertained to the designation of the metropolitan planning organization and derived from an ordinance adopted Oct. 6, 1992, § 1. 
CHAPTER 8-2. - FLOOD PROTECTION[2] Sec. 8-2-1. Purpose. Sec. 8-2-2. General provisions. Sec. 8-2-3. Application procedures. Sec. 8-2-4. Development standards. Sec. 8-2-5. Duties and responsibilities of the Athens-Clarke County Floodplain Administrator. Sec. 8-2-6. Variances and appeal. Sec. 8-2-7. Abrogation and greater restrictions. Sec. 8-2-8. Penalties for violation. Sec. 8-2-9. Warning and disclaimer of liability. Sec. 8-2-10. Definitions of terms. Footnotes: --- (2) --- Cross reference— Public safety, Title 3; buildings and construction, Title 7. 
Sec. 8-2-1. - Purpose.     It is the intent of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to regulate the use and development of property located in such areas; to provide protection from flooding and inundation to persons and property; to prevent interference with the flow of any watercourse; to prevent any appreciable expansion of flooding, siltation, erosion or inundation hazards; and to require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction. Further, this chapter is intended to be compatible with and supportive of the establishment of greenways, river walks and parks and other public uses of floodplains and watercourses as expressed through the land use plan and that may be authorized by other ordinances. (Ord. of 12-5-91 § 1(I); Ord. of 3-6-2007, § 1) 
Sec. 8-2-2. - General provisions. (a)  Adoption of documents identifying Areas of Special Flood Hazard. The Areas of Special Flood Hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency through a scientific and engineering report entitled "The Flood Insurance Study Volume 1 and 2 for Athens-Clarke County, Georgia (All Jurisdictions)," and National Flood Insurance Program-Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for Athens-Clarke County, Georgia (All Jurisdictions), dated April 2, 2007, as amended from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of these regulations. (1)  Copies of the Flood Insurance Study and FIRM described above shall be maintained on file and available for public inspection in the office of the Clerk of the Athens-Clarke County Commission, City Hall, Suite 204, 301 College Avenue, and by reference are made a part of this chapter as if fully incorporated herein. (2)  Purpose of flood insurance study. This study is intended to give the general location of flood hazard areas, the elevation for the regulatory flood, and to determine the nature and extent of flood hazard areas on any particular property. Hydrological studies, engineering computations, flood records and field surveys complied and certified by a registered professional engineer may be required for exact delineation of flood limits and elevations. (3)  The Floodplain Administrator within the Department of Transportation and Public Works is hereby designated to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter and the floodplain management program for the Unified Government of Athens-Clarke County. (4)  Data in order to administer. When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with this section, the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data available from a federal, state or other source in order to administer the provisions of this chapter. Such data could include U.S. Army Corps of Engineer reports. (b)  Application. This chapter shall apply to all areas of Special Flood Hazard within the jurisdiction of Athens-Clarke County. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any project for improvement of a structure solely to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions. (c)  Uses not permitted. No use shall be permitted if the proposed use, in conjunction with all other uses permitted, would raise the water surface elevations of the 100-year flood by more than one foot at any point. (d)  Floodway. In addition to all of the standards, encroachments (including fill), new constructions, substantial improvements and other developments shall be prohibited within floodway unless certification by a registered professional engineer or architect is provided demonstrating that the encroachments will not result in any increase in flood levels or floodway widths during occurrence of the base flood discharge. (e)  Application of chapter to Athens-Clarke County property. All of the provisions of this chapter shall also apply to property owned by Athens-Clarke County. (f)  Use of other data. The Floodplain Administrator may reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source as criteria for requiring that new construction, substantial improvements or other developments in areas of Special Flood Hazard comply with the requirements of section 8-2-4. (Ord. of 12-5-91 § 1(II); Ord. of 3-6-2007, § 1) 
Sec. 8-2-3. - Application procedures. (a)  Permit required. No person shall perform any construction, conversion, substantial improvement or development in areas of Special Flood Hazards as set forth in the provisions of this chapter without first obtaining a development permit from the chief building official. A Flood Plain Construction Permit is also required from the Department of Transportation and Public Works. The fee for the Flood Plain Construction Permit will be charged in accordance with the fee schedule in Section 7-1-560. (b)  Application for permit; required information. Application for a development permit shall be made to the chief building official on forms furnished by him/her accompanied by two sets of the site development plan drawn to scale showing the nature, location and dimensions of the proposed development in question; also showing existing and proposed structures and where applicable the location of fill and storage of material and drainage facilities. In addition, the following information shall be provided: Application stage: (1)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest floor (including basement) of all proposed and existing structures. (2)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure has been flood-proofed. (3)  Design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect stating that any nonresidential flood-proofed structure meets the flood-proofing requirements in section 8-2-4(a)(8). (4)  A description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. (5)  Approval from the Floodplain Administrator. No development permit in Areas of Special Flood Hazard shall be issued unless such permit is approved by the Floodplain Administrator as meeting the provisions of this chapter. Construction stage: (1)  For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit holder shall provide to the chief building official an as-built certification of the regulatory floor elevation or flood-proofing level immediately after the lowest floor or flood-proofing is completed. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When flood-proofing is utilized for non-residential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. (2)  Any work undertaken prior to submission of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. The chief building official shall review the above referenced certification data submitted. If deficiencies are detected by such review, the permit holder shall immediately correct noted deficiencies and correction shall be prior to further progressive work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make said corrections required hereby shall be cause to issue a stop work order for the project. (c)  Maintenance of records; verification of elevation. All records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter shall be maintained in the office of the chief building official. (d)  No Certification by Athens-Clarke County. Nothing in this chapter nor any review or approval of an application or issuance of a permit shall constitute any certification by Athens-Clarke County or any official or employee of Athens-Clarke County that flooding or flood damage shall not occur on any property or any structure located thereon. (Ord. of 12-5-91 § 1(III); Ord. of 3-6-2007, § 1; Ord. of 11-3-2009, § 3) 
Sec. 8-2-4. - Development standards. (a)  Residential and nonresidential. (1)  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure. (2)  Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities shall be elevated a minimum of one foot above the base flood elevation. (3)  All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system. (4)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters. (5)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. (6)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure on which the start of construction was begun after the effective date of this chapter shall meet the requirements of "new construction" as contained in this chapter. (7)  New construction or substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated a minimum of two feet above the base flood elevation. (8)  New construction or substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated two feet above base flood elevation or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall be flood-proofed to one foot above the base flood elevation, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications and plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the applicable provisions of this section. A record of such certificates, which includes the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such structures are flood-proofed, shall be maintained by the chief building official. (9)  For all new construction and substantial improvements, fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be unfinished or flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: a.  A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. b.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. c.  So as not to violate the "Lowest Floor" criteria of this chapter, the unfinished or flood resistant enclosure shall only be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; and d.  the interior portion of such area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. (10)  Any changes or revisions, proposed as part of a new construction or substantial improvement project to the flood data adopted herein and shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) shall be submitted to FEMA for review as a Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR) or Conditional Letter of Map Amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. Upon completion of the project the developer is responsible for submitting the as-built data to FEMA in order to obtain the final Letter of Map Revision (LOMR). (b)  Manufactured homes. (1)  All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved within zones A1-30, AH and AE shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated two feet above the base flood elevation and shall be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (2)  All manufactured homes shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement by providing over-the-top and frame ties to ground anchors. Specific requirements shall be that: a.  over-the-top ties be provided at each end of the manufactured home, with one additional tie per side at an intermediate location on manufactured homes of less than 50 feet or two additional ties per side for manufactured homes of 50 feet or more; b.  frame ties be provided at each corner of the manufactured home with four additional ties per side at intermediate points for manufactured homes less than 50 feet long and one additional tie for manufactured homes of 50 feet or longer; and c.  all components of the anchoring system be capable of carrying a force of 4,725 pounds and any additions to the manufactured home be similarly anchored. (3)  For new manufactured home parks and subdivisions; for expansions to existing manufactured home parks and subdivisions; for existing manufactured home parks and subdivisions where the repair, construction, or improvement of the streets, utilities, and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement has commenced; and for manufactured homes not placed in a manufactured home park or subdivision, the following are required: a.  Stands or lots are elevated on compacted fill or on pilings so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home will be at least two feet above the base flood level; b.  Adequate surface drainage and access for a hauler are provided; and c.  In the instance of elevation on pilings: 1.  Lots are large enough to permit access steps; and 2.  Piling foundations are placed in stable soil no more than ten feet apart; and 3.  Reinforcement is provided for pilings more than six feet above the ground level. (c)  Standards for subdivision proposals. (1)  All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; (2)  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage; (3)  All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazard; and (4)  Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals and other proposed development (including manufactured home parks and subdivisions) on proposed projects of five acres or which have 50 or more lots. (d)  Standards for critical facilities. (1)  Notwithstanding section 8-2-2(b), critical facilities shall not be located in the 100-year floodplain or the 500-year floodplain. (2)  All ingress and egress from any critical facility must have minimum elevation equal to or above the 500-year flood elevation. (e)  Standards for streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodway. For A-zones located within the areas of Special Flood Hazard, or where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided, or where base flood data have been provided but a Floodway has not been delineated, the following provisions apply: (1)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided, then the applicant shall provide to the Department of Transportation and Public Works for review any scientific or historic base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer this chapter. Only if data are not available from these sources, then the following shall apply: a.  No encroachment, including structures or fill material, shall be located within area equal to the width of the stream or 75 feet, whichever is greater, measured from the top of stream bank, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the encroachment shall not result in more than a one-foot increase in flood levels during the occurrence of a base flood discharge. b.  In Areas of Special Flood Hazard without base flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with the standards identified in section 8-2-4. (f)  Standards for Areas of Shallow Flooding (AO or AH Zones). For Areas of Special Flood Hazard designated "AO" or "AH" on the community's Flood Insurance Rate Map, the following provisions apply: (1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the flood depth specified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with the standard identified in section 8-2-4. (2)  New construction or the substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure may be flood-proofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to the specified FIRM flood elevation plus a minimum of one foot, above highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with the accepted standards of practice for compliance with the provisions above. (3)  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. (Ord. of 12-5-91 § 1(IV); Ord. of 3-3-92 § 1; Ord. of 3-6-2007, § 1) 
Sec. 8-2-5. - Duties and responsibilities of the Athens-Clarke County Floodplain Administrator.     The Floodplain Administrator upon receipt from the chief building official of a copy of the application for a permit shall perform the following: (1)  Review all development plans to assure that the permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied. (2)  Advise developer that additional federal or state permits may be required, and if specific federal or state permits are known, require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file with the development permit. (3)  When Base Flood Elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with this chapter, then the applicant shall submit additional information as necessary for the department to review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other sources in order to administer the requirements of this chapter. (4)  Notify adjacent communities and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). (5)  For any altered or relocated watercourse, submit engineering data/analysis within six months to FEMA to ensure accuracy of community flood maps through the Letter of Map Revision process. Assure flood carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse is maintained. (6)  Require that maintenance is provided within the altered relocated portion of such watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished. (7)  When flood proofing is utilized for a particular nonresidential structure, the Floodplain Administrator shall ensure that certification from a registered professional engineer or architect has been provided. (8)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of Special Flood Hazard, the Floodplain Administrator shall make the necessary interpretation. (9)  Request additional information of applicant and/or undertake additional studies deemed necessary in order to render a decision. (10)  Make substantial damage determinations following a flood event or any other event that causes damage to structures in Areas of Special Flood Hazard. (Ord. of 12-5-91 § 1(V); Ord. of 3-6-2007, § 1) 
Sec. 8-2-6. - Variances and appeals. (a)  Variances. The Athens-Clarke County Hearings Board shall sit in a quasi-judicial capacity to hear and decide all variance requests from the requirements of this chapter. A formal written application for a variance shall be filed with the Public Works Director for submittal to the Athens-Clarke County Hearings Board created in title 9 of the Code of Athens-Clarke County. (1)  The following procedures shall apply to all applications: a.  The application for variance shall state the specific variances sought and the reasons for their granting. b.  It shall be the applicant's responsibility to provide sufficient justification for granting the variance. c.  The Floodplain Administrator shall prepare an evaluation statement concerning each application for variance. The evaluation shall consider the circumstances and supporting documents supplied by the applicant and other generally available technical information pertaining to the variance request. The evaluation statement may include recommendations by the Department of Transportation and Public Works concerning the variance to the Hearings Board. d.  In passing upon such applications, the Athens-Clarke County Hearings Board shall consider all technical evaluation and relevant factors presented by the applicant and the government and the standards specified below. e.  If a variance is granted, it shall be granted upon findings by the Hearings Board that the following standards have been met: 1.  A determination that the applicant has made a showing of good and sufficient cause; and 2.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and 3.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, threats to public safety and extraordinary public expense, nor create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances; and 4.  A determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. f.  After hearing and upon consideration of the application, evidence and applicable law, the Athens-Clarke County Hearings Board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose of this chapter. (2)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. (3)  Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of historic structures, upon determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this section. (4)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted within the Area of Special Flood Hazard shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation to which the structure is to be built and stating that cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. (5)  The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Insurance Administration upon request. (6)  Appeals of variance decisions. The procedure for appealing variances shall be those set forth in the Zoning Ordinance. (b)  Denials of permits; appeals. (1)  All denials of a permit under this chapter shall be accompanied by a copy of a report from the Floodplain Administrator stating the purpose for which a permit has been denied. (2)  Upon filing a written notice of appeal, any person aggrieved by the decision of the chief building official or Floodplain Administrator, under this chapter, shall be entitled to a hearing before the Administrative Hearing Officer pursuant to the provisions of section 1-5-1. (3)  Appeals of the decision of the Administrative Hearing Officer. Appeals of the decision of the Administrative Hearing Officer shall be as provided by state law. (Ord. of 12-5-91 § 1(VI); Ord. of 12-5-2000, § 1; Ord. of 3-6-2007, § 1) 
Sec. 8-2-7. - Abrogation and greater restrictions.     This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. (Ord. of 12-5-91 § 1(VII); Ord. of 3-6-2007, § 1) 
Sec. 8-2-8. - Penalties for violation.     Violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with any of its requirements, including violation of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions, shall constitute a violation of this chapter. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall be guilty of an offense and upon conviction shall be punished for each offense according to law. Each day such violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. (Ord. of 12-5-91 § 1(VIII); Ord. of 9-7-93, § 1; Ord. of 3-6-2007, § 1) 
Sec. 8-2-9. - Warning and disclaimer of liability.     The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods may occur on rare occasion. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes, such as bridge openings restricted by debris. This chapter shall not imply that areas outside the floodplain districts will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of Athens-Clarke County or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. (Ord. of 12-5-91 § 1(IX); Ord. of 3-6-2007, § 1) 
Sec. 8-2-10. - Definitions of terms.     Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. Words used in the singular shall include the plural, and the plural and the singular; words used in the present tense shall include the future tense. The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary. The word "may" is permissive. The phrase "used for" shall include the phrases "arranged for," "designed for," "intended for" and "occupied for."     Accessory structure: means a structure having minimal value and used for parking, storage, and other non-habitable uses, such as garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns, or hay sheds.     Appeal: A request for a review of the chief building official's interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance by the Hearings Board.     Area of shallow flooding: means a designated AO or AH zone on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map with base flood elevations from one to three feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident.     Area of Special Flood Hazard: The land in the floodplain subject to one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year (also known as the 100-year floodplain). Areas of Special Flood Hazard include those areas officially designated as such by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, and those areas designated by the Unified Government of Athens-Clarke County through engineering analysis and scientific study as areas of Special Flood Hazard. For purposes of this chapter the term "special flood hazard area(s)" is synonymous in meaning with the phrase "Area(s) of Special Flood Hazard."     Athens-Clarke County Hearings Board; A board that has been established by the zoning ordinance to hear requests for variances, as defined in this chapter.     Base flood: means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.     Base flood level or elevation: The maximum stage of elevation reached by waters of the base flood at a given location.     Chief building official: The director of the building inspection department or his designee for the Unified Government of Athens-Clarke County.     Critical Facility: means any public or private facility, which if flooded, would create an added dimension to a disaster or would increase the hazard to life and health. Critical Facilities include: (1)  Structures or facilities that produce, use, or store highly volatile, flammable explosive, toxic, or water reactive materials; (2)  Hospitals or nursing homes, and housing for the elderly, which are likely to contain occupants who may not be sufficiently mobile to avoid the loss of life or injury during flood and storm events; (3)  Emergency operation centers or data storage centers which contain records or services that may become lost or inoperative during flood and storm events; and (4)  Generating plants and other principal points of utility lines.     Developer: Any person who acts in his own behalf or as an agent of an owner of property and engaged in alteration of land or vegetation in preparation for construction activity.     Development: Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate which alters the elevation or contour of a site or which establishes a structure not previously existing or the exterior configuration of an existing structure or both.     Development permit: A permit issued by the building inspection department for development after all of the requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.     Flood or flooding: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland waters or the unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any sources.     Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM): An official map of Athens-Clarke County on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the Areas of Special Flood Hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.     Floodplain administrator: The Director of the Department of Transportation and Public Works or his designee for the Unified Government of Athens-Clarke County.     Floodplain or flood-prone area: Means any land area susceptible to flooding.     Flood-proofed or flood-proofing: Means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.     Floodway: The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the flood levels which are identified on the flood boundary maps as part of the flood insurance study.     Highest Adjacent Grade: means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed foundation of a building.     Historic structure: means any structure that is: (1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the United States Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; (2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary of Interior to qualify as a registered historic district; (3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of Interior; or (4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of Interior, or b.  Directly by the Secretary of Interior in states without approved state programs.     Lowest Floor: The Lowest Floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided, that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable requirements of this chapter.     Manufactured home: A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. For floodplain management purposes, the term "manufactured home" also includes park trailers, travel trailers and other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than 180 consecutive days. For insurance purposes, the term "manufactured home" does not include park trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles.     Manufactured home park or subdivision: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.     Mean Sea Level: means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For the purposes of this chapter the term is synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD).     National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD): As corrected in 1929 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain.     Owner: The person in whom is vested the fee ownership, dominion or title of property, the proprietor; this term may also include a tenant, if chargeable under his lease for the maintenance of the property and any agent of the owner or tenant including a developer.     Site development plan: The plan required to acquire a development, construction or building permit which shows the means by which the developer will conform with applicable provisions of this chapter and other applicable ordinances.     Start of construction: Includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, placement or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and walkways or the excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure.     Structure: A walled or roofed building, including a liquid or gas storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home.     Substantial damage: means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to the structure's before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.     Substantial improvement: Any repair, reconstruction or improvement of an existing structure the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the existing structure either before the improvement of repair is started or if the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include either any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary or safety code specification which are solely necessary to assure safe living condition or any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure.     Variance: A grant of relief to a person from specific requirements of this chapter after a hearing by the Hearings Board. (Ord. of 12-5-91, § 1(App. A); Ord. of 12-5-2000, § 1; Ord. of 3-6-2007, § 1) 
CHAPTER 8-3. - SOIL EROSION, SEDIMENTATION AND POLLUTION CONTROL[3] Sec. 8-3-1. Title. Sec. 8-3-2. Definitions. Sec. 8-3-3. Exemptions. Sec. 8-3-4. Minimum requirements for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control, using best management practices. Sec. 8-3-5. Application/permit process. Sec. 8-3-6. Inspection and Compliance. Sec. 8-3-7. Enforcement and Penalties. Sec. 8-3-8. Education and certification. Sec. 8-3-9. Administrative appeal; judicial review. Sec. 8-3-10. Effective date, validity and liability. Footnotes: --- (3) --- Editor's note— Ord. of June 1, 2010, § 1, deleted the former Ch. 8-3, §§ 8-3-1—8-3-10, and enacted a new Ch. 8-3 as set out herein. The former Ch. 8-3 pertained to soil erosion and sedimentation control and derived from Ord. of 6-1-2004, § 1; Ord. of 11-3-2009, § 4. 
Sec. 8-3-1. - Title.     This chapter will be known as the "Athens-Clarke County Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Ordinance." (Ord. of 6-1-2010, § 1) 
Sec. 8-3-2. - Definitions.     The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter, unless otherwise specifically stated:     Best management practices (BMP's): These include sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission (GSWCC) as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted.     Board: The Board of Natural Resources.     Buffer: The area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters which in its natural state of vegetation facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat.     Certified Personnel: A person who has successfully completed the appropriate certification course approved by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission.     Clearing: Any activity that removes the natural ground surface including tree canopy of the project site prior to grading, excavating or filling.     Commission: The Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission.     Construction phasing: The clearing of land in distinct phases as listed in the activity schedule, with the stabilization of each phase completed before the clearing of the next phase begins. See phase or phased .     CPESC: Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control with current certification by EnviroCert, Inc., which is also referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc.     Cut: A portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to excavated surface. Also known as excavation.     Department: The Georgia Department of Natural Resources.     Design Professional: A professional licensed by the State of Georgia in the field of: engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying; or a person that is a Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control (CPESC) with a current certification by EnviroCert, Inc. Design professionals shall practice in a manner that complies with applicable Georgia law governing professional licensure.     Director: The Director of the Environmental Protection Division of the Department of Natural Resources, or an authorized representative.     District: The Oconee River Soil and Water Conservation District.     Division: The Environmental Protection Division (EPD) of the Department of Natural Resources.     Drainage structure: A device composed of a virtually non-erodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for stormwater management, drainage control, or flood control purposes.     Erosion: The process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity.     Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Plan: A plan required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, O.C.G.A. Chapter 12-7, that includes, as a minimum protections at least as stringent as the State General Permit, best management practices, and requirements in section 8-3-4(c) of this chapter. Also known as the "plan."     Fill: A portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground.     Final Stabilization: All soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that has been certified by EPD for waste disposal, 100% of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of 70% or greater, or landscaped according to the Plan (uniformly covered with landscaping materials in planned landscape areas), or equivalent permanent stabilization measures as defined in the Manual (excluding a crop of annual vegetation and seeding of target crop perennials appropriate for the region). Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction.     Finished grade: The final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design.     Grading: Altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition.     Ground elevation: The original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling.     Land-disturbing activity: Any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in section 8-3-3(a)(5).     Larger Common Plan of Development or Sale: A contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this paragraph, "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot.     Local issuing authority (LIA): The governing authority of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia, which is certified pursuant to subsection (a) of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8.     Natural ground surface: The ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling.     Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU): Numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed or suspended particles are present.     NOI: A Notice of Intent form provided by EPD for coverage under the State General Permit.     NOT: A Notice of Termination form provided by EPD to terminate coverage under the State General Permit.     Operator: The party or parties that have: (A) operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or (B) day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan or to comply with other permit conditions.     Outfall: The location where stormwater in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, leaves a facility or site or, if there is a receiving water on site or a protected stream on site as defined in Chapter 8-6 Protected Environmental Areas, becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water or protected stream.     Permit (Land-disturbing Permit or LD Permit): The authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this chapter.     Person: Any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of the State of Georgia, any interstate body or any other legal entity.     Phase or Phased: Sub-parts or segments of construction projects where the sub-part or segment is constructed and stabilized prior to completing construction activities on the entire construction site.     Project: The entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed.     Properly Designed: Designed in accordance with the design requirements and specifications contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia (Manual) published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted and amendments to the Manual as approved by the Commission up until the date of NOI submittal.     Roadway drainage structure: A device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually non-erodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled way consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side.     Sediment: Solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion.     Sedimentation: The process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity.     Soil and Water Conservation District Approved Plan: An erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan approved in writing by the Oconee River Soil and Water Conservation District.     Stabilization: The process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures as specified in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity.     State General Permit (NPDES General Permit or permits): The National Pollution Discharge Elimination System general permit or permits for stormwater runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq., and subsection (f) of O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30.     State waters: Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of Georgia which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation.     Structural Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Practices: Practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices include but are not limited to riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures, sediment traps and land grading, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia.     Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures: Measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: (a)  Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover; or (b)  Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or (c)  Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. Such measures can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia.     Watercourse: Any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater.     Wetlands: Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. (Ord. of 6-1-2010, § 1 ; Ord. of 11-1-2016(3), §§ 1—3 ) 
Sec. 8-3-3. - Exemptions. (a)  This chapter shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: (1)  Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72, "The Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968"; (2)  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; (3)  Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; (4)  The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre and not otherwise exempted under this paragraph; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in section 8-3-4 of this chapter and this paragraph. The minimum requirements of section 8-3-4 of this chapter and the buffer zones provided by this section shall be enforced by the Local Issuing Authority; (5)  Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, "Definitions," to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including but not limited to cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including but not limited to chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aquaculture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds; (6)  Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land-disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in paragraphs (15) and (16) of section 8-3-4(c) of this chapter, no other land-disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three years after completion of such forestry practices; (7)  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NCRCS) of the United States Department of Agriculture; (8)  Any project involving less than one acre of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre or within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this paragraph, "state waters" excludes channels and drainageways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one acre, which involves land-disturbing activity, and which is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainageway, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the local issuing authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by paragraphs (1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7), (9) or (10) of this subsection (a); (9)  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the Department of Transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the State Road and Tollway Authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of the Department of Transportation or the State Road and Tollway Authority which disturb one or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7.1; except where the Department of Transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the State Road and Tollway Authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the Local Issuing Authority. The Local Issuing Authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; (10)  Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and (11)  Any public water system reservoir. (Ord. of 6-1-2010, § 1) 
Sec. 8-3-4. - Minimum requirements for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control, using best management practices. (a)  General provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land-disturbing activities if requirements of this chapter and the State General Permit (NPDES General Permit) are not met. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities which are not exempted by this chapter shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion and sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of section 8-3-4(b) and (c) of this chapter. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion, sedimentation and pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity in accordance with the requirements of this chapter and the State General Permit (NPDES General Permit). (b)  Minimum requirements/BMP's. (1)  Best management practices as set forth in section 8-3-4 (b) and (c) of this chapter shall be required for all land-disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the Director or the LIA or to any other allegation of noncompliance with paragraph (2) of this subsection or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of stormwater issued pursuant to subsection (f) of O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act." As used in this subsection the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6, subsection (b). (2)  A discharge of stormwater runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by the Local Issuing Authority or of any state general permit issued by the Division pursuant to subsection (f) of O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the Director. This paragraph shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single-family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five acres. (3)  Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by the Local Issuing Authority or of any state general permit issued by the Division pursuant to subsection (f) of O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," for each day on which such failure occurs. (4)  The Local Issuing Authority may set more stringent buffer requirements than stated in (c)(15), in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 (c). (c)  The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to this chapter for the purpose of governing land-disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit; and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following BMP's: (1)  Stripping of vegetation, regrading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion, including construction phasing on all sites, with the size and scope of each construction phase to be reviewed and approved by the Local Issuing Authority; (2)  Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum; (3)  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practical erosion potential; (4)  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; (5)  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; (6)  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; (7)  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; (8)  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; (9)  To the extent necessary, sediment in run-off water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this paragraph, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; (10)  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills; (11)  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property; (12)  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; (13)  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; (14)  Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Plans shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in section 8-3-4(b)(2) of this chapter. Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Plans shall also include all necessary information for compliance with the State General Permit; (15)  There is established a 25-foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the Director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the Director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; or along any ephemeral stream. As used in this provision, the term 'ephemeral stream' means a stream that under normal circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; that has the channel located above the ground-water table year round; for which ground water is not a source of water; and for which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) stream crossings for sewer lines; and (16)  Additional buffers beyond those listed in paragraph (15) may be required on the site. Applicant should refer to the Athens-Clarke County Protected Environmental Areas Ordinance Chapter 8-6 for additional requirements. (17)  Construction site operators must control waste such as discarded building materials, concrete truck washout, chemicals, litter, and sanitary waste at the construction site that may cause adverse impacts to water quality. (d)  Nothing contained in this chapter shall prevent the Local Issuing Authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain stream buffer requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in section 8-3-4(b) and (c) of this chapter. (e)  The fact that land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this chapter or the terms of the permit. (Ord. of 6-1-2010, § 1; Ord. of 12-2-2014, § 1 ) 
Sec. 8-3-5. - Application/permit process. (a)  General. The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall design and review before submittal the general development plans. The Local Issuing Authority shall review the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall consult the zoning ordinance, stormwater management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood protection ordinance, this ordinance, and other ordinances which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the Local Issuing Authority. However, the operator is the only party who may obtain a permit. (b)  Application requirements. (1)  No person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of Athens-Clarke County without first obtaining a LD permit from the Transportation and Public Works Department of Athens-Clarke County (Public Works Department) to perform such activity and providing a copy of Notice of Intent submitted to EPD if applicable. (2)  The application for a permit shall be submitted to the Public Works Department and must include the applicant's Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in section 8-3-5(c) of this chapter. Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Plans, together with supporting data, must demonstrate affirmatively that the land disturbing activity proposed will be carried out in such a manner that the provisions of section 8-3-4(b) and (c) of this chapter will be met. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by one copy of the applicant's Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Plans. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan in accordance with EPD Rule 391-3-7.10. (3)  Fees will be charged for plan review, permits, and/or inspection in accordance with the provisions of Athens-Clarke County Code section 7-1-560. (4)  In addition to the local permitting fees, State General Permit fees will also be assessed pursuant to paragraph (5) subsection (a) of O.C.G.A. § 12-5-23, provided that such fees shall not exceed $80.00 per acre of land-disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land-disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. In Athens-Clarke County, a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to subsection (a) of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8, half of such fees levied shall be submitted to Athens-Clarke County and half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the Division; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to paragraph (9) or (10) of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17 shall be submitted in full to the Division, regardless of the existence of a local issuing authority in the jurisdiction. (5)  The Local Issuing Authority and the District have entered into an agreement which allows the Local Issuing Authority to conduct the review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Plan without referring the application and plan to the District. The Local Issuing Authority with plan review authority shall approve or disapprove a revised Plan submittal within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the Local Issuing Authority to act on a revised Plan submittal within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the revised Plan submittal. (6)  If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this chapter section, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three years prior to the date of filing of the application under consideration, the Local Issuing Authority may deny the permit application. (7)  The Local Issuing Authority may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land-disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this chapter or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the Local Issuing Authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. (c)  Plan requirements. (1)  Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in section 8-3-4(b) and (c) of this chapter, or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. Conformance with the minimum requirements may be attained through the use of design criteria in the current issue of the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, published by the state soil and water conservation commission. The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia is hereby incorporated by reference into this chapter. It is on file and available for public inspection in the offices of the Department of Transportation and Public Works. The plan for the land-disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and stormwater management facilities, local ordinances and state laws. Plans must meet all of the criteria listed within the State General Permit. Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature and seal of the certified design professional. Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspections or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on his or her level of involvement with the process, as developed by the Commission and in consultation with the Division and the Stakeholder Advisory Board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. Section 12-7-20. (2)  Data required for site plan shall include all the information required from the appropriate Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Plan Review Checklist established by the Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. (d)  Permits. (1)  Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than 45 days after receipt by the Local Issuing Authority of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary and all applicable fees have been paid prior to permit issuance. The permit shall include conditions under which the activity may be undertaken. Permits will expire after six months from date of issuance. If a project is not complete at that time, a written request for permit extension to the Local Issuing Authority must be submitted by the permittee 30 days prior to the permit expiration date. The Local Issuing Authority will review the request and determine whether a permit extension will be granted. The LIA in considering the request for an extension shall take into consideration whether or not any action allowed under the permit has been taken by the applicant during the six-month permit period. The reason for a decision to deny the request will be made in writing and furnished to the applicant. If an extension is not granted, all work must stop on the site, and a new permit application shall be submitted for review and approval or disapproval. (2)  No permit shall be issued by the Local Issuing Authority unless the Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Plan has been approved, and the Local Issuing Authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this chapter, any variances required from section 8-3-4(c)(15) are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per section 8-3-5(b)(7) are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the Local Issuing Authority are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. (3)  If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. (4)  The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the Local Issuing Authority, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this chapter. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. (5)  Any land-disturbing activities by the Local Issuing Authority shall be subject to the same requirements of this chapter, and any other ordinances relating to land development, as are applied to private persons and the Division shall enforce such requirements upon the Local Issuing Authority. (Ord.  of 6-1-2010, § 1) 
Sec. 8-3-6. - Inspection and Compliance. (a)  The Director of the Athens-Clarke County Public Works Department, or his or her designee, will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also the Local Issuing Authority shall regulate both primary, secondary, and tertiary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Tertiary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the tertiary permittee is conducting land disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this chapter, he shall be deemed in violation of this chapter and subject to the penalties for violation of this chapter, a stop work order, and/or other enforcement action provided for in this chapter.     Additional reporting requirements: Applicants/owners/operators shall provide the Director of Athens-Clarke County Transportation and Public Works Department, or his or her designee with a copy of any monitoring results submitted to the Division regarding National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES). Reports shall be in a format as prescribed by the Division. (b)  The Director of the Public Works Department, or his or her designee, shall have the power to conduct such investigations by the Local Issuing Authority as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this chapter, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land-disturbing activities. (c)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the Local Issuing Authority, the Commission, the District, or Division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. (d)  The Local Issuing Authority must amend its ordinances to the extent appropriate within 12 months of any amendments to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975. (Ord. of 6-1-2010, § 1 ; Ord. of 11-1-2016(3), § 4 ) 
Sec. 8-3-7. - Enforcement and Penalties.     Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this chapter or the requirements of an approved Erosion, Sedimentation, and Pollution Control Plan or land disturbance permit may be subject to the enforcement actions provided for in this section. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties provided for in this section shall not prevent such equitable relief. The remedies listed in this chapter are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law, and the department may seek cumulative remedies. (a)  Failure to obtain a permit for land-disturbing activity. It shall be unlawful for any person to commence any land-disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbing permit as prescribed in this chapter without first obtaining said permit. Upon conviction for the violation of this paragraph the person shall be subject to the punishment allowed under section 1-1-5. In addition, upon conviction for the violation thereof, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the Local Issuing Authority. (b)  Notice of Violation; Stop work orders. (1)  Notice of violation. If the applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of permit, approved erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan or the provisions of this article, the Local Issuing Authority may issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. The violator shall have the amount of time specified in the written notice to correct the violation. Issuance of a notice of violation is not a prerequisite to taking any enforcement action. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this chapter and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of section 8-3-5(b)(7). The Local Issuing Authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. (2)  Stop Work Orders. The Local Issuing Authority may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. A stop work order shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall apply to all activity on the site, including but not limited to land disturbance activity, construction, architecture, landscape, electric, plumbing and any other work at the site. It shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the stop work order or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein and the stop work order has been released by the LIA in writing, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. Issuance of a stop work order is not a prerequisite to taking any other enforcement action. (3)  Failure to abide by the stop work order is unlawful. (c)  Bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this chapter and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of section 8-3-5(b)(7). The local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. (d)  Monetary penalties. Any person who violates any provisions of this chapter, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this chapter or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director issued as provided in this chapter shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per day. Pursuant to the authority granted to local governments pursuant to O.C.G.A. Section 12-7-15, for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter, notwithstanding any provisions in any City Charter to the contrary and notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of county ordinances, the Municipal Court of Athens-Clarke County shall be authorized to impose a penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. In seeking civil penalties as provided for herein, the Local Issuing Authority upon written request may cause a hearing to be conducted before the Municipal Court judge for the purpose of determining whether such civil penalties should be imposed and whether the LD permit shall be revoked or suspended. The decision of the Municipal Court judge shall constitute the final decision of the Local Issuing Authority and any party to the hearing, including the Local Issuing Authority, shall have the right of judicial review thereof in accordance with law by Writ of Certiorari to the Superior Court. In considering the amount of the civil fine, if any, the Municipal Court judge shall consider the following factors: 1.  The gravity of the violation; 2.  Any previous violations within a two-year period; 3.  The costs to Athens-Clarke County related to compliance or enforcement efforts undertaken by Athens-Clarke County in pursuing the case; 4.  Actions of the permittee, its employees, subcontractors or agents in connection with the violation. The imposition of a civil fine under the provisions of this section shall not prevent the suspension, revocation, or non-renewal of the permit or the taking of punitive or remedial action for any other violation of the ordinances of Athens-Clarke County or for subsequent violations of this chapter. For purposes of administering and enforcing this chapter, any act committed by an employee, agent or representative of a permittee shall be deemed to be an act of such permittee. (e)  Withhold Certificate of Occupancy. In addition to other penalties, the Local Issuing Authority may request that the Athens-Clarke County Building Permits and Inspections Department is authorized to refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. Withholding a certificate of occupancy shall not be a prerequisite to taking any other enforcement actions. (f)  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The Local Issuing Authority may suspend, revoke or modify the LD permit authorizing the land development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of suspension, revocation, or modification of permit or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated upon such conditions as the Local Issuing Authority may deem necessary to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. Suspension, revocation, or modification of a permit shall not be a prerequisite to taking any other enforcement action. (g)  Violations made unlawful; penalties. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate the provisions of this chapter. Upon conviction for the violation thereof each person shall be subject to the punishment allowed under section 1-1-5, after hearing before the judge of Municipal Court. In addition, upon conviction for the violation thereof by a permittee, his agents or employees, any permit may be revoked, suspended or put on probation under conditions. The infliction of a penalty under the provisions of this paragraph shall not prevent the revocation of any permit or license or the taking of other punitive or remedial action where called for or permitted under the provisions of this chapter. (h)  Consent order. The Director of the Athens-Clarke County Department of Transportation and Public Works is hereby authorized at his discretion to enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents (hereafter referred to as "Consent Order") establishing an agreement with any person responsible for violating the provisions of this chapter. Such Consent Orders will include specific action to be taken by the person to correct the violation within a time period also specified by the Consent Order. Issuance of a Consent Order shall not be a prerequisite to taking any other enforcement actions under this chapter. (Ord. of 6-1-2010, § 1 ; Ord. of 11-1-2016(3), § 5 ) 
Sec. 8-3-8. - Education and certification. (a)  Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the Commission in consultation with the Division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. (b)  For each site on which land-disturbing activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary, secondary, or tertiary permittee, as defined in the state general permit, shall have as a minimum one person who is in responsible charge of erosion and sedimentation control activities on behalf of said entity or person and who meets the applicable education or training certification requirements developed by the Commission present on site whenever land-disturbing activities are conducted on that site. A project site shall herein be defined as any land-disturbance site or multiple sites within a larger common plan of development or sale permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the state general permit. (c)  Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit but otherwise requiring certified personnel on site may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of this chapter. (d)  If a state general permittee who has operational control of land-disturbing activities for a site has met the certification requirements of paragraph (1) of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A. Section 12-7-19, then any person or entity involved in land-disturbing activity at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee shall meet those educational requirements specified in paragraph (4) of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A Section 12-7-19 and shall not be required to meet any educational requirements that exceed those specified in said paragraph. (Ord. of 6-1-2010, § 1) 
Sec. 8-3-9. - Administrative appeal; judicial review. (a)  Administrative remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification, grant with condition of a permit, or denial of an extension of a permit by the Local Issuing Authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved Erosion, Sediment and Pollution Control Plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing within 30 days after receipt by the Local Issuing Authority of written notice of appeal before the administrative hearing officer pursuant to the provisions of section 1-5-1 of the Code of Athens-Clarke County. (b)  Judicial review. Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of the Local Issuing Authority after exhausting his administrative remedies shall have the right to appeal de novo to the Superior Court of Athens-Clarke County. (Ord. of 6-1-2010, § 1) 
Sec. 8-3-10. - Effective date, validity and liability. (a)  Effective date. This chapter shall become effective as provided in Athens-Clarke County Charter section 2-204. (b)  Validity. If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase, or provision of this chapter shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, such decisions shall not affect the remaining portions of this chapter. (c)  Liability. (1)  Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this chapter, nor the compliance with provisions of this chapter shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the Local Issuing Authority or District for damage to any person or property. (2)  The fact that a land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this chapter or the terms of the permit. (3)  No provision of this chapter shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder or pollute any waters of the state as defined thereby. (Ord. of 6-1-2010, § 1) 
CHAPTER 8-5. - HISTORIC PRESERVATION Sec. 8-5-1. Purpose. Sec. 8-5-2. Historic preservation commission. Sec. 8-5-3. Designation of historic districts and landmarks. Sec. 8-5-4. Design guidelines for historic districts and landmarks. Sec. 8-5-5. Application to the historic preservation commission for certificate of appropriateness. Sec. 8-5-6. Demolition or relocation applications. Sec. 8-5-7. Maintenance of historic property. Sec. 8-5-8. Penalty provisions. Sec. 8-5-9. Severability. Sec. 8-5-10. Amendments. Sec. 8-5-11. Definitions. Sec. 8-5-12. Provisions for historic preservation ordinances existing under prior law. 
Sec. 8-5-1. - Purpose.     In support and furtherance of its findings and determination that the historical, cultural, and aesthetic heritage of Athens-Clarke County is among its most valued and important assets and that the preservation of this heritage is essential to the promotion of the health, prosperity, and general welfare of the people; in order to stimulate revitalization of the business districts and historic neighborhoods and to protect and enhance local historical and aesthetic attractions to tourists and thereby promote and stimulate business; to encourage the development of financial and other incentives at all levels of government and the private sector that will serve to promote the preservation of historic resources; in order to enhance the opportunities for federal tax relief of property owners under relevant provisions of the Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981 allowing tax investment credits for rehabilitation of certified historic structures (26 U.S.C.A. section 191), the mayor and commission of Athens-Clarke County hereby declare it to be the purpose and intent of this chapter to establish a uniform procedure for use in providing for the protection, enhancement, perpetuation, and use of places, districts, sites, buildings, structures, objects, and works of art having a special historical, cultural, or aesthetic interest or value, in accordance with the provisions of the chapter. (Ord. of 12-8-92, § 1; Ord. of 7-2-96, § 1; Ord. of 7-6-99, § 1) 
Sec. 8-5-2. - Historic preservation commission. (a)  Creation. The title of the historic preservation commission shall be the Athens-Clarke County Historic Preservation Commission, hereafter referred to as the "historic preservation commission." Historic preservation commission members shall be appointed by the mayor and commission of Athens-Clarke County and will have only advisory authority in recommending landmark and historic district designation. (b)  Historic preservation commission position within the Unified Government of Athens-Clarke County. The Athens-Clarke County Historic Preservation Commission shall be considered a part of the planning functions of the Unified Government of Athens-Clarke County and shall be administrated by the staff of the Athens-Clarke County Planning Department. (c)  Historic preservation commission members: number, appointment, term and compensation. The historic preservation commission shall consist of seven members, who shall be residents of Athens-Clarke County and who shall be appointed by majority vote of the mayor and commission. The members of the historic preservation commission at the time this chapter takes effect shall be the initial members of the historic preservation commission to be appointed by the mayor and commission and shall hold office for the balance of their terms then remaining as members of such commission, and their successors shall be appointed by the mayor and commission for a term of three years. Any vacancy in membership appointed by the mayor and commission shall be filled for the unexpired term by appointment by the mayor and commission as heretofore provided; no member of the historic preservation commission shall serve more than two consecutive full, three-year terms; and the mayor and commission shall have the authority to remove any member of the historic preservation commission appointed by it for cause, on written charges, after a public hearing. All members shall serve without compensation but may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in the performance of their duties. The majority of such members shall have demonstrated special interest, experience, or education in history, architecture, or the preservation of historic resources. At least one member shall have an ownership interest in real property situated in the C-D zoning district or documented experience in commercial development in historic districts. Members shall not vote on issues in which they have conflict of interest. (d)  Statement of the historic preservation commission's powers. The Athens-Clarke County Historic Preservation Commission shall be authorized to: (1)  Prepare an inventory of all property within its respective historic preservation jurisdiction having the potential for designation as historic property; (2)  Recommend to the mayor and commission specific places, districts, sites, buildings, structures, objects, or works of art to be designated by ordinance as historic properties. (3)  Review applications for certificates of appropriateness, and approve, approve with conditions or deny same in accordance with the provisions of this chapter; (4)  Recommend to the mayor and commission that the designation of any place, district, site, building, structure, object, or work of art as historic property be revoked or removed; (5)  Restore or preserve any properties acquired by the Unified Government of Athens-Clarke County; (6)  Promote the acquisition by the Unified Government of Athens-Clarke County of easements in accordance with the provisions of section 44-10-1 et seq., O.C.G.A., entitled "Uniform Conservation Easement Act"; (7)  Conduct an educational program on historic properties located within its historic preservation jurisdiction; (8)  Make such investigation and studies of matters relating to historic preservation as the mayor and commission or the historic preservation commission may, from time to time, deem necessary or appropriate for the purposes of preserving historic resources; (9)  Seek out state and federal funds for historic preservation and make recommendations to the mayor and commission concerning the most appropriate uses of any funds acquired; (10)  Consult with historic preservation experts in the Historic Preservation Office of the Department of Natural Resources or its successor and the Georgia Trust for Historic Preservation, Inc.; (11)  Submit to the Historic Preservation Office of the Department of Natural Resources a list of historic properties designated; (12)  Perform historic preservation activities as the official agency of the Unified Government of Athens-Clarke County's historic preservation program; (13)  Receive such volunteer services as are available and appropriate, and employ persons and services within the limits of funds budgeted by the mayor and commission to carry out the responsibilities of the historic preservation commission in an appropriate manner; (14)  Receive donations, grants, funds, or gifts of property and to acquire and sell historic properties. The historic preservation commission shall not obligate the Unified Government of Athens-Clarke County without prior consent; (15)  To recommend to the mayor and commission such financial and/or other incentives that can be expected to encourage the preservation of the communities' historic resources and provide a positive incentive to affected property owners; (16)  Attend or take advantage of any training available through state, federal or private agencies to further the education of the historic preservation commission members in accordance with established budget constraints; (e)  Historic preservation commission's power to adopt rules of procedure. The historic preservation commission shall adopt rules for the transaction of its business and consideration of applications; shall provide for the time and place of regular open meetings, with proper public notification, and for the calling of special meetings; and shall provide a list of types of applications for which the historic preservation commission staff may issue certificates of appropriateness. The historic preservation commission shall adopt rules of procedure with approval from the mayor and commission. A quorum shall consist of a majority of the members. The latest edition of Roberts' Rules of Order shall determine the order of business at all meetings. (f)  Records of historic preservation commission meetings. A public record shall be kept of the historic preservation commission's resolutions, proceedings, and actions in the office of the planning department. (Ord. of 12-8-92, § 1; Ord. of 7-2-96, § 1; Ord. of 7-6-99, § 1; Ord. of 2-6-2007, § 1; Ord. of 4-6-2010, § 1) 
Sec. 8-5-3. - Designation of historic districts and landmarks. (a)  Preliminary research at the direction of the historic preservation commission. (1)  Historic preservation commission's mandate to conduct a survey of local historical resources. The historic preservation commission shall have the authority to compile and collect information and conduct, or cause to be conducted, surveys of resources within Athens-Clarke County. (2)  Historic preservation commission's power to recommend historic districts and landmarks to the mayor and commission for designation. The historic preservation commission shall present to the mayor and commission nominations for historic districts and local landmarks. (3)  Preparation of a report on proposed designations . The historic preservation commission shall prepare, or cause to be prepared, formal reports when nominating historic districts or local landmarks. The applicant, under the direction of the Historic Preservation Commission, shall be responsible for collecting information and compiling the required designation report. These reports shall be used to educate the community and to provide a permanent record of the designation. The report will follow guidelines for nominating property to the National Register of Historic Places (National Preservation Act of 1966), and shall consist of two parts: (a) a physical description and (b) a description of historic significance. This report will be submitted to the Historic Preservation Office of the Department of Natural Resources. (b)  Designation of a historic district. [The following shall apply to the designation of historic districts:] (1)  Criteria for selection of historic districts. A historic district is a geographically definable area which contains structures, sites, buildings, objects, works of art, places or a combination thereof which: a.  Have special character or special historic/aesthetic value or interest; b.  Represent one or more periods of styles of architecture typical of one or more eras in the history of the municipality, county, state, or region; c.  Cause such area, by reason of such factors, to constitute a visibly perceptible section of the municipality or county. (2)  Boundaries of a historic district. Boundaries of a historic district shall be specified on tax maps or an official historic district and landmark map adopted by the mayor and commission and drawn at a scale sufficient to clearly ascertain district and landmark boundaries, and located on the official zoning map, these boundaries will be included in the separate ordinances designating local districts and landmarks. Boundaries specified in legal notices shall be no smaller than and shall normally coincide with the boundaries finally designated. This shall not preclude the deletion of property from the adopted district that had been noticed as intended for inclusion. Districts shall be shown on the official zoning map adopted by the mayor and commission. (3)  Evaluation of properties within historic districts. Individual properties within historic districts shall be classified as: a.  Contributing. A building, site, structure, work of art or object that adds to the aesthetic qualities or historic values for which a district is significant because it possesses historic integrity reflecting the district's character or it independently meets the designation criteria. The property should meet an age criteria of fifty years unless the property has exceptional significance. b.  Noncontributing. A building, site, structure, work of art, or object that does not add to the aesthetic qualities, historic values for which a district is significant because it does not possess historic integrity reflecting the district's character and it does not independently meet the designation criteria. (4)  Affirmation of existing zoning. This historic preservation ordinance is not a use ordinance and local zoning laws apply. (c)  Designation of a landmark. [The following provisions apply to the designation of landmarks:] (1)  Criteria for selection of landmarks. A landmark is a building, structure, site, place, object, or work of art, including the adjacent area necessary for the proper appreciation or use thereof, deemed worthy of preservation by reason of value to Athens-Clarke County, State of Georgia, or local region for one or more of the following reasons: a.  It is an outstanding example of a building, structure, object, or work of art representative of its era; b.  It is one of the few remaining examples of past architectural style; c.  It is a place, building, site, object, work of art or structure associated with an event or a person of historic or cultural significance to Athens-Clarke County, State of Georgia, or the region. d.  It is a site or place of natural or aesthetic interest that is continuing to contribute to the cultural or historical development and heritage of the municipality, county, state or region. (2)  Boundary description. Boundaries shall be clearly defined for landmarks on tax maps or an official historic district and landmark map adopted by the mayor and commission and drawn at a scale sufficient to clearly ascertain district and landmark boundaries and located on the official zoning map adopted by the mayor and commission. (d)  Procedure for designation of historic districts and landmarks: (1)  Application for designation of historic districts and landmarks: a.  Historic district. A historical society, neighborhood association, group of property owners, or the mayor and commission may apply to the historic preservation commission for designation. b.  Landmark. A historical society, property owner, or the mayor and commission may apply to the historic preservation commission for designation. (2)  Historic preservation commission recommendation. Prior to the designation of any historic district or landmark, the historic preservation commission shall first consider the merits of such a designation in accordance with the provisions of this chapter at a public hearing and shall recommend approval, approval with conditions, or denial of any request in a timely manner to the mayor and commission. The historic preservation commission shall transmit its recommendation and the Report required in section 8-5-3(a)(3) of this chapter to the mayor and commission for its consideration. (3)  Required public hearings and notifications procedures. The historic preservation commission and the local governing body shall hold separate public hearings on the proposed ordinance for designation. Notice of the hearings shall be published in at least three consecutive issues of the legal organ of Athens-Clarke County and/or in a newspaper of general circulation within Athens-Clarke County, and written notice of the hearings shall be mailed by the historic preservation commission to all owners and occupants of such properties. All such notices shall be published or mailed out not less than ten nor more than 20 days prior to the date set for the public hearings. A letter sent via the United States Mail to the last known owner of the property, as shown on the most recent tax digest, shall constitute legal notification of owners under this chapter. The Unified Government of Athens-Clarke County shall pay all costs associated with required notification procedures. a.  The Historic Preservation Commission shall not schedule a public hearing in which a recommendation is to be made on a district or multiple-parcel designation without having first held a public informational meeting. Owners of property within the proposed designation area shall be provided written notification of the public informational meeting at least two weeks prior to such meeting and; b.  Owners of property within the proposed designation area shall be provided with a questionnaire to ascertain their degree of interest in and support for the proposed designation. Such questionnaire shall be used for information purposes only and is not binding on the Mayor and Commission. Such questionnaire must be distributed after completion of the public informational meeting, separate from the recommendation hearing notice, with the deadline for the collection of said questionnaires being no more than six months prior to the public hearing in which a recommendation is to be made. (4)  Requirements for designation ordinances. Any ordinance designating any historic property shall describe the exterior boundaries of each historic district or each landmark to be designated, set forth the name(s) of the owner(s) of the designated property or properties, as listed on the most recent tax digest, and require that a certificate of appropriateness be obtained from the historic preservation commission prior to any material change in appearance of the designated historic property. (5)  Requirements regarding historic property boundaries. Any ordinance designating any property as historic property shall require that the designated historic property be shown on the official zoning map adopted by the mayor and commission and kept as a public record to provide notice of such designation. (6)  Notification of historic preservation office. Prior to any historic preservation commission recommendation on designation and prior to the mayor and commission's public hearing to consider designating any property or properties under the historic preservation ordinance, the historic preservation commission must submit a report on the historic, cultural, architectural, or aesthetic significance of each place, district, site building, structure, object, or work of art to the Historic Preservation Office of the Department of Natural Resources; 30 days will be allowed to prepare written comments. (7)  Decision. A decision to accept, accept with conditions, or deny the designation shall be made following the public hearing, and shall be in the form of a recommendation to the mayor and commission. (8)  Notification of adoption of ordinance for designation. Within 30 days immediately following the adoption of the ordinance for designation by the mayor and commission, the owners and occupants of each designated historic property shall be given written notification of such designation by the historic preservation commission, which notice shall apprise such owners and occupants of the necessity of obtaining a certificate of appropriateness prior to undertaking any material change in appearance of the historic property designated. (9)  Notification of other agencies regarding designation. The historic preservation commission shall notify all necessary agencies of the Unified Government of Athens-Clarke County of the ordinance of designation and the Athens-Clarke Heritage Foundation. (10)  Permits issued prior to recommendation of ordinance for designation. Any building permit issued prior to the recommendation of an ordinance for designation may continue until its six month expiration. However, if the work described in any building permit has not begun within six months from the date of permit issuance, or once construction has begun, if it is discontinued for a period in excess of six months, such permit shall expire and be cancelled by the building official. (11)  Authority to rescind designation. The mayor and commission has the authority to rescind the designation following receipt of a recommendation from the historic preservation commission and receipt of comments at a public hearing noticed in accordance with the provisions for designation. (Ord. of 12-8-92, § 1; Ord. of 7-2-96, § 1; Ord. of 7-6-99, § 1; Ord. of 4-7-2009, § 1; Ord. of 2-4-2014, §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 8-5-4. - Design Guidelines for Historic Districts and Landmarks. (a)  Adoption of design guidelines and amendments thereto. The historic preservation commission may recommend to the mayor and commission from time to time a set of "Design Guidelines," or amendments thereto, appropriate to one or more designated districts or landmarks. The guidelines are intended to identify characteristic features of the designated districts or landmarks that will be used in the consideration of applications for certificates of appropriateness, including without limitation such elements as size, location, materials, texture, style, rhythm, or any other quality necessary to contribute to the character of the historic property. (b)  Procedure for adoption of design guidelines. The mayor and commission have sole authority to adopt design guidelines and/or amendments thereto. Prior to consideration for adoption by the mayor and commission, said guidelines and/or amendments must be recommended for adoption by the historic preservation commission. Prior to making such recommendation, the historic preservation commission shall conduct a public hearing in which it receives public input on said guidelines and/or amendments. Notice of such public hearing shall be published in the legal organ and/or in a newspaper of general circulation within Athens-Clarke County at least one time not less than ten days nor more than 20 days prior to such hearing. Said hearing may be held concurrent with the regularly scheduled monthly meeting of the historic preservation commission, and the legal notice of the combined hearing for public input on the adoption of design guidelines and/or amendments thereto and the regularly scheduled monthly meeting of the historic preservation commission may be combined into a single notice.     Following receipt of a recommendation from the historic preservation commission for adoption of design guidelines and/or amendments thereto, the mayor and commission shall conduct a public hearing in which it receives public input on said guidelines and/or amendments, and votes whether to adopt such guidelines and/or amendments. Notice of such public hearing shall be published in the legal organ and/or in a newspaper of general circulation within Athens-Clarke County at least one time not less than ten days nor more than 20 days prior to such hearing. Said hearing may be held concurrent with any scheduled meeting of the mayor and commission, and the legal notice of the combined hearing for public input on the adoption of design guidelines and/or amendments thereto and the scheduled meeting of the mayor and commission may be combined into a single notice. (c)  Concurrent action. The historic preservation commission may recommend, and the mayor and commission may consider and adopt, design guidelines at the same public hearing and/or meeting as is held for designation of a corresponding historic district or landmark. The legal notices for the guidelines and designated district or landmark may be combined into one notice if the hearings are to be combined. (Ord. of 12-8-92, § 1; Ord. of 7-2-96, § 1; Ord. of 7-6-99, § 1; Ord. of 12-6-2011, § 1) 
Sec. 8-5-5. - Application to the historic preservation commission for certificate of appropriateness. (a)  Approval of alterations to historic properties. After designation by ordinance of a historic property and adoption of corresponding design guidelines, no demolition or material change in the appearance of such historic property shall be made or be permitted to be made by the owner or occupant thereof unless or until application for a certificate of appropriateness has been submitted to and approved by the historic preservation commission. (b)  Approval of new construction to historic properties. The historic preservation commission shall review and may approve, or approve with conditions pursuant to the provisions of paragraph (j) below, concerning undue hardships, and issue certificates of appropriateness to new structures, buildings, objects, or works of art to be constructed within historic property. Such structures, buildings, objects, or works of art shall conform in design, scale, building materials, setback, and landscaping to the character of historic property specified in the historic preservation commission's design guidelines. If, in the opinion of the historic preservation commission, any such structure, building, object or work of art would fail to comply with the guidelines and would be inconsistent with the character of the historic property, the certificate of appropriateness shall be denied. Reasons for denial shall be stated and transmitted to the applicant in writing. (c)  Submission of plans to historic preservation commission. An application for certificate of appropriateness shall be accompanied by such drawings, photographs, or plans as may be required by the historic preservation commission. (d)  Acceptable historic preservation commission reaction to application for certificate of appropriateness: (1)  The historic preservation commission shall approve or approve with conditions the application and issue a certificate of appropriateness if it finds that the proposed material change(s) in the appearance would not have a substantial adverse effect on the aesthetic, historic, or architectural significance and value of the historic property or the historic district. In making this determination, the commission shall consider, in addition to any other pertinent factors, the historical and architectural value and significance, architectural style, general design arrangement, texture, and materials of the architectural feature(s) involved, and the relationship thereof to the exterior architectural style, and pertinent features of the other structures, buildings, objects, or works of art in the immediate neighborhood in accordance with the adopted design guidelines. (2)  The historic preservation commission shall deny a certificate of appropriateness if it finds that the proposed material change(s) in appearance would have substantial adverse effects on the aesthetic, historic, architectural significance and value of the historic property or the historic district. (3)  The historic preservation commission may table a certificate of appropriateness application by mutual written agreement with the applicant in order to allow changes to the proposal, attendance by an applicant or their representative, or similar reasoning. (e)  Public hearing on applications for certificates of appropriateness, notices, and right to be heard. At least seven days prior to review of a certificate of appropriateness the historic preservation commission shall take such action as may reasonably be required to inform the owners of any property likely to be affected by reason of the application and shall give applicant and such owners an opportunity to be heard. Notice in Athens-Clarke County's legal organ or newspaper of general circulation within Athens-Clarke County shall, for the purpose of this section, be deemed to be sufficient action.     In cases where the historic preservation commission deems it necessary, it may hold a public hearing concerning the application, noticed in Athens-Clarke County's legal organ or newspaper of general circulation within Athens-Clarke County at least one time not less than ten days nor more than 20 days prior to the hearing. At such hearing, any interested party shall be given the opportunity to comment on the request. (f)  Interior alterations. In its review of applications for certificates of appropriateness, the historic preservation commission shall not consider interior arrangement or use having no effect on exterior architectural features. (g)  Technical advice. When dealing with difficult technical questions, the historic preservation commission shall have the power to seek expert advice within approved budgetary limitations. (h)  Deadline for approval or rejection of application for certificate of appropriateness. The historic preservation commission shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny an application for a certificate of appropriateness within no more than 45 days after the filing of a complete application by the owner or authorized agent of a historic property. Failure of the historic preservation commission to act within such 45 days shall constitute approval and no other evidence of approval shall be needed. The historic preservation commission may extend the 45-day time period for taking action on a certificate of appropriateness by mutual written agreement between the applicant and commission. This written agreement shall become part of the permanent file. (i)  Necessary actions to be taken by historic preservation commission upon rejection of application for certificate of appropriateness: (1)  In the event the historic preservation commission rejects an application, it shall state its reasons for doing so and shall transmit a record of such actions and reasons, in writing, to the applicant. The historic preservation commission may suggest alternative courses of action it thinks proper if it disapproves of the application submitted. The applicant, if he or she so desires, may make modifications to the plans and may resubmit the application at any time after doing so. (2)  In cases where the application covers a material change in the appearance of a structure, building, object or work of art which would require the issuance of a building permit, the rejection of the application for a certificate of appropriateness by the historic preservation commission shall be binding upon the building official or other administrative officer charged with issuing building permits and, in such a case, no building permit shall be issued. (j)  Undue hardship. Where, by reason of unusual circumstances, the strict application of any provision of this chapter would result in exceptional practical difficulty or undue hardship upon any owner of a specific property, the historic preservation commission, in passing upon applications, shall have the power to vary or modify strict adherence to such provisions, or to interpret the meaning of such provisions, so as to relieve such difficulty or hardship; provided such variances, modifications, or interpretations shall remain in harmony with the general purpose and intent of such provisions, so that the architectural or historical integrity, or character of the property shall be conserved and substantial justice done. In granting variances, the historic preservation commission may impose such reasonable and additional stipulations and conditions as will, in its judgement, best fulfill the purpose of this chapter. (k)  Requirement of conformance with certificate of appropriateness. Work not in accordance with an issued certificate of appropriateness shall be halted by the building official before it is completed. Any such work shall be considered a violation of this chapter subject to any and all appropriate fines and penalties. (l)  Certificate of appropriateness void if construction not commenced. Historic preservation commission approval is valid for six months to obtain the certificate of appropriateness. A certificate of appropriateness shall become void unless construction is commenced within six months of date of issuance. Issued certificates of appropriateness may be renewed every six months for a total period of 18 months. (m)  Recording of applications for certificates of appropriateness. The historic preservation commission shall keep a public record of all applications for certificates of appropriateness and of all the historic preservation commission's proceedings in connection with such application. (n)  Acquisition of property. The historic preservation commission may, when and only when such action is authorized by the mayor and commission, and is reasonably necessary or appropriate for the preservation of a unique historic property, enter into negotiations with the owner for the acquisition by gift, purchase, exchange, or otherwise, of the property or any interest therein. (o)  Appeals. (1)  Any person adversely affected by any determination made by the historic preservation commission relative to the issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness may appeal such determination to the mayor and commission within 30 days of the date of the decision; (2)  The appeal shall be in writing, shall be filed in the office of the clerk of commission, and shall state the name and address of the person filing the appeal, the identification number of the certificate of appropriateness that is being appealed, state facts upon which standing to file the appeal is based, and the grounds for which the determination of the historic preservation commission should be denied by the mayor and commission, based on abuse of discretion by the historic preservation commission; (3)  The appeal hearing before the mayor and commission shall be scheduled by the mayor within 60 days of the filing date of the appeal; (4)  At least ten days but no more than 20 days prior to the date of the hearing, notice of the hearing stating the location of the property by street address, the time, date, place and purpose of hearing shall be posted on the property; published in a newspaper of general circulation in Athens-Clarke County, and mailed to the person who filed the appeal. (5)  At least one week prior to the hearing, the mayor and commission shall receive from the Director of Planning a complete record of the Historic Preservation Commission's action, including all information presented by the applicant, proponents and opponents, the planning staff, minutes of the hearing before the Historic Preservation Commission, and all other evidence and documents considered by the Historic Preservation Commission in reaching their determination. If the person filing the appeal wants the Mayor and Commission to have a complete transcript of the hearing before the Historic Preservation Commission, then upon a written request for a written transcript filed with the planning department at least 30 days prior to the date of the hearing, the Planning Department will have a written transcript of the hearing prepared and forwarded to the Mayor and Commission prior to the hearing. The applicant must pay the full costs of the transcript to the Planning Department at least five working days prior to the date of the hearing. The costs of the transcript shall include the hours of staff time used to prepare the transcript based on the hourly rate of the staff person who performs the task. (6)  The procedures for the conduct of the hearing before the mayor and commission are as follows: a.  The party who filed the appeal first presents a ten-minute argument in the support of the appeal, and opponents shall then present their ten-minute argument in opposition to the appeal. b.  Neither side will be required to use all of its ten-minute argument period. c.  Either side may allocate its ten-minute argument period among any number of speakers, provided that the presentation by all speakers for each side shall not exceed ten minutes per side. d.  All persons wishing to speak during one side's ten-minute argument period must register their intent to do so and the amount of time to be allocated per speaker with the clerk of commission not later than the time that the meeting of the mayor and commission at which the hearing on the appeal is to be conducted is first called to order. e.  In the event that all persons wishing to speak as a part of one side's ten-minute argument are not able to agree how that side's ten-minute argument period shall be allocated, they shall inform the mayor of their disagreement before either side begins its ten-minute argument, in which event the mayor shall decide and announce the manner in which that side's ten-minute argument period shall be allocated. Any commissioner dissatisfied with the mayor's allocation of that side's ten-minute argument shall have the right to appeal the mayor's allocation decision to the commission before either side begins its ten-minute argument. f.  After the opponents of the appeal have concluded their ten-minute arguments, the party who filed the appeal shall have a three-minute rebuttal. (7)  The hearing before the mayor and commission shall be confined to a review of the record of the historic preservation commission's determination for error based on abuse of discretion of the historic preservation commission. (8)  The mayor and commission may either approve or approve and modify the determination of the historic preservation commission upon finding that the historic preservation did not abuse its discretion, or the mayor and commission may reject the determination made by the historic preservation commission upon finding that the historic preservation commission abused its discretion in reaching its decision. (9)  Appeals from decisions of the mayor and commission made pursuant to this chapter may be taken to the Superior Court of Athens-Clarke County in the manner provided by law for appeals from conviction for Athens-Clarke County ordinance violations. (p)  Department of Transportation and local governments. The Department of Transportation and any contractors, including cities and counties, performing work funded by the Department of Transportation are exempt from this chapter. Local governments are exempt from the requirement of obtaining certificates of appropriateness; provided, however, that local government shall notify the historic preservation commission 45 days prior to beginning an undertaking that would otherwise require a certificate of appropriateness and allow the commission an opportunity to comment. (Ord. of 12-8-92, § 1; Ord. of 8-3-93, § 1; Ord. of 7-2-96, § 1; Ord. of 7-6-99, § 1; Ord. of 3-2-2004, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 6-6-2006, § 1; Ord. of 6-3-2008, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 4-7-2009, § 2) 
Sec. 8-5-6. - Demolition or relocation applications. (a)  Authority to comment on demolition and relocation permit applications. The commission shall have the authority to approve or deny a certificate of appropriateness for a permit to demolish or relocate a structure, building, object, or work of art from, to, or within a historic property or historic district. (b)  Actions acceptable in reaction to application for certificate of appropriateness for demolition or relocation. The commission shall have the authority pursuant to subsections 8-5-5(d)(1), (2), and (3) to approve, approve with conditions, table, or deny a certificate of appropriateness for a demolition or relocation within its jurisdiction. (c)  Consideration of pre-demolition and pre-relocation plans. A public hearing shall be scheduled for each application for demolition or relocation. Notice shall be given in Athens-Clarke County's legal organ and/or newspaper of general circulation within Athens-Clarke County at least one time not less than ten days nor more than 20 days prior to the public hearing. (d)  Consideration of post-demolition and post-relocation plans. The historic preservation commission shall not grant a certificate of appropriateness for demolition or relocation without reviewing at the same time the plans for the historic property. (e)  Relocation : A decision by the historic preservation commission approving or denying a certificate of appropriateness for the relocation of a building, structure, or object shall be guided by: (1)  The historic character and aesthetic interest the building, structure, or object contributes to its present setting or historic district; (2)  Whether there are definite plans for the area to be vacated and what the effect of those plans on the character of the surrounding area or historic district will be; (3)  Whether the building, structure, or object can be moved without significant damage to its physical integrity; and (4)  Whether the proposed relocation area is compatible with the historical and architectural character of the building, structure, site or object. (f)  Demolition. A decision by the historic preservation commission approving or denying a certificate of appropriateness for the demolition of buildings, structures, sites, or objects shall be guided by: (1)  The historic, scenic or architectural significance of the building, structure, site, or object; (2)  The importance of the building, structure, site, or object to the ambiance of a district; (3)  The difficulty or impossibility of reproducing such a building, structure, site, or object because of its design, texture, material, detail, or unique location; (4)  Whether the building, structure, site, or object is one of the last remaining examples of its kind in the neighborhood or Athens-Clarke County; (5)  Whether there are definite plans for use of the property if the proposed demolition is carried out, and what the effect of those plans on the character of the surrounding area would be; (6)  Whether reasonable measures can be taken to save the building, structure, site, or object from collapse; and (7)  Whether the building, structure, site, or object is capable of earning reasonable economic return on its value. (Ord. of 12-8-92, § 1; Ord. of 6-6-06, § 2; Ord. of 4-7-2009, § 3) 
Sec. 8-5-7. - Maintenance of historic property. (a)  Ordinary repair. Ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior architectural feature in or on a historic property that does not involve a material change in design, material, or outer appearance thereof is excluded from review. (b)  Conformity to existing building codes. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as to exempt property owners from complying with existing building codes adopted by Athens-Clarke County nor to prevent any property owner from making use of his property not prohibited by other statutes, ordinances, or regulations. (Ord. of 12-8-92, § 1) 
Sec. 8-5-8. - Penalty provisions.     Violations of any provisions of this chapter shall be punished as provided in section 1-1-5 of this Code. (Ord. of 12-8-92, § 1) 
Sec. 8-5-9. - Severability.     In the event that any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this chapter shall be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall in no manner affect the other sections, sentences, clauses, or phrases of this chapter, which shall remain in full force and effect as if the section, subsection, clause or phrase so declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional were not originally a part thereof. (Ord. of 12-8-92, § 1) 
Sec. 8-5-10. - Amendments. (a)  This chapter, including the official historic district and landmark map, may be amended by the mayor and commission on its own motion or on recommendation of the historic preservation commission; but no amendment shall become effective unless it shall have been proposed by or shall have been submitted to the historic preservation commission for review and recommendation. All amendments to historic districts and landmarks shall follow the procedure set forth in section 8-5-3(d) of this chapter, known as "Procedure for Designation of Historic Districts and Landmarks." (b)  Amendments to the design guidelines for new construction or alterations within a designated district or involving landmarks must be approved by the mayor and commission on its own motion or on recommendation of the historic preservation commission; but no amendment shall become effective unless it shall have been proposed or shall have been submitted to the historic preservation commission for review and recommendation. All amendments to the design guidelines shall follow the procedure set forth in section 8-5-4(B) of this chapter, known as "Procedure for Adoption of Design Guidelines." (Ord. of 12-8-92, § 1; Ord. of 7-2-96, § 1; Ord. of 7-6-99, § 1) 
Sec. 8-5-11. - Definitions.     [The following definitions shall be applicable in the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter:]     Backyard fence: Any fence located completely in the rear yard, as defined in this section, and having no frontage on the street.     Certificate of appropriateness: A document evidencing approval by the historic preservation commission of an application to make a material change in the appearance of a designated historic property.     Exterior architectural features: The architectural style, general design, and general arrangement of the exterior of a building, structure, object or work of art, including, but not limited to, the kind or texture of the building material and the type and the style of all windows, doors, signs, and other appurtenant architectural fixtures, features, details, or elements relative to the foregoing.     Historic district: A geographically definable area which contains structures, buildings, objects, sites, works of art, or a combination thereof which exhibit a special historical, architectural, or environmental character as designated by the mayor and commission.     Historic property: Property designated by [this] historic preservation ordinance as either being within a historic district or as a landmark.     Landmark: An individual structure, building, object, site, or work of art which exhibits a special historical, architectural, or environmental character as designated by the mayor and commission.     Material change in appearance: A change that will affect either the exterior architectural or environmental features of a historic property, and may include any one or more of the following: (1)  A reconstruction or alteration of the size, shape, or facade of a historic property, including any of its architectural elements or details; (2)  Demolition of a historic property; (3)  Commencement of excavation for construction purposes; (4)  A change in the location of advertising visible from the public right-of-way on any historic property; (5)  The erection, alteration, restoration, or removal of any building, structure, object or work of art within a historic property, including walls, fences, steps, and pavements, or other appurtenant features.     Rear yard: A yard extending across the full width of the lot between the rearmost line of the principal building projected to the side lines of the lot and the rear lot line, the depth of which shall be the least horizontal distance between the rear line of the principal building and the rear lot line. (Ord. of 12-8-92, § 1; Ord. of 8-3-93, § 2; Ord. of 7-2-96, § 1; Ord. of 7-6-99, § 1) 
Sec. 8-5-12. - Provisions for historic preservation ordinances existing under prior law.     Designations of property under article 2 of title 8, chapter 1 of the former Code of the City of Athens shall continue in full force and effect. (Ord. of 12-8-92, § 1) 
CHAPTER 8-6. - PROTECTED ENVIRONMENTAL AREAS[5] Article 1. Statement of Intent; Definitions Sec. 8-6-1. Purpose and intent. Sec. 8-6-2. General regulations. Sec. 8-6-3. Environmental areas review, environmental areas permits, and approval of permits. Sec. 8-6-4. Establishment of environmental areas. Sec. 8-6-5. Official map. Article 2. Riparian Buffers and Floodplains Sec. 8-6-6. Standards for activities within the floodplains. Sec. 8-6-7. Standards for activities within the riparian buffers. Article 3. Wetlands, Groundwater Recharge, and Water Supply Sec. 8-6-8. Land disturbing activity standards for wetlands. Sec. 8-6-9. Land disturbing standards for significant groundwater recharge areas. Sec. 8-6-10. Water supply watershed and water supply intakes. Article 4. Minimum Buildable Area, Variance, and Violations Sec. 8-6-11. Minimum buildable area required. Sec. 8-6-12. Variances for environmental areas. Sec. 8-6-13. Penalties for violation. Footnotes: --- (5) --- Editor's note— Section 1 of an ordinance adopted Nov. 3, 2004, deleted former Ch. 8-6 in its entirety and added new provisions as Ch. 8-6 as herein set out. Former Ch. 8-6, §§ 8-6-1—8-6-15, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from § 1 of an ordinance adopted Oct. 3, 2000; §§ 1—11 of an ordinance adopted Oct. 17, 2000; §§ 1—4 of an ordinance adopted Dec. 2, 2003. 
ARTICLE 1. - STATEMENT OF INTENT; DEFINITIONS 
Sec. 8-6-1. - Purpose and intent.     The purpose of this chapter is to protect the quality of the community's waterways and to provide for the appropriate development of sites in and adjacent to floodplains, riparian areas, wetlands, significant groundwater recharge areas, water supply watersheds and water supply intake areas. The streams and rivers of Athens-Clarke County supply much of the water required by Athens-Clarke citizens for drinking and other governmental and industrial uses. The quality of the groundwater that is used for drinking, agricultural and industrial purposes in Athens-Clarke County is connected with the quality of the surface water in the streams and rivers of Athens-Clarke County. Furthermore, the people of Athens-Clarke County use the surface waters for fishing, canoeing, and other recreational and economic purposes. The Commission finds that the protection of the streams and rivers of Athens-Clarke County is vital to the health, safety, and economic welfare of its citizens.     Furthermore, it is the intent of this chapter to establish buffer areas adjacent to stream systems and rivers as well as all other state waters and to protect the integrity of floodplain in Athens-Clarke County. The purposes of these protective measures are to: protect public and private water supplies and restore and maintain the chemical, physical and biological integrity of water resources, trap sediment and other pollutants in surface runoff, stabilize stream banks, protect riparian wetlands, minimize the impact of floods, maintain base flow of streams and rivers, protect wildlife habitat, and furnish scenic and recreational opportunities.     It is not the intent of this section to repeal or preclude other regulations that affect the quality of the community's waterways, including, but not limited to, regulations such as the Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Ordinance (Chapter 8-3, Athens-Clarke County Code), Flood Protection (Chapter 8-2, Athens-Clarke County Code) or Stormwater Management (Chapter 5-4, Athens-Clarke County Code). The standards and requirements are not superseded by these standards. If the provisions of this chapter conflict with these or other regulations of Athens-Clarke County, state or federal regulations including the protection of Wetlands as defined by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, the more restrictive of the regulations shall govern. (Ord. of 11-3-2004, § 1) 
Sec. 8-6-2. - General regulations.     The following definitions shall apply to the provisions of this chapter.     Agriculture: The raising, harvesting, or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including but not limited to cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including but not limited to chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals, the production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy livestock, poultry, eggs and avian products; farm buildings and farm ponds.     Best management practices (BMPs): Conservation practices or management measures which control soil loss and reduce water quality degradation caused by nutrients, animal wastes, toxins, sediment and runoff. For the purposes of this chapter, best management practices shall be considered to be the most recent publication of those practices or measures officially promulgated by the State of Georgia, the Federal Government or the Unified Government of Athens-Clarke County.     Buffer: With respect to a stream, creek, river or other body of water a natural or enhanced vegetated area lying adjacent to the body of water.     Buildable area: The portion of a lot remaining and available for the construction of a building or structure after required setbacks, yards, environmental buffers, wetlands, floodplains, and easements have been provided.     Drought: A condition of moisture deficit sufficient to have an adverse effect on vegetation, animals, and humans over a sizeable area.     Ephemeral stream: Ephemeral (stormwater) stream means a feature that carries only stormwater in direct response to precipitation with water flowing only during and shortly after large precipitation events. An ephemeral stream may or may not have a well-defined channel, the aquatic bed is always above the water table, and stormwater runoff is the primary source of water. An ephemeral stream typically lacks the biological, hydrological, and physical characteristics commonly associated with the continuous or intermittent conveyance of water.     Hazardous material: Any substance or material that, by reason of its quantity, concentration, or physical or chemical characteristics, poses a significant present or potential hazard to human health and safety or to the environment if released into the workplace or the environment as codified in 40 C.F.R. 370.     Hazardous waste: Any solid waste which has been defined as a hazardous waste in regulations promulgated by the administrator of the United States Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to the federal act, which are in force and effect on February 1, 1988, codified as 40 C.F.R. Section 261.3.     Intermittent stream: Intermittent stream means a well-defined channel that contains water for only part of the year, typically during winter and spring when the aquatic bed is below the water table. The flow may be heavily supplemented by stormwater runoff.     Jurisdictional wetlands: An area that meets the definitional requirements for wetland boundaries by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, as required by the Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. Section 1344, as amended.     Jurisdictional wetlands determination: A delineation of jurisdictional wetland boundaries by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, as required by Section 404 of the Clean Water Act, as amended.     Large water supply watershed: A watershed containing 100 square miles or more of land within the drainage basin upstream of a governmentally-owned public drinking water supply intake.     Lot: A unit of land created by a subdivision, which complies with all applicable laws at the time such lots were created.     Perennial stream: Perennial stream means a well-defined channel that contains water year round during a year of normal rainfall with the aquatic bed located below the water table for most of the year. Groundwater is the primary source of water for a perennial stream, but it also carries stormwater runoff.     Pollution susceptibility: The relative vulnerability of an aquifer to being polluted from spills, discharges, leaks, impoundments, applications of chemicals, injections and other human activities in the recharge area. All of Athens-Clarke County is located within a low pollution susceptibility area.     Pollution susceptibility maps: Maps of relative vulnerability to pollution prepared by the Department of Natural Resources, using the DRASTIC methodology. (Georgia Department of Natural Resources Hydrologic Atlas 20: Groundwater Pollution Susceptibility Map of Georgia.)     Protected stream: Any perennial stream or intermittent stream that has a stream channel with perennial or intermittent stream flow as defined hereinafter. A stream channel with perennial or intermittent stream flow is one, which satisfies any one of the following criteria: (1)  Any stream identified on the most recent edition of the Natural Resources Conservation Service Soil Survey Map; or (2)  A channel that originates from a spring, seep, or other groundwater outflow not caused by construction, that sustains water flow during periods of high water tables; or (3)  A point within a stream channel with a drainage area of 25 acres or more. In the event of a disagreement as to whether or not any of the above criteria have been met, or in the event that evidence supporting or negating the existence of a protected stream is inconclusive, then the planning director shall make the determination using evidence from a physical inspection of the site applying the adopted stream classification protocol as defined in this chapter.     Protected river : A river or waterway with an average annual flow exceeding 400 cubic feet per second (cfs) as determined by the appropriate U.S. Geological Survey documents or by field data, site evaluations or other appropriate evidence. The area between the top of the riverbank and the edge of the river shall be included within the boundaries of the protected river.     Protected river corridor: All the land, inclusive of islands not regulated under the Metropolitan River Protection Act (O.C.G.A. §§ 12-5-440 through 12-5-459), or the Coastal Marshlands Protection Act (O.C.G.A. §§ 12-5-280 through 12-5-293), in areas of a protected river and being within 100 feet horizontally on both sides of the river as measured from the river banks. The 100-foot buffer shall be measured horizontally from the uppermost part of the riverbanks, usually marked by a break in slope. Although not within the measured 100-foot wide buffer, the area between the top of the bank and the edge of the river shall be treated by Athens-Clarke County in the same manner as the river corridor and shall be included within the River Corridor Protection District. Because stream channels move due to natural process such as meandering, riverbank erosion, and jumping of channels, the river corridor may shift with time. For purposes of these standards, the river corridor shall be considered to be fixed at its position at the beginning of each review period for the Athens-Clarke County Comprehensive Plan. Any shift in the location of the protected river after the review period will be shown by revision of the boundaries of the river corridor at the time of the next comprehensive plan review by the Department of Community Affairs.     Public utility or utilities: A service or services provided by a public utility company or a private entity which provides such service or services and all equipment and structures necessary to provide such services.     Regulated activity for wetlands: Any activity which will, or which may reasonably be expected to, result in the discharge of dredged or fill material into waters of the U.S. excepting those activities exempted in Section 404 of the Federal Clean Water Act.     River bank: The rising ground, bordering a river, which serves to confine the water to the natural channel during the normal course of flow, usually marked by a break in slope.     Single-family dwelling: A detached residential unit other than a Class "B" manufactured home, hotel or motel, designed for, and occupied by, one family only.     State waters: Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within, or forming a part of, the boundaries of the State which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation; and as subject to the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b)(15)(A).     Stream bank: The sloping land that contains the stream channel and normal flows of the stream.     Stream channel: The portion of a watercourse that contains the base flow of the stream.     Stream classification protocol: This protocol refers to the Athens-Clarke County Manual for Identification of Streams , which manual is incorporated into this chapter by reference and adopted by the mayor and commission as part of this chapter. A copy of this manual, dated November 3, 2004, is on record and available for public inspection at the Athens-Clarke County Department of Transportation and Public Works. This manual and accompanying field form can be used to identify points on the landscape that represent stream origins as well as stream, channel and flow characteristics resulting from these varying sources of water.     Timber production and forestry: The use of land for the raising and harvesting of timber, pulp woods, and other forestry products for commercial purposes. Excluded from this definition shall be the cutting of timber associated with land development and construction.     Wetlands: Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. The ecological parameters for designating wetlands include hydric soils, hydrophytic vegetation, and hydrological conditions that involve a temporary or permanent source of water to cause soil saturation. (Ord. of 11-3-2004, § 1; Ord. of 8-4-2015, § 1 ) 
Sec. 8-6-3. - Environmental areas review, environmental areas permits, and approval of permits. (a)  In lieu of an environmental areas review permit, review for compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall be conducted in conjunction with the review of the following applications for activity that is proposed to occur within either the floodplains, riparian buffer areas, including protected rivers, wetlands, or significant groundwater recharge areas. (1)  Plats combining the full extent of two or more lots to create a single lot. (2)  Preliminary subdivision plats. (3)  Final plats associated with major subdivisions. (b)  An environmental areas review permit is required for all activity which meets the following thresholds and which occurs or is proposed to occur within either the floodplains, riparian buffer areas, including protected rivers, wetlands, or significant groundwater recharge areas. (1)  Any proposed change of use of any property. Change of use, as used herein, shall be defined in a manner consistent with that employed in the administration of the Athens-Clarke County zoning ordinance. (2)  Any plat not exempted from the permit requirement by section 8-6-3(a). (3)  Any proposed water treatment facility, purification facility, or stormwater management facility. (4)  Road and utility construction. (5)  Excavation and fill where the fill or excavation combined is equal to or greater than ten cubic yards. (6)  Any work requiring a zoning permit or land disturbance activity permit to be issued by Athens-Clarke County other than permits required for ordinary repair and maintenance or work that occurs entirely within the interior of a building or structure but does not entail a change of the use of the building or structure. (7)  Any substantial clearing of vegetation which alters the nature and characteristics of the existing vegetation on site unless the clearing meets the definition of timber production or agriculture. (8)  Any increase in impervious surface equal to or more than either ten percent of the existing impervious surface on the existing lot of record or 10,000 square feet, whichever is less. (9)  Construction of a dam or any other impoundment. (c)  An environmental areas review permit is not required for the following activities: (1)  Ordinary maintenance of buildings and yards, planting and maintenance of non-commercial home gardens and the cutting of firewood for personal use provided that no live trees are removed within 25 feet of a stream bank. (i.e., fewer than two cords of wood per year). Routine repair and maintenance of existing roadways and utility facilities. (2)  Timber production, surface mining, granite quarry. Although not requiring an Environmental Areas Review Permit, all activities associated with timber production shall comply with the best management practices as specified in Georgia's Best Management Practices for Forestry available from the Georgia Forestry Commission. All activities associated with timber production, surface mining, or granite quarry shall not impair the quality of the water as defined by the Federal Clean Water Act, and shall comply with all state and federal laws and all regulations promulgated by the Georgia Forestry Commission. (3)  Any action taken by Athens-Clarke County or other governmental entity in an emergency to mitigate an existing or potential hazard. (4)  Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission. (5)  Agricultural production and management. Although not requiring an environmental areas review permit, all agricultural production and management shall comply with the best management practices established by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission, shall not impair the quality of the water as defined by the Federal Clean Water Act, and shall comply with all state and federal laws and all regulations promulgated by the Georgia Department of Agriculture, including the best management practices established by the Natural Resources Conservation Service. (6)  Existing buildings, structures or on-going land-use activities do not require an environmental areas review as long as at the time of construction the existing building or structures obtained the appropriate construction related permits (i.e., building permits). An environmental areas review permit shall be required if the previously permitted land-use activities have ceased for a period of more than one year. (d)  Application and plans required. A complete application and the following plans are required for any activity that meets the thresholds established in 8-6-3(a): (1)  A site plan containing the following information: a.  The location and extent of environmental areas, as established in 8-6-4. Plans shall indicate the extent and boundaries of floodplain, riparian buffers, wetlands, or significant groundwater recharge areas. The applicant may request the department to field verify the applicant's delineation of protected streams and buffers. The field review by the department will be valid for up to six months. b.  The location and extent of topography, with areas having slopes greater than 25 percent delineated. c.  The location and extent of all existing non-natural features including buildings, structures, foundations, parking areas, driveways, walls, and fences. d.  The location and extent of any easements or other physical encumbrances on the property. e.  The location and extent of all proposed construction including clearing, construction of buildings, impervious surfaces (driveways, paving, patios and sidewalks), roads, walls, fences and other accessory structures. f.  Buildable area. (2)  The application form shall be made available at the Athens-Clarke County Planning Department. As part of the application process, the boundaries of all environmental areas shall be clearly marked in the field for review by Athens-Clarke County staff and shall remain clearly marked for the duration of the proposed activity. Ongoing activities shall be marked in a manner approved by staff. (3)  The application and plans shall clearly demonstrate how the proposed activity within the environmental areas meets the requirements of this chapter. (e)  Criteria for approval. An application for an environmental areas review permit shall be issued by the planning director when the applicant demonstrates the following: (1)  That all environmental areas have been properly identified and indicated on the plans submitted. (2)  That the proposed activity is in compliance with the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. of 11-3-2004, § 1; Ord. of 10-4-2005, § 1) 
Sec. 8-6-4. - Establishment of environmental areas.     For the purposes of this chapter, the following shall be used to determine classifications of environmental areas. The type of regulation applicable to a specific land area depends upon the classification in which the land is placed. In the event that land meets the criteria for more than one type of environmental area, then the more restrictive of the standards for activities shall apply. (a)  Floodplains: Floodplains are identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) on such agency's current official Flood Insurance Rate Maps or identified and defined through standard engineering analysis by other government agencies or a licensed professional engineer, but not yet incorporated into the FEMA Flood Insurance Rate Maps. (b)  Wetlands: Wetlands are hereby established which shall correspond to all lands within Athens-Clarke County that are mapped as wetland areas by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service National Wetland Inventory (NWI) maps. The locations of the wetland areas identified by the NWI maps shall be incorporated on the Athens-Clarke County Environmental Areas Map as described in section 8-6-5. The Environmental Areas Map does not necessarily represent the boundaries of jurisdictional wetlands within Athens-Clarke County and cannot serve as a substitute for a delineation of wetland boundaries by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, as required by Section 404 of the Clean Water Act, as amended. (c)  Riparian Buffer Areas: As set forth in the following table, areas adjacent to protected rivers, streams and bodies of water including all state waters. If a hydrologic feature meets more than one definition, then the more stringent definition of riparian buffer shall apply. The buffer width is measured horizontally, on both banks (as applicable) of the stream or body of water, from the top of the bank associated with the stream or body of water. Hydrologic Feature Riparian Buffer Width Protected river 100 ft. Upper North Oconee River and Sandy Creek 100 ft. All protected streams located on lands in Industrial ("I") zones as defined in Title 9 of ACC Code. 150 ft. All other protected streams 75 ft. State waters [per O.C.G.A. 12-7-3(16)] 25 ft.  (d)  Significant groundwater recharge areas: Areas identified as significant groundwater recharge areas by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, and as indicated on the Environmental Areas Map and by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources in Hydrologic Atlas 18, 1989 Edition. (e)  Water supply watersheds and water supply intake areas: As defined and adopted in section 8-6-5 and indicated on the Environmental Areas Map. (Ord. of 11-3-2004, § 1; Ord. of 8-4-2015, § 2 ) 
Sec. 8-6-5. - Official map. (a)  An Environmental Areas Map as required by the Georgia Planning Act Part V shall be incorporated herein by reference with the text of this chapter. The Athens-Clarke County Environmental Areas Map is hereby established as a reference and educational tool. For purposes of this ordinance, field data and evaluations of the site at the time of application for an environmental review permit will supersede information found on the Environmental Areas Map. Copies of the map will be maintained in the offices of the Athens-Clarke County Planning Department for public inspection, and copies shall be available for sale.     The Environmental Areas Map shall be dated as of the adoption date of this ordinance, and signed by the Athens-Clarke County Mayor and Clerk of Commission, with the following certification: "This is to certify that this is the Official Environmental Areas Map of Athens-Clarke County referred to in Chapter 8-6 of the Code of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia. This map supersedes the Official Environmental Areas Map adopted November 3, 2004. Adopted the 2nd day of December, 2014." Said map is hereby made a part of this Title by reference and incorporation as if fully set forth herein. (b)  For any application for an environmental areas review permit, the delineation of environmental areas on the site map, as approved by the planning director and based upon field data and evaluations of the site at the time of application, shall supersede the Athens-Clarke County Environmental Areas Map in determining what areas are subject to the requirements of this chapter. Nothing in this subparagraph (b) shall be construed to change the riparian buffer areas as described in subsection 8-6-4(c) above. (c)  The boundaries of all environmental areas shall be clearly marked in the field for the duration of land-disturbing activities on the property. (Ord. of 11-3-2004, § 1; Ord. of 12-2-2014, § 1 ) 
ARTICLE 2. - RIPARIAN BUFFERS AND FLOODPLAINS 
Sec. 8-6-6. - Standards for activities within the floodplains. (a)  Permitted activities. Applications for environmental areas review permits where the proposed activity or activities is proposed to occur within a floodplain shall be evaluated against the following criteria: (1)  Subdivisions of land: All lots modified by lot line adjustments or new lots created from existing lots which contain protected environmental areas must demonstrate that the proposed lots contain a buildable area of sufficient size to accommodate a single-family dwelling, regardless of the extent of the uses allowed by the underlying zoning. The demonstration of the buildable area does not establish or secure the ability of the owner or subsequent owners to construct on the site. (2)  Standards for water treatment or purification: a.  The restoration or enhancement of floodplains must meet the federal and state standards and be conducted in accordance with state and federal standards and guidelines. b.  Measures to remove or abate nuisances or any other violation of state or federal statute, administrative rule or Athens-Clarke County ordinance must demonstrate that manner of removal or abatement does not create a further negative impact on the floodplain or violate additional Athens-Clarke County ordinances. (3)  New transportation or utility stream crossings must meet the following criteria: a.  Water and sewerlines must run parallel to existing streams and rivers. The location of water and sewerlines shall be located as far from the bank as the physical constraints of the site allows. b.  All crossings shall be made at a right angle unless demonstrated that a right angle is not feasible. c.  An installation and maintenance plan for the transportation or utility stream crossing shall accompany the environmental areas review application. d.  Construction of transportation and utilities shall meet all requirements of the Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act as amended. e.  Utilities shall not impair the drinking quality of the water, as defined by the Federal Clean Water Act, as amended. (4)  Excavation and fill: Any modification to the floodplain that includes excavation and fill must demonstrate that it has satisfied the requirements established in Chapter 8-2 (Flood Protection) including, but not limited to the requirement for adjustments to the FEMA map. a.  No net fill in any floodplain is allowed. All fill placed in a floodplain shall be balanced with at least an equal amount of soil material removal. Any modification to the floodplain must satisfy the conditions established in Chapter 8-2 (Flood Protection). b.  Excavation areas shall not exceed fill areas by more than 50 percent of the square footage of the proposed improvements. c.  Installation and maintenance of the facilities shall be such as to protect the integrity of the floodplain area. d.  Excavation to balance a fill shall be located on the same parcel as the fill. If it is demonstrated that if such excavation is not possible, and the director of Athens-Clarke County Public Works Department concurs, then the excavation shall be located in the same drainage basin and as close as possible to the fill site, and the proposed excavation must not increase the flood impacts for surrounding properties as determined through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis. e.  Temporary fills which are necessary for construction may be permitted during construction and must be located upslope except in association with permitted uses and removed prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or the initiation of the use of the parcel. f.  New culverts, stream crossings and transportation projects shall be designed as balanced cut and fill projects or designed not to raise the design flood elevation. Such projects shall be designed to minimize the area of fill in floodplains and to minimize erosive velocities of water as defined by the Georgia Erosion and Sediment Control Manual. Stream crossings shall be perpendicular to the protected stream. g.  Excavation and fill required for the construction of detention facilities, levees, or other such structures shall be designed to reduce or mitigate flood impacts and improve the conditions of the environmental areas. Levees shall not be used to create additional buildable areas. h.  These standards are in addition to and do not supersede those actions required in Chapter 8-2 (Floodplain Protection). (5)  Buildings and construction: a.  Additions to existing buildings or structures must not exceed ten percent of the current square footage of the total square footage of all of the buildings or structures located within the floodplain and must meet the requirements of Chapter 8-2 (Flood Protection). Provided that the applicant demonstrates that the proposed additions and those additions constructed with benefit of all previous environmental areas review permits are less than or equal to ten percent of the square footage of the sum of the square footage of those buildings and structures extant at the time of the first environmental areas review permit. b.  The construction of one single-family dwelling on existing lot of record provided that the following criteria are met: 1.  The dwelling shall be located within the buildable area on the parcel. The available buildable area on the subject property shall be used for the proposed construction before any construction is permitted in the protected environmental area. 2.  Septic tanks shall not be located within the floodplain. 3.  Septic tank drainfields and other forms of on-site wastewater treatment shall not be located within the floodplain. 4.  Best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resulting sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia," published by the State Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity is permitted. 5.  The stripping of vegetation, regrading, and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner to minimize erosion and shall be limited to that necessary for the construction of the single-family dwelling. 6.  Cut and fill operations shall be limited to that necessary for the construction of the single-family dwelling. 7.  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type, so as to create the lowest practicable erosion potential. 8.  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented. 9.  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum. 10.  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as in accordance with Georgia Manual for Sediment and Erosion Control. 11.  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during the development. 12.  To the extent necessary, sediment in run-off water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this paragraph, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. 13.  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to cut face of excavation or the sloping surfaces of fills. 14.  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property. 15.  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels so as to adversely affect other property owners. 16.  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by the means of bridges or culverts, except where such methods are not feasible; provided, in any case, that such crossings must be kept to a minimum. 17.  Land-disturbing activity plans for erosion and sedimentation control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(a). 18.  The impervious area footprint of the house and accessory structures within a floodplain must be less than 2,500 square feet. (6)  Criteria for the clearing of vegetation: a.  Native vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented within the flood plain. Limited non-mechanical clearing of vegetation is allowed within the flood plain, provided that the vegetation removed is less than six-inch (DBH) and is not within 25 feet of the stream bank. b.  No removal of living trees shall be removed within 25 feet of the bank. (7)  Impervious surfaces: Increases in impervious surface, including increases to or construction of parking lots, may be located at an elevation no lower than one foot below the elevation of the 100-year floodplain. (b)  Prohibited activities within floodplains. (1)  Handling areas for the receiving and storage of hazardous waste as defined by the State of Georgia. (2)  Hazardous waste and solid waste landfills. (3)  Agricultural waste pits. (4)  New buildings, new structures or other impervious improvements that encroach into the floodplain that require a grading permit or a building permit except as specified in 8-6-6(a)(5). (Ord. of 11-3-2004, § 1; Ord. of 8-4-2015, § 3 ) 
Sec. 8-6-7. - Standards for activities within the riparian buffers. (a)  Permitted activities. (1)  Subdivisions of land: All lots modified by lot line adjustments or new lots created from existing lots which contain protected environmental areas must demonstrate that the proposed lots contain a buildable area of sufficient size to accommodate a single-family dwelling, regardless of the extent of the uses allowed by the underlying zoning. The demonstration of the buildable area does not establish or secure the ability of the owner or subsequent owners to construct on the site. (2)  Standards for water treatment facilities or purification facilities: a.  The restoration or enhancement of riparian buffers must meet the federal and state standards and be conducted in accordance with state and federal standards and guidelines. b.  Measures to remove or abate nuisances or any other violation of state or federal statute, administrative rule or Athens-Clarke County ordinance must demonstrate that manner of removal or abatement does not create a further negative impact on the riparian buffers or violate additional Athens-Clarke County ordinances. (3)  New transportation or utility stream crossings must meet the following criteria: a.  Water and sewerlines must run parallel to existing streams and rivers. The location of water and sewerlines shall be located as far from the bank as the physical constraints of the site allows. b.  All crossings shall be made at a right angle unless demonstrated that a right angle is not feasible. c.  The installation and maintenance of the facility shall be conducted in such a manner as to protect the integrity of the floodplain area. An installation and maintenance plan shall accompany the environmental areas review application. d.  Construction of transportation and utilities shall meet all requirements of the Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act as amended. e.  Utilities shall not impair the drinking quality of the water, as defined by the Federal Clean Water Act, as amended. (4)  The construction of one single-family dwelling on existing lot of record provided that the following criteria are met: a.  If the proposed construction is located within a protected river corridor, the dwelling shall be located on a lot that is no less than two acres in size. b.  The dwelling shall be located within the buildable area on the parcel. The available buildable area on the subject property shall be used for the proposed construction before any construction is permitted in the protected environmental area. c.  Septic tanks shall not be located within the riparian buffer. d.  Septic tank drainfields and other forms of on-site wastewater treatment shall not be located within the riparian buffer. e.  Best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resulting sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia," published by the State Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity is permitted. f.  The stripping of vegetation, regrading, and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner to minimize erosion and shall be limited to that necessary for the construction of the single-family dwelling. g.  Cut and fill operations shall be limited to that necessary for the construction of the single-family dwelling. h.  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type, so as to create the lowest practicable erosion potential. i.  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented. j.  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum. k.  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as in accordance with Georgia Manual for Sediment and Erosion Control. l.  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during the development. m.  To the extent necessary, sediment in run-off water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this paragraph, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. n.  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to cut face of excavation or the sloping surfaces of fills. o.  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property. p.  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels so as to adversely affect other property owners. q.  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by the means of bridges or culverts, except where such methods are not feasible; provided, in any case, that such crossings must be kept to a minimum. r.  Land-disturbing activity plans for erosion and sedimentation control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(a). s.  The impervious area footprint of the house and accessory structures within a riparian buffer must be less than 2,500 square feet. (5)  Criteria for clearing vegetation within the riparian buffer for permitted activities: a.  Native vegetation shall be retained, protected, and supplemented within the environmental area. Limited non-mechanical clearing of vegetation is allowed within riparian buffer, provided that the vegetation removed is less than six-inch (DBH) and is not within 25 feet of the stream bank. b.  No removal of living trees within 25 feet of the stream bank. (b)  Prohibited activities within riparian buffers. (1)  Any new structures, land disturbance activities, or impervious surfaces other than those specifically permitted in this chapter. (2)  Handling areas for the receiving and storage of hazardous waste as defined by the State of Georgia. (3)  Hazardous waste and solid waste landfills. (4)  Agricultural waste pits. (5)  Parking lots. (6)  Those activities not specifically listed in 8-6-7(a). (Ord. of 11-3-2004, § 1; Ord. of 8-4-2015, § 4 ) 
ARTICLE 3. - WETLANDS, GROUNDWATER RECHARGE, AND WATER SUPPLY 
Sec. 8-6-8. - Land disturbing activity standards for wetlands. (a)  Determination of U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) jurisdiction. A determination of the USACE jurisdiction shall be made prior to the issuance of any environmental areas review permit for a land disturbing activity, as follows: (1)  The Athens-Clarke County Planning Staff or their designated agents shall compare applications for an environmental areas permit with the generalized wetlands map and shall determine whether local permitting shall proceed or be deferred pending a USACE determination. (2)  A local permit may be issued without requiring a jurisdictional wetlands determination by the USACE when the activity being proposed meets either of the following tests: a.  It is not the type of activity that would cause the alteration of a wetland; or b.  The proposed location of the activity is not near or within a protected wetland boundary as shown on the Environmental Areas Map. (3)  A local permit must be deferred pending a jurisdictional wetlands determination by the USACE. This action must be taken when the activity being proposed fails both of the above tests; i.e., it is a type of activity that would cause alteration of wetlands and the proposed location of the activity is near or within a wetland boundary. In this case, the local permit shall be issued only after a letter of permission or Section 404 Permit is obtained from the USACE by the applicant. (b)  Permitted uses. Only those activities permitted by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers through individual Section 404 Permits or Letters of Permission under the Federal Clean Water Act are allowed in wetlands as delineated by the USACE. (c)  Prohibited uses. No land disturbing activity not authorized by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers through individual Section 404 Permits or Letters of Permission shall be allowed in wetlands as delineated by the USACE. (d)  No action by Athens-Clarke County under this chapter relieves the landowner from federal or state permitting requirements. No local permit or permission will be granted for a proposed development project that appears to contain wetlands or be located near wetlands so as to potentially alter them until the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers has determined whether or not jurisdictional wetlands exist on the site. (Ord. of 11-3-2004, § 1) 
Sec. 8-6-9. - Land disturbing standards for significant groundwater recharge areas.     The groundwater recharge area district is hereby established which shall correspond to all lands within Athens-Clarke County, Georgia that are mapped as significant groundwater recharge areas by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources in Hydrologic Atlas 18, 1989 Edition and shown as a groundwater recharge area on the Environmental Areas Map. All land-disturbing activities in areas indicated as significant groundwater recharge areas shall comply with the following standards: (a)  New waste disposal facilities must have synthetic liners and leachate collection systems. (b)  No land disposal of hazardous waste shall be permitted. (c)  The handling, storage and disposal of hazardous materials shall take place on an impermeable surface having spill and leak protection approved by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, Environmental Protection Division (EPD). (d)  New aboveground chemical or petroleum storage tanks larger than 650 gallons must have secondary containment for 110 percent of tank volume or 110 percent of the largest tanks in a cluster of tanks. Tanks used for agricultural purposes are exempt if they comply with all federal regulations. (e)  New agricultural waste impoundment sites shall be lined if they are within a low pollution susceptibility area and exceed 50 acre-feet. As a minimum, the liner shall be constructed of compacted clay having a thickness of one foot and a vertical hydraulic conductivity of less than 5 × 10-7 cm/sec or other criteria established by the Natural Resources Conservation Service. (f)  Permanent stormwater infiltration basins shall not be constructed in areas having high pollution susceptibility. (g)  No construction may proceed on a building or mobile home to be served by a septic tank unless the Athens-Clarke County Health Department first approves the proposed septic tank installation as meeting the requirements of the Georgia Department of Human Resource Manual for On-Site Sewage Management (hereinafter DHR Manual) and paragraphs (h) and (i) below. (h)  New homes served by a septic tank/drainfield system shall be on lots having minimum size limitations as follows, based on application of Table MT-1 of the DHR Manual (hereafter DHR Table MT-1). The minimums set forth in DHR Table MT-1 may be increased further based on consideration of other factors (set forth in Sections A—F) of the DHR Manual, pages M-1 and M-2: One hundred ten percent of the subdivision minimum lot size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-1 if they are within a low pollution susceptibility area. (i)  New mobile home parks served by septic tank/drainfield systems shall have lots or spaces having minimum size limitations as follows, based on application of Table MT-2 of the DHR Manual (hereinafter DHR Table MT-2). The minimums set forth in DHR Table MT-2 may be increased further based on consideration of other factors (set forth in Sections A-F) of the DHR Manual, pages M-1 and M-2: One hundred ten percent of the subdivision minimum lot or space size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-2 if they are within a low pollution susceptibility area. (j)  New facilities that handle hazardous materials of the types listed in Section 312 of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (excluding underground storage tanks) and in amounts of 10,000 pounds or more on any one day shall perform their operations on impervious surfaces and in conformance with any applicable federal spill prevention requirements and local fire code requirements. (k)  Each recharge area shall be determined to have a pollution susceptibility of high, medium, or low based on the Georgia Pollution Susceptibility Map, Hydrologic Atlas 20, 1992 Edition. Said map is hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter by reference. All of Athens-Clarke County is located within a low pollution susceptibility area, as indicated on the Georgia Pollution Susceptibility Map, Hydrologic Atlas 20, 1992 Edition. (Ord. of 11-3-2004, § 1) Editor's note— The map referred to in section 8-6-9(k) is on file and available for review in the office of the Athens-Clarke County Planning Department. 
Sec. 8-6-10. - Water supply watershed and water supply intakes.     The water supply watersheds within Athens-Clarke County are all classified as Large Watersheds with no reservoirs within the jurisdiction. The Middle Oconee River Water Supply Watershed District, the North Oconee River Water Supply Watershed District, the Savannah River Water Supply Watershed District, and the Oconee River Water Supply Watershed District are all large water supply watersheds. Intakes for Athens-Clarke County are located on the North Oconee River and on the Middle Oconee River. This water supply watershed does not contain a reservoir within Athens-Clarke County.     The following regulations shall apply to the above mentioned watersheds: New facilities, located within seven miles of the water supply intake or water supply reservoir, which handle hazardous materials of the types listed in Section 312 of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (excluding underground storage tanks) and amounts of 10,000 pounds or more on any one day, shall perform their operations on impervious surface and in conformance with any applicable federal spill prevention requirements or the requirements of the Standard Fire Prevention Code. (Ord. of 11-3-2004, § 1) 
ARTICLE 4. - MINIMUM BUILDABLE AREA, VARIANCE, AND VIOLATIONS 
Sec. 8-6-11. - Minimum buildable area required.     All lots modified by lot line adjustments or new lots created from existing lots which contain floodplains, wetlands, riparian buffer areas, or significant groundwater recharge areas must contain a buildable area of a sufficient size to accommodate the uses permitted in the underlying zone, unless the action is for open space or conservation purposes. This section shall apply even if the effect is to prohibit further division of lots that are larger than the minimum size permitted in the zoning ordinance. (Ord. of 11-3-2004, § 1) 
Sec. 8-6-12. - Variances for environmental areas.     Where there are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape, character, topography; and the special conditions and circumstances do not result from the actions of the applicant; and the benefits of granting the variance will be greater than any negative impacts on the environmental areas or will further the purpose and intent of the Environmental Areas Protection Ordinance; and the variance for environmental areas requested is the minimum variance that will make possible the legal use of the land, building or structure, the Athens-Clarke County Hearings Board established in Title 9 (Zoning) of this Code may grant a variance. In granting a variance, the Athens-Clarke County Hearings Board may approve or approve with conditions applications for variance that protect the integrity of the environmental areas as well as the best interests of the surrounding property and property owners and the community as a whole. Properties within protected river corridors, as defined in this chapter, are not eligible for variances. Variances for the 25-foot buffer on all state waters are subject to the provisions of Chapter 8-3 and cannot be granted by the hearings board. (a)  Application. Variances shall be heard by the hearings board in accordance with section 9-21-3. Such application shall be accompanied by the following: (1)  Site plans prepared in accordance with 8-6-3. (2)  A statement and evidence demonstrating that the following criteria are met: a.  There are unique or unusual circumstances that apply to this site which do not typically exist for parcels which contain environmental areas; b.  The approval of the application is necessary for the preservation of property rights; c.  The proposal's benefits will be greater than any negative impacts on the environmental areas, on adjacent uses and will further the purpose and intent of this chapter; and d.  The circumstances or conditions have not been willfully or purposefully self-imposed. (3)  Proposed mitigation plan that offsets the effects of the proposed encroachment during site preparation, construction and post-construction phases. (b)  No variances shall be issued unless the hearings board determines that the circumstances documented in 8-6-12(a)(2) exist and that the requirements of this chapter represent an extreme hardship for the landowner such that little or no reasonable economic use of the land is available without a variance. (c)  Any variance issued by the hearings board shall meet the following conditions: (1)  The width of the encroachment on the environmental area is the minimum necessary to provide relief; and (2)  The encroachment will not result in violations of any other local, state and federal laws, and will not impair water quality as defined by the Clean Water Act. (d)  Planning staff permit: Minor variances for protected streams with riparian buffers of 50 feet or greater. (1)  A minor variance is a reduction of up to ten percent of the buffer width over a portion of a property in exchange for an increase in buffer width elsewhere on the same property such that the average buffer width remains the same for the protected stream. No minor variance can decrease the buffer width more than ten percent of total buffer width. A property owner may request a minor variance from the requirements of the riparian buffer by submitting the appropriate application to the Athens-Clarke County Planning Department. Such applications are to be processed following the procedures for staff permits established in section 9-4-7 of this Code. (2)  Each applicant for a minor variance must submit documentation that the variance, if approved, will not result in a reduction in water quality. All minor variances shall adhere to the following criteria: a.  The width of the riparian buffer shall be reduced by the minimum amount necessary, and the width of the buffer shall never be reduced more than 25 feet. b.  Reductions in the width of the riparian buffer shall be balanced by corresponding increases in the riparian buffer elsewhere on the same property, such that there is no net reduction in the total riparian buffer area. c.  The land disturbing activities must comply with the requirements of Chapter 8-3 and all applicable best management practices. (e)  Variances to the protected environmental areas regulations do not preclude other regulations that affect the quality of the community's waterways, including, but not limited to, regulations such as the Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Ordinance (Chapter 8-3, Athens-Clarke County Code), Flood Protection (Chapter 8-2, Athens-Clarke County Code) or Stormwater Management (Chapter 5-4, Athens-Clarke County Code). The standards and requirements are not superseded by these standards. If the granting of a variance conflicts with these or other regulations of Athens-Clarke County, state or federal regulations, including the protection of Wetlands as defined by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, the more restrictive of the regulations shall govern. (Ord. of 11-3-2004, § 1) 
Sec. 8-6-13. - Penalties for violation.     Any person, firm or corporation, whether as principal, agent, employee, or otherwise, violating or causing the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter has committed an infraction, and upon conviction thereof is punishable as prescribed in section 1-1-5 of the Athens-Clarke County Code. Such person, firm or corporation is guilty of a separate violation for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of this chapter is committed or continued by such person, firm or corporation. (Ord. of 11-3-2004, § 1) 
CHAPTER 8-7. - COMMUNITY TREE MANAGEMENT Sec. 8-7-1. Title. Sec. 8-7-2. Purpose. Sec. 8-7-3. Intent. Sec. 8-7-4. Applicability and exemptions. Sec. 8-7-5. Administration. Sec. 8-7-6. Definitions. Sec. 8-7-7. Community forester. Sec. 8-7-8. Athens-Clarke County Arborist. Sec. 8-7-9. Community tree program. Sec. 8-7-10. Community tree council. Sec. 8-7-11. Athens-Clarke County Tree Species List. Sec. 8-7-12. Landmark trees. Sec. 8-7-13. Tree Preservation Area. Sec. 8-7-14. Athens-Clarke County trees. Sec. 8-7-15. Tree canopy cover. Sec. 8-7-16. Protected trees. Sec. 8-7-17. Tree management plan. Sec. 8-7-18. Forest management activities. Sec. 8-7-19. Technical standards. Sec. 8-7-20. Variances. Sec. 8-7-21. Inspections. Sec. 8-7-22. Enforcement. Sec. 8-7-23. Violations and penalties. 
Sec. 8-7-1. - Title.     This chapter shall be known as the "Community Tree Management Ordinance of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia". (Ord. of 6-7-2005, § 1) 
Sec. 8-7-2. - Purpose.     Community trees provide many environmental, social, and economic benefits. A summary of the results of research on the benefits of trees entitled "Benefits of Urban Trees, Urban and Community Forestry: Improving Our Quality Of Life", also known as Forestry Report R8-FR 71, published in September 2003 by the United States Department of Agriculture, Southern Region, states that "Beyond aesthetics and emotional well-being, trees perform important functions that protect and enhance city dwellers' health and property. Trees literally clean the air by absorbing air pollutants and releasing oxygen. They reduce stormwater runoff and erosion; they temper climate; they can save energy; they create wildlife habitat; they can improve health, serve as screens, and strengthen community. They can even help contribute to a community's economy and way of life." Large maturing trees are particularly effective in providing these benefits.     Therefore, the purpose of this chapter is to sustain and enhance the functions and benefits of trees and the community forest for the citizens of Athens-Clarke County and to utilize trees for their value and positive effects on air quality, water quality, stormwater runoff, local climate, environmental health, property values, business revenues, scenic quality, urban design, human health and well-being, outdoor recreation, forest products, and wildlife. (Ord. of 6-7-2005, § 1) 
Sec. 8-7-3. - Intent.     The intent of this chapter is to regulate the quantity, quality, and distribution of trees within Athens-Clarke County, within each zoning district, and on individual sites as prescribed herein. Further, the intent of this chapter is to regulate the quantity of trees through the establishment of minimum requirements for conserved and planted tree canopy, to regulate the quality of trees through adoption of technical standards for species selection, tree planting, tree maintenance, and tree protection, and to regulate the distribution of trees so that their function is maximized. (Ord. of 6-7-2005, § 1) 
Sec. 8-7-4. - Applicability and exemptions.     Unless otherwise stated herein, this chapter applies to all land in Athens-Clarke County. (Ord. of 6-7-2005, § 1) 
Sec. 8-7-5. - Administration.     Unless otherwise stated herein, the landscape management division of the central services department shall be the administrator of this chapter. (Ord. of 6-7-2005, § 1) 
Sec. 8-7-6. - Definitions.     The terms listed below are hereby defined for the purpose of administering this chapter. All other terms shall have their meaning as defined in other parts of the Athens-Clarke County Code of Ordinances, or their common meaning if undefined in the Code.     Arborist. A professional certified by the International Society of Arboriculture who possesses the technical competence through experience and related training to provide for or supervise the management of trees and other woody plants in the residential, commercial, and public landscape.     Athens-Clarke County Arborist. A staff position within the planning department and the official responsible for plans review and site inspections.     Athens-Clarke County tree. Any tree whose trunk is growing wholly or partially on land owned by Athens-Clarke County, including, but not limited to, public street rights-of-way, parks, and building and facility yards.     Athens-Clarke County Tree Species List. A list of trees approved and adopted by the mayor and commission that includes tree species approved for planting in Athens-Clarke County to satisfy the requirements of this chapter and information on their characteristics of size, form, habit, and growing requirements.     Branch. A secondary shoot or stem arising from one of the main axes (i.e., trunk or leader) of a tree or woody plant.     Caliper. The diameter of a tree trunk measured at six inches above the ground up to and including four inches caliper size, and 12 inches above the ground for larger trees. Used for nursery stock and newly planted trees, and not for established trees.     Canopy tree. A large or medium tree with a crown size and shape that will typically provide significant shade and beneficial effects on temperature, air quality, water quality, and other environmental conditions, at maturity. Synonymous with "shade tree."     Champion tree. A tree of sufficient points—given for the total of the circumference of the trunk in inches at 4.5 feet above the ground plus the total vertical height in feet plus the average crown spread in feet—to qualify as the largest tree of its species within Athens-Clarke County, the State of Georgia, or the United States.     Community forest. The collection of individual trees and forest stands within Athens-Clarke County, including trees on both public and private property.     Community forester. A staff position within the landscape management division of the central services department and the official responsible for the coordination of the community tree program.     Community tree. Any tree growing within Athens-Clarke County, whether on public or private property.     Community tree program. A program approved and adopted by the mayor and commission with the purpose of pro-actively managing the public tree resource and supporting the conservation and management of the private tree resource.     Community tree council, council, CTC. The Athens-Clarke County Community Tree Council, a citizen advisory group established by this chapter.     Conservable tree . A healthy tree at least two inches dbh that can and will be protected in accordance with the technical standards set forth in this chapter.     Conserved tree canopy cover. That portion of the tree canopy cover represented by natural cover of individual conservable trees, forested areas, forest regeneration areas, and/or future forest areas.     Critical root zone. A more or less circular area above and extending 24 inches below the ground around the trunk of a tree with a radius equivalent to the distance to the dripline, or 1.25 feet for every one inch in dbh, whichever is greater. The critical root zone increases in size as a tree grows larger.     Crown. The leaves and branches of a tree or shrub; the upper portion of a tree from the lowest branch on the trunk to the top.     Decay. Degradation of woody tissue caused by biological organisms.     Diameter breast height (dbh). The outside diameter of the trunk of a tree, measured 4.5 feet above ground level. For trees with co-dominant (forked) stems, the trunk is measured below the fork and above the trunk flare, at the point of the smallest diameter. For multi-stemmed trees, the diameter is considered to be the sum of the diameters of all of the stems that contribute significantly to the crown.     Dripline. A line extending down to the ground from the greatest horizontal extent of a tree's branches, more or less forming a cylinder around the tree.     Establishment period. The length of time it takes to successfully establish a tree in the landscape, generally considered to be three years from the time of planting.     Flush cut. An improper cut made into the stem or parent branch of a limb or branch being removed during pruning, instead of outside the branch collar.     Forest management. A class of agriculture that includes management of land, forested areas, and trees for timber production, wildlife, recreation, or other purposes.     Forest regeneration area. A specified area where native seedlings, saplings, or larger trees are replanted to recreate natural forest conditions and functions to the greatest extent possible.     Forested area. An area which contains more than 100 trees of greater than six inches dbh per acre, and which is more than 70 percent covered in tree canopy at full leaf-out.     Future forest area. An area currently devoid of trees but permanently set aside for natural forest succession to take place over time.     Future tree canopy cover. A standardized amount of future mature tree canopy cover credited to a particular species based upon its mature size category—large, medium, small, or very small—and the typical shape of its crown. The amount credited to each species is found in the Athens-Clarke County Tree Species List .     Hazard tree. A tree or any part thereof, that is at risk for failure and threatens the health, safety, or general welfare of a person(s) or property.     Healthy tree. As determined by the community forester or Athens-Clarke County Arborist, a tree that is vigorous as indicated by leaf color and annual shoot extension, with a relatively symmetrical form typical of the species, with 1/3 or more of its height in live crown (live crown ratio of 33 percent or more), with roots, trunk, and crown absent of extensive and significant signs of insect or disease infection, wounds or other mechanical damage, decay and structural defects. For pine trees the live crown ratio may be less than 30 percent and the tree still otherwise considered healthy.     Included bark. Bark that is caught between co-dominant stems, or a stem and a branch, and/or within narrow branch angles, creating a structural weakness.     Inspector. The community forester, Athens-Clarke County Arborist, or other individual designated by the manager to enforce the provisions of this chapter.     International Society of Arboriculture, ISA . A worldwide professional organization dedicated to fostering a greater appreciation for trees and to promoting research, technology, and the professional practice of arboriculture. Administers certification programs for arborists, tree workers, utility arborists, and municipal arborists.     Landmark tree. Individual trees, groups of trees, or forested areas that meet one or more criteria for age, size, species, form, character, history, location, or association with an historic event, person, or landmark, and which is officially designated by the landscape management division.     Landscape management division. A division of the central services department charged with the administration of the community tree program, as well as the care of the public landscape, among other responsibilities.     Large canopy tree. A tree with a canopy that covers at least 1,600 square feet at maturity under urban conditions, with crown diameter of at least 45 feet.     Lateral. A branch or twig growing from a parent branch or stem.     Leader. A dominant upright stem, usually the main trunk. There can be several leaders in one tree.     Limb. Same as "branch" but larger and more prominent.     Live crown ratio. The vertical extent of a tree's live crown as compared to its total height and expressed as a fraction or percent.     Medium canopy tree. A tree with a canopy that covers at least 900 square feet at maturity but less than 1,600 square feet under urban conditions, with a crown diameter of at least 35 feet.     Mulch. Organic matter composed of pine straw, leaves, aged wood chips, compost, pine bark, or a combination thereof, that is applied in a layer on the ground over the roots of a tree to retain soil moisture, improve soil texture, cover and suppress the growth of unwanted vegetation, increase soil nutrients, and provide a favorable habitat for beneficial soil organisms.     Native tree. A tree species that naturally occurs within Athens-Clarke County or the Piedmont area of Georgia in which Athens-Clarke County is located. See the Athens-Clarke County Tree Species List for information on which species are considered native.     Open soil surface area. The minimum area around a planted tree that shall remain in a permeable condition as specified in the Athens-Clarke County Tree Species List .     Parent branch or stem. The tree trunk; or a large limb from which lateral branches grow.     Planted tree. A new tree, native or non-native, planted on a site outside of a tree conservation area, forested area, forest regeneration area, or future forest area.     Protected trees. Trees planted or conserved to meet the requirements of this chapter, Athens-Clarke County trees, designated landmark trees, and trees within a designated Tree Preservation Area.     Pruning. Removal of woody plant parts.     Replacement trees. Trees located on the Athens-Clarke County Tree Species List that are appropriate to be planted to meet the requirements of this chapter.     Roots. Woody and fibrous (or "feeder") structures extending from the base of the tree trunk and contained primarily within the soil that function to anchor the tree, store food, and absorb water and nutrients. A tree's root system extends out from the trunk generally two to three times the width of the crown.     Scaffold limbs. The large, main limbs that diverge from the trunk of a tree and that support the remainder of the branches and leaves.     Shade tree. See "canopy tree".     Small canopy tree. A tree with a canopy that covers at least 400 square feet at maturity but less than 900 square feet under urban conditions, with a crown diameter of at least 25 feet.     Stub. An undesirable short length of a branch remaining after a break or an incorrect, internodal pruning cut is made.     Topping, top (heading, lopping, tipping). An improper method of pruning that involves cutting a currently growing or one-year-old shoot back to a bud, or cutting an older branch or stem back to a stub or lateral branch not sufficiently large enough to assume the terminal role.     Tree. A woody perennial plant that has the potential to attain a height of 15 feet or greater and a dbh of three inches or greater.     Tree canopy cover. The land area covered by a tree crown or crowns, as measured in square feet. For a site or lot it may be expressed as the percent of the land area covered by tree canopy and is calculated by dividing the tree canopy cover in square feet by the total land area of the site or lot.     Tree conservation. The conservation of specified areas on a site or lot where existing, noninvasive, healthy trees, groups of trees, and/or forested areas will remain.     Tree establishment. The activities associated with installing a tree in the landscape, including tree selection, tree placement (site selection), soil preparation, planting, and new tree maintenance.     Tree-planting season. The time of year most suitable for planting trees, while they are dormant, considered to be December through March in Athens-Clarke County.     Tree Preservation Area. Area determined by the Mayor and Commission to be of unique and intrinsic value to the general public because of its size, age, historic association, cultural or ecological value.     Tree protection zone (TPZ). A more or less cylindrical area surrounding a tree (planted or conserved) and including the critical root zone and extending up to the top of the tallest branch and out from the trunk to the dripline of the tree or the critical root zone, whichever is greater. This area includes the trunk, crown, and that portion of the tree's roots within the critical root zone. For a group of trees, it includes the area within the group and extending out to the critical root zones of the trees located along the entire perimeter of the group. The tree protection zone increases in size as a tree grows.     Trunk. The main stem(s) of a tree, located above ground, extending up from the root system, and supporting the crown. The trunk is responsible for water, nutrient, and carbohydrate transport within the tree and the storage of carbohydrates for future use.     Unhealthy tree. As determined by the community forester or Athens-Clarke County Arborist, a tree demonstrating one or more signs of loss of vigor and decline, as indicated by atypical leaf color, recurring short annual shoot extension, or less than one-third live crown ratio, or severe insect or disease infestation, or with damage or structural defects that may include, but are not limited to: severed or damaged roots greater than two inches in diameter within the critical root zone; signs of previous topping or other improper pruning practices resulting in decay or a structural defect; longitudinal cracks in the trunk; wounds that encompass greater than one-third of the circumference of the trunk; trunk cavities equal to or greater than two-thirds of the trunk diameter at the point of the cavity; cracks, wounds, or cavities of one or more of the scaffold limbs resulting in a structural defect that cannot be corrected to ensure a safe or healthy condition; and any other defect that cannot be corrected through standard arboricultural practices.     Vegetation management. All planned work activities relating to landscape and roadside development on the right-of-way. These activities may include the removal and/or pruning of trees or other vegetation, landscape planting, construction and any maintenance management of their related features (i.e., mowing, chemical control and pruning and tree removal).     Very small canopy tree. A tree with a canopy that covers at least 150 square feet at maturity but less than 400 square feet under urban conditions, with a crown diameter of at least 15 feet.     Wound. The opening that is created any time the tree's protective bark covering is penetrated, cut, or removed, injuring or destroying living tissue. (Ord. of 6-7-2005, § 1; Ord. of 4-6-2010, § 8) 
Sec. 8-7-7. - Community forester.     The staff position of community forester is hereby established within the landscape management division of the central services department. The community forester shall report to the landscape management administrator and shall coordinate the community tree program. The community forester shall provide technical assistance to the administrators, Athens-Clarke County Arborist, and Athens-Clarke County staff in the administration of this chapter, in addition to other duties and responsibilities as described herein and as may be assigned by the manager. (Ord. of 6-7-2005, § 1) 
Sec. 8-7-8. - Athens-Clarke County Arborist.     The staff position of Athens-Clarke County Arborist is hereby established within the planning department. The Athens-Clarke County Arborist shall report to planning director and shall provide technical assistance and site inspections to the planning director and the development community for the purpose of satisfying the provisions of this chapter related to development, in addition to other duties and responsibilities as described herein and as may be assigned by the manager. (Ord. of 6-7-2005, § 1) 
Sec. 8-7-9. - Community tree program.     There is established by the mayor and commission a community tree program for the purpose of proactively conserving and professionally managing the public tree resource, and actively supporting the quality conservation and management of the private tree resource for public health and safety, environmental health, and the enhancement of the quality of life in Athens-Clarke County. (a)  Administration. The landscape management division of the central services department shall administer the community tree program. The community forester shall be responsible for coordinating the community tree program. (b)  Program components. The community tree program shall include administration of the community tree ordinance, maintenance of the Athens-Clarke County Tree Species List , public tree establishment, maintenance, and record keeping, tree care education and outreach, and maintenance of a community tree program calendar. (Ord. of 6-7-2005, § 1) 
Sec. 8-7-10. - Community tree council.     There is established an Athens-Clarke County Community Tree Council, which shall be known as the community tree council and the CTC. (a)  Membership. The council shall consist of 14 members, appointed by the mayor and commission. The community forester shall be an additional member and shall serve as Athens-Clarke County's official liaison and council secretary. (b)  Ex-officio members. There may be up to ten ex-officio members of the council. One representative from each of the following may be included: (1)  Athens Area Utility Coordinating Committee. (2)  Athens Area Homebuilders Association. (3)  Athens-Clarke County Cooperative Extension Service. (4)  Athens Garden Club Council. (5)  Clarke County School District. (6)  Federation of Neighborhood and Community Associations. (7)  Georgia Forestry Commission. (8)  Keep Athens-Clarke County Beautiful. (9)  Oconee Rivers Greenway Commission. Other organizations may be asked to send representatives as appropriate but the total number of ex-officio members shall not exceed ten. (c)  Term of office. The term of office of the members of the council shall be three years. Term starting dates shall alternate so no more than 1/3 of membership terms expire in a one year period. In order to achieve staggered terms, initial appointments shall be: five members for one year, five members for two years and four members for three years. (d)  Assistance from Athens-Clarke County departments. Athens-Clarke County departments are hereby authorized to offer assistance to the council as deemed appropriate by the manager. (e)  Rules and regulations. The council is hereby authorized to adopt by-laws for its own administration and to recommend rules and regulations affecting trees located on public and private property. (f)  Responsibility and authority. The council shall be advisory in nature and shall, in all matters related to trees: (1)  Provide information, long-range planning, and community forest evaluation to Athens-Clarke County staff. (2)  Provide tree-related information and education to the public and private sectors. (3)  Seek federal, state, and private funds for the operation of the council and its programs. (4)  Hear appeals for applications for landmark tree designation. (5)  Develop networks and coordination among community tree management partners. (6)  Attend training available through state, federal or private agencies to further the education of the council members. (7)  Provide guidance and recommendations on community tree policy and procedures. (8)  Serve as a partner to the central services department, landscape management division in its implementation of the community tree program. (g)  Budgetary authority and accountability. The council is hereby authorized to develop and maintain an annual budget to cover the costs of operation and shall account to the mayor and commission for the expenditure of funds. (h)  Reports. The council shall make an annual report to the mayor and commission in conjunction with Arbor Day each year and other such reports as may be requested. (Ord. of 6-7-2005, § 1; Ord. of 12-6-2011, §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 8-7-11. - Athens-Clarke County Tree Species List.     The official Athens-Clarke County Tree Species List as adopted by the Mayor and Commission on December 6, 2011 and referred to in various sections of this chapter and Title 9 of the Athens-Clarke County Code is incorporated herein by reference. The community forester shall be responsible for notifying the Mayor and Commission of changes to the contents of the list. The original of said Athens-Clarke County Tree Species List and all changes thereto shall be on file and available for public inspection in the Office of the Clerk of Commission at City Hall, 301 College Avenue, Athens, Georgia. Copies of the Athens-Clarke County Tree Species List and all changes thereto may also be maintained for public inspection in the landscape management division office and the planning department office. (Ord. of 6-7-2005, § 1; Ord. of 12-6-2011, § 3) 
Sec. 8-7-12. - Landmark trees.     A classification of trees known as "landmark trees" is hereby established, along with a program to designate trees as landmark trees. The landscape management division shall administer the landmark tree program. (a)  Criteria for designation. Landmark trees shall be healthy trees that meet one or more of the following criteria: (1)  Age greater than 50 years as determined by planting records or the written opinion of an arborist, the Athens-Clarke County Arborist, or the community forester. (2)  Large canopy trees greater than 36 inches dbh, medium canopy trees greater than 24 inches dbh, and small canopy trees greater than 12 inches dbh. (3)  National, state, or Athens-Clarke County champion trees. (4)  Unique or rare species. (5)  Association with a documented historic event, person, or community landmark. (6)  Trees planted for Arbor Day celebrations and other community-wide public celebrations. (7)  Trees planted in honor or memory of an individual or an event. (8)  Trees belonging to a significant cross-property or neighborhood-wide planting that affect the greater landscape beyond the property on which they grow. (b)  Application . Only the owner may apply for landmark tree status for a tree growing on their property. Applications shall be available from the landscape management division office. The community forester shall review each application, conduct an inspection of the tree, and either approve or deny the application. (c)  Landmark tree official record . The community forester shall keep an official record of the location and description of all designated landmark trees. Such record shall be maintained in the office of the landscape management division for public inspection. In addition the location of a designated landmark tree shall be entered into a landmark tree GIS layer and maintained by the GIS/graphics division of the planning department. (d)  Appeal of denial of landmark tree designation. An appeal to approve an application for landmark tree designation that has been denied may be made to the community tree council in writing. A copy of the original application for landmark tree designation shall accompany the letter of appeal. The community tree council shall act upon the request for approval for the landmark tree application at its next regularly scheduled meeting. (e)  Maintenance of landmark trees. The pruning, maintenance, and protection of landmark trees shall be done in accordance with the technical standards set forth in section 8-7-19. Failure to comply with these technical standards may result in the revocation of landmark tree status by the community forester. An appeal to reinstate a landmark tree designation may be made by the tree owner to the community tree council in writing. The community tree council shall act upon the request for reinstatement at its next regularly scheduled meeting. Landmark tree owners are encouraged to hire professional certified arborists experienced in the care of mature and special trees to assist in maintaining landmark trees. (Ord. of 6-7-2005, § 1) 
Sec. 8-7-13. - Tree Preservation Area. A.  Trees within a designated Tree Preservation Area that meet the definition of conservable trees are considered protected trees unless otherwise exempt by Chapter 9-12. Trees within the Tree Preservation Area that have the designation of "N=Do not Plant" in the Athens-Clarke County Tree Species List are not considered protected trees. B.  Removal of trees within a Tree Preservation Area requires a permit to be issued by the Planning Department following these conditions: 1.  Removal in conformance with Sec. 8-7-19L, or 2.  If none of the criteria in Sec. 8-7-19L are satisfied, the Planning Director may authorize removal if it is mitigated by "replacement trees in lieu of preservation" consisting of an inch for inch replacement of the tree(s) to be removed, unless a lesser replacement is warranted, as determined by the County Arborist. The replacement trees shall be planted within the Tree Protection Area on the property from which the tree(s) were removed, or on adjacent rights-of-way. Any tree planting proposed within the Athens-Clarke County right-of-way must be approved by the Community Forester. If site conditions are such that tree mitigation planting within the Tree Protection Area or right-of-way is not feasible, the County Arborist shall approve an alternate mitigation planting plan. 3.  All replacement tree(s) shall be no less than three inches caliper at the time of planting. 4.  Any action taken by Athens-Clarke County or other governmental entity in an emergency to mitigate an existing or potential hazard is exempt from the Tree Preservation Area Removal Permit. C.  Any tree removal on private property shall not encroach upon, or damage any trees located in preservation areas. Any permit authorizing removal may be subject to such conditions that the Planning Director may deem necessary or appropriate to minimize damage to other trees or vegetation on a site, including installation of protective fencing. D.  Application and plans required. A request for tree removal within a Tree Preservation Area requires a complete application and plans in accordance with sections 8-7-13B and 8-7-17. E.  All applicable requirements of the Community Tree Management Chapter 8-7 must be met. F.  The boundaries of all Tree Preservation Areas on the subject property and on adjacent properties shall be clearly marked in the field for the duration of any land-disturbing activities on the property per section 8-7-19(h)(3). (Ord. of 4-6-2010, § 9) 
Sec. 8-7-14. - Athens-Clarke County trees.     All trees growing on Athens-Clarke County property, including the public street rights-of-way, Athens-Clarke County offices and facilities, parks and recreation areas, and all other public areas, shall be protected trees. The landscape management division shall be responsible for the administration of requirements of this chapter related to Athens-Clarke County trees. (a)  Damage or destruction of Athens-Clarke County trees. It shall be unlawful to damage or cause the death of any Athens-Clarke County tree, or to engage in the prohibited activities listed in section 8-7-19(h)(1) or to exceed the limitations set forth in 8-7-19(h)(2) within the tree protection zone of any such tree. (b)  Athens-Clarke County right-of-way encroachment permit required. An Athens-Clarke County right-of-way encroachment permit issued by the transportation and public works department shall be required for any activity that occurs both on the public right-of-way and within the tree protection zone of an Athens-Clarke County tree. A right-of-way encroachment permit is not required for utility vegetation maintenance activities performed on public rights-of-way. (1)  Tree protection required. When encroachment occurs within the tree protection zone of an Athens-Clarke County tree as described in section 8-7-14(b), the tree shall be protected from damage or destruction in accordance with the tree protection standards set forth in section 8-7-19(h). (2)  Site inspection. When proposed right-of-way encroachment meets the criteria set forth in section 8-7-14(b), a copy of the approved right-of-way encroachment permit shall be forwarded from the transportation and public works department to the community forester for monitoring of encroachment activities to ensure tree protection standards as set forth in section 8-7-19(h) are met. (c)  Annual vegetation management schedule required from utility companies. All utility companies having wires, cable lines, pipe, or other facilities within Athens-Clarke County right-of-way shall submit an annual vegetation management schedule no later than January 1 of each year to perform any vegetative maintenance activities on any Athens-Clarke County tree or public right-of-way. Vegetation maintenance activities shall include 1) mowing; 2) chemical control; and 3) pruning and tree removal. For non-routine projects not included on the annual vegetation management schedule, notification is not required but is preferred. In no event shall the requirements of this chapter be more restrictive with respect to utility companies affected thereby than are equivalent regulations promulgated by the Georgia Department of Transportation with respect to utilities on the state highway system under the authority of O.C.G.A. section 32-6-174. The annual vegetation management schedule requirements include: (1)  One vegetation management schedule shall be submitted for each maintenance activity, annually for all of the sites within Athens-Clarke County. (2)  One schedule for all three maintenance activities may be submitted, or up to three separate schedules. (3)  The name and contact information of the utility company representative shall be included with the schedule. (4)  The vegetation management schedule shall be submitted to the landscape management division office. (5)  The utility company shall have one year to perform the maintenance activities described in the vegetation management schedule. (6)  A minimum of five working days notification of any changes to the vegetation management schedule shall be provided by the utility company to the landscape management division office. Vegetation maintenance activities shall conform to the standards set forth in section 8-7-14(d) below. (d)  Vegetation maintenance standards. All vegetation maintenance activities performed by utility companies and their agents on Athens-Clarke County right-of-way, including mowing, chemical control, and tree pruning and removal shall conform to the following minimum standards as required by the Georgia Department of Transportation with respect to utilities on the state highway system under the authority of O.C.G.A. section 32-6-174. (1)  Tree removal, tree pruning, mowing, and chemical control may be performed at any time. (2)  Chemical control shall meet all state and federal regulations. (3)  Aerial applications of chemicals are prohibited. (4)  The utility company shall repair any damage that results from the mishandling or misuse of materials at the utility's expense and to the satisfaction of Athens-Clarke County. (5)  All pruning and removal activities shall be performed under the supervision of an ISA certified arborist. (6)  All trimming and pruning activities shall be in accordance with the most current ISA tree trimming and pruning guidelines. (7)  Crown reduction of pine tree is limited to lateral limbs. (8)  Cutting the leader of mature wood constitutes topping and is prohibited. (9)  Pruning which removes more than one-third of the canopy of a tree and/or leaves the tree with unnatural symmetry is prohibited. If this type of activity is contemplated, removal should be considered. (10)  Within right-of-way mowable areas, tree stumps and roots projecting through or appearing on the surface of the ground shall be removed to a depth of six inches below the average contour of the ground surface. Removal shall be accomplished by means of stump grinding equipment designed for this purpose, or by hand. (11)  Holes or voids created by the removal of stumps shall be filled, graded, and compacted with acceptable fill material. In areas where stumps are adjacent to grass areas, sod shall be used to repair the bare spots created by the stump removal, areas damaged by equipment and/or currently exposed on site. (12)  In non-mowable areas stumps may remain at a maximum of four inches above the ground line. (13)  All work shall be done without damage to native trees and shrubs that are to remain in the vegetation management zone or are adjacent to the vegetation management zone. All work shall be done without damage to existing site conditions. (14)  All waste and debris shall be properly disposed of and the site left in an acceptable condition on a daily basis. When completed, the work site must be clean of all litter and debris created by the utility company and, if a mowable area, acceptable for mowing by conventional mowing equipment. (15)  Cut trees, limbs, and shrubs must be removed in their entirety from the site, unless other arrangements have been made. (16)  Woody and leafy debris shall not be discarded onto adjacent property without permission of the landowner. (17)  Maintenance activities that do not conform to these standards shall be deemed unsatisfactory and shall promptly be corrected by the utility company within 15 working days after notification by the landscape management division office. (18)  Maintenance activities that result in a safety hazard or cause erosion shall be deemed unsatisfactory and shall be halted and corrected immediately, within eight hours, to the satisfaction of the landscape management division administrator. (19)  If necessary, the landscape management division will correct unsatisfactory work and its cost reimbursed by the utility company. (Ord. of 6-7-2005, § 1; Ord. of 2-3-2009, § 1) 
Sec. 8-7-15. - Tree canopy cover.     It is the goal of Athens-Clarke County to achieve and maintain an actual tree canopy cover of at least 45 percent and to promote the functional distribution of that canopy throughout and within the established zoning districts as development occurs through goals and requirements for tree canopy cover. (a)  Minimum total tree canopy cover requirements . New developments and existing developments adding structural or site improvements as defined in section 9-25-2 and developments requiring preliminary plats as defined in section 9-26-2, and developments for which a land development/land disturbance activity permit is required, shall contribute at least a minimum amount of tree canopy cover to Athens-Clarke County's overall total. Existing single-family residential lots that appear on a preliminary plat approved prior to the adoption of this chapter are exempt. (b)  Distribution of tree canopy cover . The tree canopy cover shall be distributed throughout the site or lot, in parking lots, within the adjoining street rights-of-way, and within the side, front, and rear yards of the lot. (c)  Tree canopy cover required by zoning district. The amount of tree canopy cover required is measured in percent of total gross acreage of the site or lot and varies by zoning district. Table 1 contains the minimum tree canopy cover required according to the zoning district. On new single-family residential subdivisions, tree canopy cover is required for the overall site, as well as for each individual lot. Tree canopy cover required for each lot may be counted toward the tree canopy cover required for the entire site. The tree canopy cover located in the adjacent public right-of-way may be applied to the individual lot and overall tree canopy cover requirements. (d)  Maintenance of tree canopy cover; certificate of occupancy. (1)  Requirements for certificate of occupancy. Compliance with the provisions of this chapter is required for issuance of a certificate of occupancy. (2)  Requirements after issuance of certificate of occupancy. For single-family residential lots, tree canopy cover requirements and protected-tree status requirements do not apply after the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. For all other lots, including open-space areas within single-family residential subdivisions, the required amount of total tree canopy, conserved and planted, shall be maintained in perpetuity. All trees planted or conserved to meet the requirements of this chapter are protected trees and shall conform with the technical standards of section 8-7-19. Table 1. Tree Canopy Cover Requirements by Zoning District Land Use Zone Total Tree Canopy Cover, Conserved and Planted Conserved Tree Canopy Cover Component of Total (lots greater than or equal to 12,500 sq ft.) AR 0% 0% IN 40% 10% RS-40 Site 60% 40% Each Lot 50% 30% RS-25 Site 60% 40% Each Lot 50% 30% RS-15 Site 60% 30% Each Lot 50% 20% RS-8 Site 45% 15% Each Lot 35% 0% RS-5 Site 40% 15% Each Lot 35% 0% RM-1 55% 35% RM-2 50% 25% RM-3 45% 15% G See footnote (1) See footnote (1) P N/A, See footnote (2) N/A, See footnote (2) C-G 40% 10% C-D 0% 0% C-O 50% 25% C-N 45% 15% C-R 60% 30% E-O 40% 15% E-I 40% 5% I 20% 0%  (1) The minimum conserved and planted tree canopy cover for a G (Government) zone property shall be that of the most compatible non-Government zoning classification for the principal use of the property as determined by the Planning Director. (2) Existing and conserved canopy and related standards of the Community Tree Management Ordinance for Athens-Clarke County parks shall be determined by the Mayor and Commission in conjunction with the approval of all park master plans. (e)  Minimum conserved tree canopy cover requirement. On lots equal to or greater than 12,500 square feet in gross acreage a minimum amount of the tree canopy cover shall originate from tree conservation as listed in Table 1. Trees within forested areas, open space, forested buffers, side, rear, and front yard buffers, 100-foot or 75-foot riparian buffers identified on the Environmental Areas Map, state-mandated 25-foot riparian buffers, stormwater retention and detention areas and facilities, parks and open areas, passive recreation space, the 100-year floodplain, jurisdictional wetlands, and other such forested areas shall count toward the minimum conserved tree canopy cover requirement if they meet the definition of a conservable tree or trees and/or forested area. Trees within forested areas cannot be measured individually with future tree canopy cover credits. All tree conservation shall be accomplished in accordance with the tree conservation standards set forth in section 8-7-19 (d) and (e). (f)  Administrative waiver of tree conservation. An applicant may request in writing an administrative waiver from all or part of the tree conservation requirement prior to the submittal of a site plan, preliminary plat, or building permit; however, existing trees must be conserved to the greatest extent possible. In the event a waiver is granted, an alternative compliance method must be substituted for tree conservation in accordance with the criteria set forth in section 8-7-15(g) below. The request for a waiver shall include an explanation of why tree conservation cannot be fully achieved and shall be accompanied by a tree management plan which illustrates the extent to which tree conservation can be achieved and the alternative compliance method(s) proposed as a substitute. The tree management plan must otherwise meet all requirements for a tree management plan as required in section 8-7-17. (g)  Criteria for substituting alternative compliance methods. Substitution of an alternative compliance method for tree conservation shall be accomplished as follows. (1)  When tree conservation requirements cannot be partially or wholly met due to zoning requirements, utility construction standards, street construction standards, other Athens-Clarke County Code requirements, or extraordinary or exceptional conditions pertaining to the site because of its size, shape, character, topography, or the amount or distribution of existing trees, then a forest regeneration area or future forest area may be substituted for all or part of the tree conservation area. Forest regeneration areas and future forest areas shall be established in accordance with the standards set forth in section 8-7-19(f) and (g). (2)  When tree conservation requirements cannot be partially or wholly met for one of the reasons described in section 8-7-15(g)(1) and the site is either surrounded by impervious surfaces or the amount of landscaped area available is not large enough to establish a forest regeneration area according to the standards set forth in section 8-7-19(f), then additional planted trees may be substituted for all or part of the tree conservation area. (h)  Criteria for substituting alternative compliance methods when no trees exist. When no tree canopy cover exists prior to development, then an administrative waiver is not required and any combination of a future forest area, forest regeneration area, and additional planted trees may be substituted for tree conservation to meet the total tree canopy cover requirement. (i)  Planted tree canopy cover. The remainder of the minimum total tree canopy cover requirement may be satisfied through the planting of trees after tree conservation requirements have been met. For trees to be eligible for any tree canopy cover credit, the required amount of open soil surface area must be present and protected around the tree. In addition, tree planting must meet the tree establishment standards set forth in section 8-7-19(i), and trees must be protected in accordance with the tree protection standards set forth in section 8-7-19(h) to be eligible for tree canopy cover credit. Individual trees planted in parking lots, along the street, in front, side, and rear yards, in village greens, in active recreation areas, or in any other unbuildable portion of the lot shall count for credit as planted trees and the overall tree canopy cover requirement. (j)  Tree canopy cover in parking areas. A minimum of one tree per seven parking spaces is required. Parking areas shall be shaded by parking lot canopy trees as listed in the Athens-Clarke County Tree Species List . Tree canopy cover and trees planted in parking areas shall conform to the following minimum requirements. (1)  A ratio of one parking lot canopy tree for each seven parking spaces to create a canopy effect is required. (2)  Trees shall be selected from the parking lot canopy trees identified in the Athens-Clarke County Tree Species List . (3)  Required trees may, unless otherwise restricted, be incorporated into the required landscape areas required in section 9-25-8. (4)  To be considered a parking lot canopy tree, the tree shall not be planted any farther than ten feet from, nor any closer than three feet to, the edge of the parking area pavement or curb. (5)  Required trees shall be a minimum of two inches in caliper for deciduous trees, a minimum of eight feet in height for evergreen trees, and a minimum of one inch caliper per trunk for multi-trunk trees at the time of planting. (6)  A parking lot consisting of fewer than ten spaces may incorporate the required parking lot trees around its perimeter. (7)  Reserved. (8)  Only large canopy trees shall be used for the perimeter planting areas. Large canopy trees shall be used for interior islands or peninsulas if adequate root area can be provided. For vehicle sales lots smaller tree species may be used. (9)  The landscaped area shall include the open soil surface area required for the canopy size tree selected in the Athens-Clarke County Tree Species List . However, one medium parking lot canopy tree may be planted in a landscape island or peninsula with a minimum dimension of nine feet by 18 feet from outside of curb to outside of curb or one parking stall. (10)  Where double loaded parking is utilized, an island that is a minimum of nine feet by 36 feet outside of curb to outside of curb may use either one large canopy tree or two medium canopy trees. (11)  Planting strips in the interior of a parking lot shall have a minimum width of nine feet from outside of curb to outside of curb to accommodate trees. (12)  Perimeter planting strips along property lines shall have a minimum width of seven feet measured from outside of curb to the property boundary to accommodate trees. (13)  In no case shall trees be planted in areas between any structure and the curb without a minimum of 12 feet planting width. (14)  Trees shall be evenly distributed throughout the parking areas and parking perimeter at the required ratio. (15)  No more than 14 contiguous parking spaces shall be allowed without a minimum of one landscape island or peninsula containing trees. (16)  Conservable trees may qualify for parking lot canopy trees with the approval of the Athens-Clarke County Arborist. (k)  Streetscape trees. Trees shall be required as part of the streetscape on all street frontages in accordance with sections 9-14A-12, 9-15-2, 9-25-8, and 9-26-6. Tree establishment shall be done in accordance with the technical standards set forth in section 8-7-19. Tree canopy cover along streets must meet the following minimum requirements. (1)  One street tree shall be planted for each 30 feet of frontage for that portion of the development fronting the street. (2)  Where feasible, existing healthy trees on the site or lot of greater than two inches dbh shall be incorporated into the required streetscape. (3)  Trees may be spaced at variable distances to conform to site selection standards set forth in section 8-7-19(i)(1) and minimum distances in Table 2 of section 8-7-19(i); however, they must be more or less evenly distributed across the front lot line. (4)  Street trees shall be selected from the species recommended for use in road frontage areas by the Athens-Clarke County Tree Species List . Other species may be used as street trees with the approval of the Athens-Clarke County Arborist. (5)  Street trees shall be planted within ten feet of the lot line or within the public street right-of-way. Street trees required along private drives or private streets shall be within ten feet of the edge of the pavement. The Athens-Clarke County community forester or arborist may waive the standards in section 8-7-15(k)(5) to best meet the purpose and intent of this chapter. When granted, waivers shall be recorded in writing on the application for the tree management plan or other permanent record. (6)  Street trees may not be allowed in traffic vision clearance zones designated by the director of the department of transportation and public works. (7)  Street trees planted in the public street right-of-way must be approved by the community forester. (l)  Minimum tree canopy cover goals. Where tree canopy cover requirements do not exist or do not apply to a zoning district or individual lot, Athens-Clarke County encourages individual property owners to contribute toward Athens-Clarke County's overall tree canopy cover goal by maintaining trees on their property. (1)  Single-family residential lots. Owners of single-family residential lots are encouraged, but not required, to maintain a minimum of 60 percent tree canopy cover, after a certificate of occupancy has been issued. (2)  Agricultural land uses. Owners of lots in the AR zone are encouraged, but not required, to maintain a minimum of 50 percent tree canopy cover. (m)  Measurement of tree canopy cover. Tree canopy cover includes conserved individual trees, groups of trees, forested areas, forest regeneration areas, future forest areas, and/or planted trees, as established in accordance with this chapter. For a tree to be eligible for tree canopy cover credit for a specific lot, its trunk must be growing wholly on that lot. The eligible categories of tree canopy cover are measured as follows: (1)  Tree canopy cover for individual, conserved trees. For the purposes of this chapter, the tree canopy cover that is credited to an individual tree shall be either the actual square foot area of the crown's projection directly down onto the ground, or the future tree canopy cover for the species as listed in the Athens-Clarke County Tree Species List , whichever is greater. Any tree of a species not on the Athens-Clarke County Tree Species List shall be given the future tree canopy cover for the size typical of the species using standard landscaping references. For a conserved tree to be eligible for tree canopy cover it must be protected in accordance with the technical standards set forth in section 8-7-19. (2)  Tree canopy cover for groups of conserved trees and forested areas. Tree canopy cover credited to a group of trees shall be the combined area of the crowns' projections onto the ground, also described as the outer perimeter of the area encompassed by the tree protection zones of all the trees. Trees within a forested area cannot be counted individually with future tree canopy cover credit. (3)  Tree canopy cover for forest regeneration areas and future forest areas. Tree canopy cover credited to a forest regeneration area shall be the area planted in accordance with the forest regeneration area establishment standards set forth in section 8-7-19(f). Tree canopy cover credited to a future forest area shall be the area established in accordance with the future forest area establishment standards set forth in section 8-7-19(g). (4)  Planted tree canopy cover. Tree canopy cover credited to a planted tree shall be the future tree canopy cover for the species as listed in the Athens-Clarke County Tree Species List . For a planted tree to be eligible for tree canopy cover the required open soil surface area as listed in the Athens-Clarke County Tree Species List must be present. (5)  Tree canopy cover of a site or lot. The tree canopy cover of a site or lot shall be expressed as a percent of the gross acreage of the site or lot. Tree canopy cover for a site or lot can consist of conserved trees or planted trees or both. (6)  Tree canopy cover credit for landmark trees. On development sites, designated landmark trees shall be given two times either the future tree canopy cover listed in the Athens-Clarke County Tree Species List or two times the actual tree canopy cover, whichever is greater. (7)  Tree canopy cover. The area of tree canopy cover for which credit is given shall always remain in tree canopy cover and there shall be no other use of the area other than for tree growth or passive recreation as defined in Title 9. The area shall remain permeable, open soil as required by the technical standards set forth in section 8-7-19. (n)  Athens-Clarke County tree canopy cover measurement. The current and future total tree canopy cover throughout Athens-Clarke County and the total within each zoning district shall be calculated on a regular basis by the planning department or its agent. The results of the tree canopy cover measurement shall be presented to the mayor and commission at a regularly scheduled meeting during the first quarter after the completion of the measurement. (o)  Exemptions. The following areas are exempt from canopy cover calculations. (1)  Lakes. Natural or manmade bodies of water of two or more acres that are well-defined and contain water year round during a year of normal rainfall with the aquatic bed located below the water table for most of the year. Artificial bodies of water with a recirculation system approved by the Public Works Department are not included in this definition. (2)  Airport exclusion areas. Any portion of a property that is located within a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) designated clear zone or primary surface zone, any area within FAA designated approach surface zone that is within 1,000 feet of a clear zone or primary surface zone, any area that is within an FAA designated transitional surface zone that is within 350 feet of a clear zone or primary surface zone, or any area within 1,000 feet of a VHF omnidirectional range that is located on FAA recognized airport property shall not be included in the gross acreage of the site or lot for tree canopy calculation purposes. (Ord. of 6-7-2005, § 1; Ord. of 4-3-2007, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 5-6-2008, § 1; Ord. of 7-1-2008, § 1; Ord. of 2-3-2009, § 2; Ord. of 12-6-2011, §§ 4—6; Ord. of 5-1-2012, § 17; Ord. of 3-7-2017(4), §§ 1, 2 ; Ord. of 9-5-2017(1), § 1 ) 
Sec. 8-7-16. - Protected trees.     Officially designated landmark trees, trees on private property that have been conserved or planted to satisfy Athens-Clarke County Code requirements, and Athens-Clarke County trees shall be classified as protected trees. Protected tree status does not apply to trees on single-family residential lots after the certificate of occupancy has been issued. (a)  Protection of protected trees. All protected trees shall be actively and passively protected within the tree protection zone from damage or destruction and from any activity that may cause damage or destruction, including, but not limited to, those prohibited and limited activities listed in section 8-7-19(h)(1) and (2), using any and all measures necessary. Tree protection measures shall conform to the tree protection standards contained in section 8-7-19(h). (b)  Planting of other vegetation. Planting of perennial shrubs, herbaceous plants, turf, sod, or ground cover is limited to the outer two-thirds of the tree protection zone for a conserved tree, and to no closer than 2.5 feet to the trunk of a planted tree. (c)  Pruning of protected trees. The pruning of protected trees shall conform to the tree pruning standards contained in section 8-7-19(j). A right-of-way encroachment permit shall be required for the pruning of any Athens-Clarke County tree, except for pruning by Athens-Clarke County or for vegetation management in accordance with section 8-7-14(d). (d)  Removal of protected trees. An Athens-Clarke County tree shall not be removed without prior approval from the landscape management division administrator, except for the removal of trees by Athens-Clarke County or for vegetation management in accordance with section 8-7-14(d). Any tree planted or conserved on private property to meet code requirements shall not be removed without prior approval from the planning director. Approval shall be granted or denied based upon the tree removal standards set forth in section 8-7-19(l). (e)  Replacement of protected trees. The property owner shall replace any protected tree that dies or is removed from a site if such removal results in the decrease of the tree canopy cover on the site or lot less than that required. Replacement is required by the next tree-planting season with a tree of the same or similar species and canopy size in the same location. Replacement of landmark trees for which tree canopy cover credit was received during development shall be at the rate of two times the landmark tree's actual tree canopy cover or two times the future tree canopy cover, whichever is greater. Replacement is not required for landmark trees removed from single-family residential lots. All tree replacement shall be in accordance with the tree establishment standards set forth in section 8-7-19(i). (Ord. of 6-7-2005, § 1; Ord. of 2-3-2009, § 3) 
Sec. 8-7-17. - Tree management plan.     The property owner or his/her agent shall provide an approved tree management plan prior to the issuance of a site review permit, the issuance of a land development/land disturbance activity permit, or the issuance of a building permit for lots that appear on a preliminary plat approved after the adoption of this chapter. The tree management plan shall show the amount, location, and type of tree canopy cover currently existing on the site or lot, and that which is to be conserved and planted on the site, and the percent to be included on each individual lot within a subdivision. In lieu of a tree management plan approval prior to preliminary plat approval, the Athens-Clarke County Arborist must review and approve the tree canopy conservation areas proposed on the preliminary plat. Tree management plans submitted with a notice of timber harvest are only required to demonstrate that the tree canopy conservation standards will be met. The following components shall be included on the tree management plan: (a)  Existing and proposed utilities. The location and type of all existing and proposed utilities. (b)  Existing forested areas and individual trees inventory. The location and description of all existing forested areas, groupings of trees with overlapping canopies, individual, isolated trees greater than 18 inches in diameter, and landmark trees. (1)  For each forested area or group of trees the area in square feet. (2)  For each individual tree and landmark tree outside of existing forested areas the species common and Latin names, dbh, and tree canopy cover area. (c)  Athens-Clarke County trees. The location of any and all individual trees greater than two inches dbh, groupings of trees, and forested areas growing on the public right-of-way adjacent to the property being developed. The information listed shall be as required in section 8-7-17(b)(1) and (2). (d)  Current tree canopy cover. An estimate of the amount of tree canopy cover currently existing on the site or lot to the nearest one percent. (e)  Individual trees to be conserved. For individual trees to be conserved the species common and Latin names, dbh, canopy cover, location of the trunk, extent of the crown, boundaries of the tree protection zone, and location of tree protection fencing. (f)  Groups and stands of trees to be conserved. For groups and stands of trees the square foot and percent canopy cover represented, the location of the groups or stands, boundaries of the tree protection zone, and location of tree protection fencing. (g)  Forest regeneration areas. For each forest regeneration area the location and boundaries of the forest regeneration area, the square footage and percent of tree canopy cover represented, the number of trees to be planted of each species and the percent of the total that each species represents, and the size of the trees to be planted by species. (h)  Future forest areas. For each future forest area the location and boundaries of the future forest area, and the square footage and percent of tree canopy cover that will be represented by the future forest area. (i)  Tree planting. For each tree that will be planted to satisfy tree canopy cover requirements, including street trees and parking lot trees, the location, species common and Latin names, variety or cultivar, caliper at time of planting, and extent and location of open soil surface area. (j)  Summary table. A summary table of tree canopy cover by acres and percent of total site for tree canopy cover meeting conserved, planted, and total tree canopy cover requirements. (k)  Tree Preservation Area. The boundaries of all Tree Preservation Areas shall be clearly identified on the Tree Management Plan. (Ord. of 6-7-2005, § 1; Ord. of 4-3-2007, § 3; Ord. of 4-6-2010, § 10) 
Sec. 8-7-18. - Forest management activities. (a)  Forest management activities, including timber harvesting, shall conform to accepted professional forestry practices and Georgia's Best Management Practices for Forestry, dated January 1999, published by the Georgia Forestry Commission, and as officially revised and amended from time to time. (b)  Notification required . All persons or firms harvesting standing timber in Athens-Clarke County for delivery as pulpwood, logs, poles, posts or wood chips to any woodyard or processing plant located inside or outside the state or any property owners who individually or through agents or contractors harvest standing timber from their own lands shall provide notice of such harvesting operations to the Athens-Clarke County Planning Director prior to cutting any such timber. "Harvest" or "harvesting" as used in this chapter shall mean the cutting or removal of trees for any purpose that results in the assessment of ad valorem taxation of such trees in accordance with O.C.G.A. section 48-5-7.5. (c)  Forms and content of notice. The required notice of harvesting such timber shall describe each separate site to be harvested, shall be on such form promulgated by the Georgia Forestry Commission, shall be delivered to the Athens-Clarke County Planning Director prior to the inception of harvesting and shall consist of: (1)  A map of the area which identifies the location of the site to be harvested and, as to those trucks which will be traveling to and from such site for purposes of picking up and hauling loads of cut forest products, the main point of ingress to such site from a public road and, if different, the main point of egress from such site to a public road. (2)  A statement as to whether the timber will be removed pursuant to a lump sum sale, per unit sale, or owner harvest for subject to ad valorem taxation under section 48-5-7.5 of the Official Code of Georgia. (3)  The name, address, and daytime telephone number of the timber seller if the harvest is pursuant to a lump sum or per unit sale or of the timber owner if the harvest is an owner harvest. (4)  The name, business address, business telephone number, and nighttime or emergency telephone number of the person or firm harvesting such timber. (d)  Delivery of notice. Notice may be submitted in person, by transmission of an electronic record via facsimile or such other means as approved by the Athens-Clarke County Planning Director, or by mail to the Athens-Clarke County Planning Director. (e)  Bond or letter of credit required. Persons or firms subject to the notice requirement shall deliver a bond or letter of credit as provided by this section. Notice shall not be effective for such harvesting operations unless and until the person or firm providing such notice has delivered to the Athens-Clarke County Public Works Director a valid surety bond, executed by a surety corporation authorized to transact business in Georgia protecting Athens-Clarke County against any damage caused by such person or firm in the amount of $5,000.00 or, at the option of the person or firm harvesting timber, a valid irrevocable letter of credit issued by a bank or savings and loan association, as defined in Section 7-1-4 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, in the amount of and in lieu of such bond. For purposes of this section, any such surety bond or letter of credit shall be valid only for the calendar year in which delivered. If the timber harvest is to occur on a parcel of three acres or less, the Athens-Clarke County Public Works Director may waive the requirement for a bond or letter of credit. (f)  Duration of notice. Notice shall be effective for such harvesting operation on such site within Athens-Clarke County upon receipt of the same by the Athens-Clarke County Planning Director and compliance with the requirements of section 8-7-4 hereof and until such time as the person or firm giving such notice has completed the harvesting operation for such site; provided, however, that any subsequent change in the facts required to be provided for purposes of such notice shall be reported to the Athens-Clarke County Planning Director within three business days after such change. (g)  Violation; penalties. Violation of the notice requirements of this section shall be subject to the penalties set forth in section 1-1-5 of the Code of Ordinances of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia; provided, however, the maximum fine for each violation shall be $500.00. (h)  Exemptions. The notice requirement shall not apply to the following: (1)  The harvesting of five or fewer trees on a site within a calendar year. (2)  The removal of any tree which has become a danger to human life or property. (3)  The removal of trees found to be diseased or insect infested by the County Extension Service, the Georgia Forestry Commission, a certified arborist, the community forester, or the Athens-Clarke County Arborist. (4)  Reserved. (5)  Reserved. (6)  Any harvesting of standing timber on sites one acre or smaller within RS-5, RS-8, RS-15, RS-25, or RS-40 zoning districts. (i)  Development limitations. (1)  If a tree management plan or notice of timber harvest is required but has not been submitted and approved prior to timber harvesting activity, no development activity may occur on a site for a period of five years after the commencement date of the timber harvesting or tree cutting or removal. The five-year development limitation described herein shall not apply with regard to construction of a single-family residence on the property subject to the limitation that all required applications for permits associated with the timber harvest shall have been submitted and approved within 60 days following imposition of the five-year development limitation. (2)  The hearings board established under Chapter 4 of Title 9 of this Code may grant waivers from application of the limitation of development activity imposed by the preceding paragraph if the property owner demonstrates that special constraints on the site required the removal of standing timber to allow applicant's proposed use of such site in accordance with applicable zoning and development standards, that the removal of such standing timber was the minimum necessary for such proposed use, and that the proposed development will at a minimum meet the tree conservation requirements as set forth in section 8-7-15. (3)  The hearings board shall be authorized to add conditions to the grant of a waiver to promote the conservation and regeneration of trees on the site, including but not limited to requirements for conservation of existing trees, establishment of natural forest regeneration areas, and technical standards for the planting and maintenance of trees. (4)  An applicant for a waiver shall submit at the time of application a proposed tree management plan completed by the property owner or his/her agent as set forth in section 8-7-17. (Ord. of 6-7-2005, § 1; Ord. of 8-2-2005, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 8-7-2007, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 12-6-2011, § 7; Ord. of 3-7-2017(5), § 1 ) 
Sec. 8-7-19. - Technical standards.     Technical standards for tree conservation, protection, establishment, pruning, and maintenance are hereby established and shall be the minimum standards required. All activities associated with protected trees shall conform to these technical standards. In addition, all tree conservation, protection, establishment, pruning, and maintenance shall conform to applicable American National Standard for Arboricultural Operations Z133.1 safety standards, dated October 19, 2000, published by the American National Standards Institute, and as officially revised and amended from time to time. (a)  Professional assistance. Any person or firm subject to the requirements of this chapter is encouraged to seek professional assistance from a registered forester or certified arborist. A list of consulting foresters and arborists is available from the Georgia Forestry Commission, and certified arborists can be located online on the International Society of Arboriculture's website. (b)  Arboricultural (tree) services. Any person or firm subject to the requirements of this chapter is encouraged to hire only qualified, established businesses to perform arboricultural services, to require references for similar work before hiring, and to require adequate insurance for property damage, personal liability, vehicles, and workers compensation. The hiring of arboricultural businesses and tree services that employ certified arborists who can supervise the requested work is recommended. (c)  Administrative waiver of technical standards. The community forester or the Athens-Clarke County Arborist may waive any technical standard in section 8-7-19 to best meet the purpose and intent of this chapter. When granted, waivers shall be recorded in writing on the application for landmark tree designation, the right-of-way encroachment permit, the tree management plan, or other permanent record. (d)  Tree conservation standards; forested areas. The conservation of forested areas shall meet the minimum criteria below. (1)  Each area shall be at least 2,500 square feet. (2)  At least 50 percent of the area shall be contiguous. (3)  Each area shall be a minimum of 20 feet wide in any one dimension. (4)  Each area shall include the tree protection zones of all trees, and the trees shall be protected according to the tree protection standards set forth in section 8-7-19(h). (5)  Areas shall remain in a natural, undisturbed condition. (6)  Turf is not permitted. (7)  Mowing is not permitted. (8)  Clearing of underbrush is not permitted, except for the removal of invasive species. (9)  No new tree maintenance shall be required, except for that necessary to maintain a healthy stand of trees. (10)  Areas dominated by kudzu or Chinese privet will not be eligible for tree canopy cover credit. (11)  Tree removal without prior approval is not permitted, except for hazard trees. (12)  Activities permitted and prohibited within the area shall be as listed in section 9-14A-13 for open space, except that no active recreation areas, timber harvesting, or tree removal shall be allowed. (e)  Tree conservation standards; individual trees. The conservation of individual healthy trees or groups of healthy trees shall meet the minimum criteria below. (1)  Each tree must meet the definition of a conservable tree. (2)  The tree protection zone of each tree shall be conserved and the tree protected according to the tree protection standards set forth in section 8-7-19(h). (3)  Each tree shall be mulched in accordance with the mulching standards set forth in section 8-7-19(k). (f)  Forest regeneration area establishment standards. Forest regeneration shall meet the minimum criteria below. (1)  Each area shall be at least 2,500 square feet. (2)  Soils shall be aerated to a depth of eight inches. (3)  Soils shall have a minimum of five percent organic matter. (4)  Wood chips less than three months old shall not be used to provide organic matter. (5)  Soils shall have a pH between 5.8 and 7.0. (6)  Trees shall be planted at a rate of at least 245 trees per acre. (7)  All species planted shall be native to the Piedmont area of Georgia. (8)  A minimum of 15 percent of the trees planted shall be large canopy trees that are at least 1.5 inches caliper and at least five feet tall at the time of planting, and shall be evenly distributed throughout the forest regeneration area. (9)  A minimum of 30 percent of the trees planted shall be medium canopy trees at least .5 inch caliper and at least three feet tall at the time of planting, and shall be evenly distributed throughout the forest regeneration area. (10)  The remaining 55 percent of the trees planted shall be a mixture of small, medium, and large canopy trees and shall be at least one-year old seedlings, at least 1.5 feet tall at the time of planting, and shall be evenly distributed throughout the forest regeneration area. (11)  No more than 15 percent of any one species shall be planted. (12)  Only native grasses and shrubs may be planted within the forest regeneration area, except that non-native vegetation approved for soil sedimentation and erosion control may be used. (13)  The area shall remain free from English ivy, Chinese privet, Japanese honeysuckle, kudzu, and other invasive or non-native plants. (14)  Turf is not permitted. (15)  Mowing is not permitted. (16)  Tree removal without prior approval is not permitted, except for hazard trees. (17)  At least 200 healthy trees per acre must be maintained within the forest regeneration area or replanting to meet this minimum shall be required. (18)  Activities permitted and prohibited within the area shall be as listed in section 9-14A-13 for open space, except that no active recreation areas, timber harvesting, or tree removal shall be allowed. (g)  Future forest area establishment standards. The establishment of a future forest area shall meet the minimum criteria below. (1)  Each area shall be at least 2,500 square feet. (2)  Soils and existing vegetation shall remain undisturbed. (3)  No prohibited activities, as described in section 8-7-19(h)(1) and (2) shall be allowed. (4)  The area shall remain free from English ivy, Chinese privet, Japanese honeysuckle, kudzu, and other invasive or non-native plants. (5)  Turf is not permitted. (6)  Mowing is not permitted. (7)  Activities permitted and prohibited within the area shall be as listed in section 9-14A-13 for open space, except that no active recreation areas, timber harvesting, or tree removal shall be allowed. (h)  Tree protection standards. Athens-Clarke County trees or trees on private property conserved and planted to meet tree canopy cover requirements shall be actively protected during development and passively throughout their life in accordance with the requirements for protected trees set forth in section 8-7-16. (1)  Prohibited activities. The following activities and conditions, and any other activities and conditions harmful to a tree's roots, trunk, or crown, within the tree protection zone are prohibited: a.  Vehicle or equipment traffic, parking, or storage. b.  Materials or supplies storage. c.  Placement of temporary or permanent structures. d.  Equipment maintenance or washout. e.  Wounding of trunk. f.  Wounding or breakage of scaffold limbs or branches greater than six inches in diameter. g.  Topping or other improper pruning, such as stub cuts or flush cuts. h.  Fires; excessive heat from equipment exhaust pipes. (2)  Limited activities. The following activities and conditions within the tree protection zone are limited to one side of the tree in the outer ½ of the critical root zone, but in no case closer than 2.5 feet to the trunk of a planted tree and ten feet to the trunk of a conserved tree: a.  Site or lot clearing or grubbing. b.  Soil excavation. c.  Soil cuts. d.  Soil fill. e.  Grading. f.  Trenching. g.  Tilling. h.  Edging. i.  Soil compaction. j.  Top dressing with soil greater than two inches in depth. k.  Paving. (3)  Active tree protection standards. Active tree protection shall meet the following minimum criteria: a.  Tree protection fencing shall be installed prior to any land development or land disturbance activity around a tree at the location of the tree protection zone and shall remain in place until construction activities end or a certificate of occupancy is issued, whichever is later. b.  Tree protection fencing shall be four feet high, high-visibility polypropylene fencing erected with sturdy posts. c.  Activities described in section 8-7-19(h)(1) and (2) shall be prohibited within the tree protection zone. d.  Low hanging limbs that may be damaged by equipment traffic or other construction activities shall be pruned prior to the commencement of any land development/land disturbance activity; all pruning shall be in accordance with the pruning standards set forth in section 8-7-19(j). e.  When equipment movement is such that damage to tree trunks is possible, then tree trunks shall be wrapped vertically with one layer of two inch by four inch lumber spaced a maximum of 12 inches apart, and covered with corrugated cardboard secured with strapping. The wrapping shall remain on throughout the period of potential damage. (4)  Active tree protection area sign standards. Prior to any land development or land disturbance activity and after tree protection fencing is installed around any conserved trees or tree conservation area, tree protection area signs shall be installed. Signs shall be installed along the perimeter of all tree protection zones at least every 50 feet and shall include, at a minimum, the following text: "Tree Protection Area, Entry Prohibited, No Construction Activity, Materials or Equipment Storage, Equipment Washout, or Vehicle Traffic Allowed". The sign shall be fabricated out of a sturdy material, shall be at least 18 inches wide by 24 inches high, and shall be placed on a sturdy post with the bottom of the sign at a minimum height of 30 inches above the ground. The signs must remain present at all times during construction. (5)  Passive tree protection standards. Passive tree protection shall be required throughout the life of a protected tree and shall require, at a minimum, the avoidance of all prohibited activities described in section 8-7-19(h)(1) and (2) within the tree protection zone. (i)  Tree establishment standards. Tree establishment involves a series of steps that includes site selection, species selection, quality tree selection, site preparation, tree planting, and new tree maintenance. Tree establishment standards shall be as set forth in subsections (1) through (7) below. (1)  Site selection standards. Trees shall be placed such that they have adequate space to grow unobstructed to maturity. Minimum distances, at the time of planting as measured from the tree trunk, to structures and infrastructure shall be required as listed in Table 2. In addition, the following standards apply: a.  Trees shall not be planted directly over property boundary lines or corners. b.  In no case shall a planting site be less than three feet wide in any one direction. Table 2. Minimum Distances in Feet Required between Trees and Structures or Infrastructure by Tree Canopy Size Category Structure/Infrastructure Description Tree Canopy Size Category from the Athens-Clarke County Tree Species List Large Medium Small Very Small Street intersections, measured from the right-of-way boundary 35 35 35 35 Traffic signs 20 20 20 20 Light poles 20 20 15 15 Overhead utility lines 30 20 0 0 Underground utility lines 5 5 5 5 Mailboxes 5 5 5 5 Fire hydrants, electrical transmission boxes, water meters, other similar structures 5 5 5 5 Curb, sidewalk, or pavement edge 2 2 1.5 1.5 Buildings 15 10 5 5  (2)  Species selection standards. Species planted to satisfy the requirements of this chapter shall be selected from the Athens-Clarke County Tree Species List , and shall conform to the following standards: a.  Species shall be selected that are tolerant of the growing conditions existing on the site, including growing space, sunlight, soil moisture, temperature, and soil volume. b.  [Reserved] c.  No more than 30 percent of any one species shall be planted on a lot, except in forest regeneration areas where no more than 15 percent of any one species shall be planted. d.  For street trees, where no obstructions to growth exist, large canopy trees shall be planted; where obstructions to growth exist for large canopy trees, medium canopy trees shall be planted; where obstructions to growth exist for medium canopy trees, small canopy trees shall be planted. (3)  Tree size and quality standards. Trees planted to satisfy the requirements of this chapter shall meet minimum quality standards as established in the ANSI Z60.1 American Standard for Nursery Stock dated 1990 and published by the National Arborist Association, as officially revised and amended by the National Arborist Association from time to time. Trees shall also conform to the following standards to be eligible for tree canopy cover credit: a.  Trees shall be a minimum of two inches in caliper for deciduous trees, a minimum of eight feet in height for evergreen trees, and a minimum of one inch caliper per trunk for multi-trunk trees at the time of planting. b.  Trees outside of forest regeneration areas may be container grown or balled and burlapped. c.  Trees within forest regeneration areas may be bare root, container grown, or balled and burlapped. d.  Trees with forked stems and included bark shall not be counted for tree canopy cover credit. e.  Trees that require staking to stand upright shall not be counted for tree canopy cover credit. (4)  Site preparation standards. The soil around a planted tree shall meet the following standards: a.  The soil within the open soil surface area shall be well aerated to a depth of eight inches, except that in tree planting islands surrounded by pavement it shall be well aerated to a depth of 18 inches. b.  The soil shall contain at least five percent organic matter. c.  Soil pH shall be with a range of 5.8 to 7.0. d.  An approved structural soil mix containing 80 percent rock aggregate, 15 percent mineral soil, and a sticking agent may be used within parking lots and other paved areas to increase the rooting volume available to trees. e.  Permeable or porous pavements may be used within a parking lot or other paved area, in which case the open soil surface area required may be reduced by up to 20 percent. (5)  Tree planting standards for container grown, or balled and burlapped trees. The following standards shall apply to container grown and balled and burlapped trees: a.  In undisturbed soils and prepared soils the planting hole shall be at least two times as wide and no deeper than the root ball of the tree, shall have sides sloping inward from the top, and the bottom shall be firm soil. b.  In compacted soils, the planting hole shall be at least three times as wide and no deeper than the root ball of the tree, shall have sides sloping inward toward the bottom, and shall have firm soil on the bottom. c.  The tree shall be planted no deeper than it was growing in the container or field and the trunk flare shall be visible above the ground. d.  All strapping, webbing, twine, strings, and other such material shall be removed from the root ball. e.  The burlap and wire basket, if present, shall be removed to a minimum depth of 12 inches and to a greater extent if possible. f.  In no case shall any burlap be located above the soil surface. g.  Tree staking is not required, but if installed it shall be removed no later than one year after planting. (6)  Tree planting standards for bare root saplings and seedlings. The following standards shall apply to all bare root saplings and seedlings: a.  The roots of saplings and seedlings shall remain moist at all times prior to planting. b.  A planting hole shall be dug of sufficient depth to accommodate the root system of the tree without bending or creating a j-shaped root. c.  Trees shall be planted no deeper than they were growing in the field. d.  The soil shall be packed around the roots after planting to eliminate air pockets. (7)  New tree maintenance standards. For newly planted balled and burlapped or container grown trees that are planted to satisfy the requirements of this chapter, except for those planted in forest regeneration areas, the property owner shall comply with the following maintenance standards for the first three years after planting: a.  Trees shall be mulched immediately after planting in accordance with the mulching standards set forth in section 8-7-19(k)(1). b.  When natural rainfall is less than one inch per week, trees shall be provided with the equivalent of one inch of water per week after planting and throughout the growing season and throughout the open soil surface area. c.  Trees shall be pruned immediately after planting to remove dead, broken, diseased, dying, or rubbing branches. d.  Tree pruning shall be done as necessary to remove dead branches, train tree structure, and maintain clearance over walkways and vehicles in accordance with the tree pruning standards set forth in 8-7-19(j). e.  Tree staking materials shall be removed within one year after planting. (j)  Tree pruning standards . Protected trees shall be pruned in accordance with the American National Standard for Tree Care Operations A300 dated June 1, 1995 published by the American National Standards Institute and Best Management Practices published by the International Society of Arboriculture, as officially revised and amended from time to time. Tree owners and their agents are encouraged to hire businesses that employ certified arborists who can supervise the pruning work on site and ensure that proper pruning is being done. In addition, the following standards shall apply to protected trees: (1)  Pruning activities shall not disturb nesting, rare, or endangered wildlife to the greatest extent possible. (2)  Co-dominant stems less than four inches in diameter at the fork shall be pruned off and one main stem shall remain. (3)  Pruning shall be done such that a tree's natural form is maintained to the greatest extent possible. (4)  Tree topping or heading is not permitted. (5)  Reasons for which tree pruning is not permitted include, but are not limited to: a.  Sign installation, clearance, or visibility, excluding traffic, directional, warning, or information signs owned by any public or semipublic agency. b.  Clearance for temporary or permanent equipment traffic or storage, the erection of temporary structures, or materials storage within the tree protection zone. (k)  Tree maintenance standards. In addition to pruning, tree maintenance includes mulching, fertilization, cabling and bracing, and lightning protection. When required for protected trees as set forth herein, these activities shall be done in accordance with the standards set forth below. (1)  Mulching standards. Individual planted trees, individual conserved trees, and groups of ten or less conserved trees shall be mulched in accordance with the following standards. For conserved groups of more than ten trees, forested areas, future forest areas, and forested buffers, the addition of mulch is not required; however, the ground surface and natural leaf litter within these areas shall remain present and undisturbed. a.  Mulch shall be composed of organic materials only and may include, but is not limited to, pine straw, leaves, wood chips aged at least three months, compost, and pine bark. b.  Grass clippings, plastic sheeting, and rocks or gravel shall not be used as mulch and shall not be applied within the tree protection zone. c.  For all trees the critical root zone shall be mulched out from the trunk at least one-third the distance to the outer edge of the critical root zone, except that no mulch ring shall have a radius less than 2.5 feet or shall be required to be greater than ten feet. d.  Mulch shall be three to four inches in depth, and shall be spread in an even layer from six inches out from the trunk to outer extent of the mulched area. e.  Mulch is not allowed closer than six inches to the tree trunk. f.  Mulch shall be applied at least annually, preferably in the late winter or early spring. (2)  Fertilization standards. Fertilization is not required for protected trees. However, if protected trees are fertilized, they shall be fertilized in accordance with the American National Standard for Tree Care Operations A300 (Part 2), dated September 24, 1998, published by the American National Standards Institute, and as officially revised and amended from time to time. (3)  Tree support systems standards. Any tree support systems placed in protected trees shall be designed, installed, and maintained in accordance with the American National Standard for Tree Care Operations ANSI A300 (Part 3), published by the American National Standards Institute, and as officially revised and amended from time to time. (4)  Lightning protection systems standards. Any lightning protection systems placed in protected tree shall be designed, installed, and maintained in accordance with the American National Standard for Tree Care Operations ANSI A300 (Part 4), dated August 30, 2002, published by the American National Standards Institute, and as officially revised and amended from time to time. (l)  Tree removal standards. The removal of protected trees shall be done in accordance with the standards set forth below. (1)  Tree removal shall not disturb nesting, rare, or endangered wildlife to the greatest extent possible, and removal shall be delayed until nesting wildlife is safely removed. (2)  Tree removal shall be approved if a tree meets one or more of the following conditions. a.  Dead. b.  Unhealthy condition. c.  Dieback of 50 percent or greater of the crown. d.  Insect infestation or disease condition for which treatment is impractical, causing tree decline, and with a high probability of spreading to other trees. e.  Trunk wounds greater than one-third the circumference of the trunk. f.  Trunk cavity greater than two-thirds the diameter of the trunk at the point of the cavity. g.  Structural defects in scaffold limbs, where defect correction through pruning will result in removal of 50 percent or greater of the tree's crown. h.  Litter originating from the tree that creates an unsafe condition or poses a hazard to public health, safety, and welfare. i.  Unresolvable conflict with infrastructure that is creating an unsafe condition or poses a hazard to public health, safety, and welfare. (3)  Reasons for which tree removal is not permitted include, but are not limited to: a.  Sign installation, clearance, or visibility, excluding traffic, directional, warning, or information signs owned by any public or semipublic agency. b.  Unwanted production of leaves, fruit, or other organic litter that does not create an unsafe condition or that is not a hazard to public health, safety, and welfare. (4)  Stump grinding standards. After removal, stumps of protected trees, except for landmark trees on single-family residential lots, that are greater than six inches in diameter shall be ground to a depth of 12 inches, and the resulting woody debris mixed with an equal part of soil. The surface of the ground in the area of the stump shall be level with the surrounding ground after grinding and incorporation of soil. (Ord. of 6-7-2005, § 1; Ord. of 2-3-2009, § 4; Ord. of 12-2-2014, § 1 ) 
Sec. 8-7-20. - Variances.     Except as otherwise provided in this chapter as administrative waivers, where practical difficulties, unnecessary hardships, and results inconsistent with the purpose and intent of this chapter may result from the strict application of certain provisions thereof, variances may be granted by the Athens-Clarke County Hearings Board established in Title 9 upon a finding that the criteria set forth in (a)(2) below have been met. In granting a variance, the hearings board is hereby given jurisdiction to hear variances herein and may impose conditions to protect the best interests of the surrounding property and property owners, the neighborhood, or the community as a whole and consistent with the purpose and intent of this chapter. (a)  Application. Variances shall be heard by the hearings board pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 9-21. Such application shall be accompanied by: (1)  Tree management plan prepared in accordance with section 8-7-17. (2)  A statement and evidence demonstrating that the following criteria are met: a.  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape, character, topography; b.  The application of the provisions of this chapter to this particular piece of property would create an unnecessary hardship; c.  The benefits of granting the variance will be greater than any negative impacts on adjacent uses and will further the purpose and intent of this chapter; d.  The special conditions and circumstances on the site do not result from the actions of the applicant; and e.  The variance, if granted, will represent the minimum variance that will afford relief from the identified hardship and will represent the least deviation possible from the zoning regulation and from the comprehensive plan. (3)  Proposed mitigation plan that offsets the effects of the proposed variance during site preparation, construction and post-construction phases. (Ord. of 6-7-2005, § 1; Ord. of 4-7-2009, § 1) 
Sec. 8-7-21. - Inspections.     Inspections shall be required to ensure that the purpose, intent, and provisions of this chapter are met. At a minimum, the following inspections by the county arborist shall be required for all development related activities and by the community forester for non-development related activities covered by the provisions of this chapter. (a)  Preliminary inspection. The site shall be inspected with the applicant or his/her agent prior to plans review or preliminary plat approval for the purpose of discussing options for tree conservation, compliance with technical standards and enforcement procedures. In no case shall a site plan or preliminary plat be approved without a preliminary inspection as set forth in section 8-7-21(a) and approved tree management plan as set forth in section 8-7-17. (b)  Tree protection inspection. An inspection shall be made after the approval of a site plan or preliminary plat and prior to the issuance of a land development/land disturbance activity permit for the purpose of insuring that all tree protection standards have been met. The approval of tree protection measures by the county arborist shall be required before any land disturbance activities commence. In no case shall a land disturbance activity permit be issued without a site inspection for tree protection compliance and without an approved tree management plan as required by section 8-7-17. (c)  Periodic inspections. Additional site inspections may take place periodically during construction or encroachment to ensure that all technical standards and conditions of the tree management plan are being met. Inspections may be made at any time to insure that tree canopy cover is being maintained on a site or lot as required by this chapter. (d)  Certificate of occupancy inspection. An inspection of the site shall be required prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the purpose of insuring all applicable requirements of this chapter have been met. (e)  Inspection of right-of-way encroachment activity. The community forester may inspect when right-of-way encroachment permits are issued as described in section 8-7-14(b). Site inspections may be made at any time after the permit is issued to enforce the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. of 6-7-2005, § 1) 
Sec. 8-7-22. - Enforcement.     Failure to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall result in a citation, or one of the following actions. (a)  Stop work order. Upon notice from the issuing authority or its agent, work on any project that is being done contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall be immediately stopped. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, his authorized agent or the person or persons in charge of the activity on the property and shall state the conditions under which work may resume. Where an emergency exists a written notice to comply nor a written notice to stop work is not required. (b)  Withholding of certificate of occupancy. If the person engaged in development activity fails to comply with a written notice to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this chapter and, in addition to other penalties, the administrator may request that the Athens-Clarke County Building Permits and Inspections Department refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the measures necessary to achieve compliance with this chapter have been completed and all violations of this chapter have been brought into compliance. (Ord. of 6-7-2005, § 1) 
Sec. 8-7-23. - Violations and penalties.     Any person violating or causing the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or failing to comply with its provisions has committed an infraction, and upon conviction thereof is punishable as prescribed in section 1-1-5 of the Athens-Clarke County Code. (Ord. of 6-7-2005, § 1) 