THE CODE OF ATHENS-CLARKE COUNTY, GEORGIA ____________ CHARTER, SPECIAL AND RELATED LAWS AND THE GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE UNIFIED GOVERNMENT ____________ Published by Order of the Chief Elected Officer and Commission ____________ Adopted: April 6, 1993 Effective: April 6, 1993 ____________ > OFFICIALS of ATHENS-CLARKE COUNTY, GEORGIA ____________ Gwen I. O'Looney Chief Elected Officer ____________ Charles Carter, District 1 Harry Sims, District 2 John Taylor, Sr., District 3 John Barrow, District 4 Hugh Logan, District 5 Marilyn Farmer, District 6 Cardee Kilpatrick, District 7 Ken Jordan, District 8 Tom Chasteen, District 9 Tal DuVall, District 10 Commissioners ____________ H. Russell Crider Manager ____________ Denny C. Galis Attorney ____________ Peppi Teague Anglin Legal Assistant ____________ Jean Spratlin Clerk of Commission PREFACE     This Code constitutes a complete publication of the general and permanent ordinances of the Unified Government of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia.     Source materials used in the preparation of this Code were ordinances adopted by the commission through April, 1992. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative table appearing in the back of this volume, the reader can locate any section of any ordinance included herein, and any subsequent ordinance included herein.     The chapters of the Code have been arranged in the order designated by the Unified Government and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Footnotes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state laws have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this volume. Chapter and Numbering System     The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and municipal codes. Each section number consists of three component parts separated by dashes, the first figure referring to the title number, the second figure referring to the chapter number and the third figure referring to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the first section of chapter 1-4 is number 1-4-1 and the third section of chapter 1-7 is 1-7-3. Under this system, each section is identified with its title and chapter and at the same time new sections or even whole titles or chapters can be inserted in their proper place simply by using the decimal system for amendments. By way of illustration: If new material consisting of three sections that would logically come between sections 1-1-8 and 1-1-9 is desired to be added, such new sections would be numbered 1-1-8.1, 1-1-8.2 and 1-1-8.3, respectively. New chapters may be included in the same manner. If the new material is to be included between chapters 3-3 and 3-4, it will be designated as chapter 3-3.5. New titles, articles and divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject, the next successive number being assigned to the article or division. Looseleaf Supplements     A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the appropriate page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages.     Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised sheets are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. Acknowledgments     The publication of this Code was under the direct supervision of James Thompson, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project.     The publishers are most grateful to Ms. Jean Spratlin, Clerk of Commission, Ms. Peppi Teague Anglin, Legal Assistant, Ms. Gwen I. O'Looney, Chief Elected Officer, and Mr. Denny C. Galis, Athens-Clarke County Attorney, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this Code. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publishers have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the Athens-Clarke County readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the Unified Government's affairs. MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION Tallahassee, Florida  ADOPTING ORDINANCE AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR ATHENS-CLARKE COUNTY, GEORGIA; ESTABLISHING THE SAME; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE; AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES. The Commission of Athens-Clarke County hereby ordains as follows:     Section 1. The Code entitled, "The Code of Athens-Clarke County," published by Municipal Code Corporation consisting of titles 1 to title 9, each inclusive, is hereby adopted and enacted as The Code of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia, which Code may be referred to as the 1993 Code, which shall supersede all general and permanent ordinances of Athens-Clarke County passed on or before April 7, 1992, to the extent provided in section 2 hereof.     Section 2. All provisions of the Code shall be in full force and effect from and after April 6, 1993, and all ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on final passage on or before April 7, 1992, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein are hereby repealed from and after the effective date of this Code.     Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by this ordinance.     Section 4. Whenever in such Code or in any ordinance of Athens-Clarke County any act or omission is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in this Code or ordinances the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful or an offense, and no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of such Code shall be a violation punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000.00, or imprisonment for not more than six months, or any combination thereof. Unless specifically provided otherwise, or the context thereof so dictates, each day any violation of any provision of such Code shall constitute a separate offense.     Section 5. Any and all additions and amendments to the Code, when passed in conformity with the requirements of the Charter of the Unified Government of Athens-Clarke County shall be deemed to indicate the intention of the governing body to make the same a part of the Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code shall be understood and intended to include the additions and amendments.     Section 6. In case of the amendment of any section of the Code for which a penalty is not provided, the general penalty as provided as in section 4 of this ordinance and in section 1-1-5 of such Code shall apply to the section as amended, or in case the amendment contains provisions for which a penalty, other than the aforementioned general penalty, is provided in another section shall be held to relate to the section so amended, unless the penalty is specifically repealed therein.     Section 7. This ordinance and the Code adopted hereby shall become effective April 6, 1993. 
PART I - CHARTER[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Editor's note— Part I of this volume consists of the Charter of the Unified Government of Athens-Clarke County as adopted Aug. 7, 1990. The Charter has been set out herein as enacted, with only minor, nonsubstantive modifications made by the editor for purposes of consistency and style. Any material in brackets [ ] has been added for purposes of clarity. The absence of a history note following any particular section of the Charter indicates that such section has derived unchanged from the Aug. 7, 1990, Charter; conversely, a history note in parentheses following an individual section (or sections) indicates that those provisions have been amended by the legislation contained in the parentheses. Following Parts I and II of this volume are tables showing the basic sections of the Charter, along with ordinances amending same, and special and related laws pertaining to the municipality. 
ARTICLE I. - UNIFICATION, CREATION, BOUNDARIES, STATUS, AND POWERS OF UNIFIED GOVERNMENT Section 1-101. Unification of county and city; creation of unified government; name. Section 1-102. Boundaries. Section 1-103. Status of unified government as municipal corporation and county. Section 1-104. Powers of the unified government. Section 1-105. Taxing districts. Section 1-106. Construction. 
Section 1-101. - Unification of county and city; creation of unified government; name. (a)  The governmental and corporate powers, duties and functions now vested in the governing authority of the City of Athens, a municipal corporation created by an Act of the General Assembly of Georgia, approved April 11, 1979 (Ga.L. 1979, p. 3770), as amended, are hereby unified with the governmental and corporate powers, duties and functions of Clarke County. This unification shall result in the creation and establishment of a single county-wide government with powers and jurisdiction throughout the territorial limits of Clarke County, which single government shall supersede and replace the governments of the City of Athens and Clarke County. Said county-wide government shall be a new political entity, a body politic and corporate, and a political subdivision of the state, to be known as the "Unified Government of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia," (herein at times called the "unified government,") having all the governmental and corporate powers, duties and functions heretofore held by and vested in the City of Athens and Clarke County, and also the powers, duties and functions provided in this Charter. Such unified government shall not include the municipal corporation of Winterville, Georgia, which shall retain its Charter and maintain the same legal relationship with the unified government as it had with Clarke County prior to the effective date of this Charter, except as otherwise provided in this Charter. The unified government shall be a public corporation; shall have perpetual existence; shall adopt a common seal; shall, without the necessity or formality of a deed, bill of sale or other instrument of transfer, own, possess and hold all the properties of whatsoever kind or nature, assets, contracts, franchises, things, rights, privileges, immunities, and real and personal property theretofore owned, possessed, enjoyed or held by the City of Athens or Clarke County; and by the name of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia, shall be capable of suing and being sued when authorized by this Charter and by the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia. From and after the effective date of this Charter, the political subdivision known as Clarke County, Georgia, and the municipal corporation known as the City of Athens, Georgia, shall be unified into the said new political entity herein created. (b)  The unified government shall encourage the meaningful involvement in its operations of all citizens of Athens-Clarke County, particularly those who are members of minority or other traditionally disadvantaged groups, as appointees, employees and independent contractors. No individual shall be denied any opportunity on the basis of race, gender, religion, age, handicap or national origin. (c)  The unification of the governments of the City of Athens and Clarke County is authorized pursuant to the provisions of article IX, section III, paragraph II(a) of the Constitution of Georgia of 1983, as amended. 
Section 1-102. - Boundaries.     The unified government shall embrace the total area included within the existing territorial limits of Clarke County as such limits are fixed and established on the effective date of this Charter. However, such limits may be altered and changed from time to time as provided by the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia pertaining to counties. 
Section 1-103. - Status of unified government as municipal corporation and county.     The unified government shall be deemed to be both a municipal corporation and a county throughout the total territory of said government. It is the express intention of this section to declare as a city and as a part of the unified government all of the area of Clarke County, except for those areas within the boundaries of the cities of Winterville and Bogart. 
Section 1-104. - Powers of the unified government. (a)  The Unified Government of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia, shall have all powers of self-government authorized by the Constitution and not otherwise prohibited by the laws of Georgia. (b)  In addition to the foregoing, the unified government shall have and be vested with, to the same extent as if herein repeated, all rights, powers, duties, privileges and authority that the mayor and council of the City of Athens or the commission of Clarke County, or both, has under the Constitution and general and local laws of the State of Georgia at the time of adoption of this Charter, except as herein expressly modified. This authority shall include, but shall not be limited to, the authority to adopt home rule ordinances and resolutions as provided in article IX, section II of the Constitution of the State of Georgia. (c)  In addition to the foregoing, the unified government shall have all rights, powers, duties, privileges and authority herein conferred or herein enlarged, and such other rights, powers, duties, privileges and authority as may be necessary and proper for carrying the same into execution, and also all rights, powers, duties, privileges and authority, whether express or implied, that may be now vested in or hereafter granted to counties or municipal corporations, or both, by the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia, including the powers vested in the unified government by this Charter. (d)  The unified government, in addition to the rights, duties, powers, privileges and authority expressly conferred upon it by this Charter, shall have the right, duty, power, privilege and authority to exercise and enjoy all other powers, duties, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities necessary and proper to promote or protect the safety, health, peace, security and general welfare of said government and its inhabitants and to exercise all implied powers necessary to carry into execution all powers granted in this Charter as fully and completely as if such powers were fully enumerated herein and to do and perform all of the acts pertaining to its property, affairs and local government which are necessary or proper in the legitimate exercise of its corporate powers and governmental duties and functions. (e)  No enumeration of any right, power, privilege or authority hereinafter made shall be construed as limiting or abolishing any right, power, privilege or authority hereinabove set forth. (f)  In addition to and supplementary to all other powers which it may possess, and by way of illustration and not of limitation, the unified government shall have the powers specifically enumerated in section 8-114 of this Charter. 
Section 1-105. - Taxing districts. (a)  The unified government shall divide the county into two (2) or more taxing districts (herein called "services districts"); provided, however, at least one of such districts shall be known as the "general services district." The general services district shall consist of the total area of Clarke County and shall include the area of the City of Winterville wherein all services provided in the general services area of Athens-Clarke County shall be made available to the citizens of the City of Winterville at the same rate such services are provided all citizens of the general services area pursuant to a contract executed between the governments of the City of Winterville and Athens-Clarke County for the amount of $1.00 for a period not to exceed fifty (50) years, as provided in article IX, section III, paragraph I of the Constitution of the State of Georgia. In addition, the commission shall establish at least one (1) or more Urban Services Districts which shall embrace such territory or territories for which provision is made by the commission for additional or higher levels of services than are provided uniformly throughout the territory of the unified government. Special services districts, which are those wherein specific services are provided to specific areas outside an urban services district, may also be created as provided in this Charter. (b)  Taxes shall be assessed, levied and collected in accordance with the kind, character, type, degree and level of services provided by the government within said service districts, and the rate and manner of taxation may vary in any one district from that in another or other districts. (c)  The unified government may also establish special services districts, which shall embrace such territory or territories for which provision is made by the commission for additional or higher levels of service(s) provided by the unified government. (d)  In the establishment of the first urban services district or districts, the commission shall hold one or more public hearings thereon at which all interested persons affected thereby shall have an opportunity to be heard. Notice of the time, place and date of such hearings shall be published in the official legal organ of Athens-Clarke County at least once a week during the two (2) weeks immediately preceding the date of hearing. (e)  In the establishment of special services districts, the commission shall hold one (1) or more public hearings thereon at which all interested persons affected thereby shall have an opportunity to be heard. Notice of the time, place and date of such hearings shall be published in the official legal organ of Athens-Clarke County at least once a week during the two (2) weeks immediately preceding the date of hearing. (f)  The unified government is hereby empowered to exercise and provide within the general services district and within any urban and special services district established by this Charter or by ordinance of the commission those powers, functions and services which have theretofore been exercised and provided by Clarke County or the City of Athens, or both; all powers, functions and services authorized by this Charter, and any amendments thereto; and all powers, functions and services which counties or municipal corporations, or both, are now or are hereafter authorized to exercise under the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia. (g)  The unified government shall perform within the general services district those governmental duties, functions and services which are generally available and accessible to all residents throughout the total area of said government. (h)  The unified government shall perform within its urban services districts those additional, more comprehensive and intensive and higher levels of governmental duties, functions and services which benefit primarily the residents of such urban services districts. (i)  The unified government shall perform within its special services districts those additionally selected, more comprehensive, intensive and higher levels of governmental duties, functions and services which benefit primarily the residents of such special services districts. (j)  Except as otherwise provided by this Charter, urban and special services districts of the unified government shall be created, expanded, merged, consolidated or reduced only by an ordinance duly adopted by the commission under such general rules, procedures, regulations, requirements and specifications as established by the commission; provided, however, no new urban or special service district shall be created or existing urban or special services district expanded, abolished, merged, consolidated or reduced without providing an opportunity for interested persons to be heard by publishing a notice of a public hearing on the proposed expansion, consolidation, reduction or creation of an urban or special services district in the official legal organ of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia, at least once a week during the two (2) weeks immediately preceding the date of hearing. Such rules and regulations shall set forth the manner and method for the creation of new urban and special services districts; the expansion, consolidation, reduction or merger of existing urban or special services districts; requirements for defining functions and policies for rendering services; changes in levels of services within existing services districts; the transfer of territory from one services district to another; requirements for defining boundaries of services districts; procedures for the expansion, reduction or consolidation of existing services districts; and requirements for defining boundaries of services districts. (k)  The unified government is empowered to create new services and eliminate existing services by the same procedures and methods stated above. (l)  Citizens of any area in the county may request additional services by petitioning the unified government according to the rules, procedures and guidelines established by the unified government. The unified government will hold public hearings as outlined in the services district modification procedure stated above and will consider all comments received prior to reaching a final decision. 
Section 1-106. - Construction.     The powers of the unified government shall be construed liberally in favor of the unified government. The specific mention or failure to mention particular powers in this Charter shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general powers of the unified government as provided in this article. It is the intention hereof to grant to the unified government full power and right to exercise all governmental authority authorized by the Constitution and laws of Georgia which is necessary for the effective operation and conduct of the unified government within its territory and for the conduct of all of its affairs. 
ARTICLE II. - LEGISLATIVE ARTICLE Chapter 1. The Commission Section 2-101. Name and composition. Section 2-102. Term of office; qualifications; disqualifications. Section 2-103. Salary and expenses of the commission. Section 2-104. Organization; oath; rules; quorum; meetings; records; mayor pro-tempore. Section 2-105. Powers of the commission. Section 2-106. Filling of vacancies. Chapter 2. Legislative Procedure Section 2-201. Legislation by ordinance. Section 2-202. Introduction, consideration and passage of ordinances and resolutions. Section 2-203. Reserved. Section 2-204. Submission of ordinances to mayor; effective date. Section 2-205. Authentication; recording. Section 2-206. Codes of technical regulations. Section 2-207. Codification and printing of ordinances. Section 2-208. Prima facie evidence. Chapter 3. Ethics and Prohibited Practices Section 2-301. Conflict of interest. Section 2-302. Disclosure. Section 2-303. Testimony of public officials relating to public affairs. Section 2-304. Contracts voidable and rescindable. Section 2-305. Hearings and determinations; penalties for violation. 
CHAPTER 1. - THE COMMISSION 
Section 2-101. - Name and composition.     There is hereby created the "Commission of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia." Membership on the commission is a part-time position. The commission shall consist of ten (10) members, elected from districts as provided in section 6-201 of this Charter. 
Section 2-102. - Term of office; qualifications; disqualifications. (a)  The terms of office of all members of the commission shall be four years and until their successors are elected and qualified, except that a commissioner appointed to fill a vacancy shall serve only for the balance of the unexpired term as provided in Section 2-l06 of this Charter. All terms of office shall begin at the first regular commission meeting in January next following the election. (b)  No person shall be eligible for election or appointment to the commission unless such person, on or before the date of election or appointment, shall have attained the age of twenty-one (21) years, shall be a qualified voter of the unified government, and shall have resided within the county for one (1) year and within the territorial limits of the district from which elected on the date of qualifying for election. A member of the commission shall continue to reside within the district from which elected during such member's term of office. (c)  No member of the commission, during that member's term of office, shall hold any other federal, state or local government elective office. (2002 Ga. Laws, p. 4246, § 1; 2012 Ga. Laws (Act No. 409), § 1) Editor's note— The description of the districts as set forth in § 2-102(a) may be found in appendix A to this Charter. 
Section 2-103. - Salary and expenses of the commission. (a)  The salary of each commissioner shall be $15,000.00 per year, payable in equal monthly installments. (b)  In addition to the salary, commissioners shall be reimbursed for all direct expenses incurred in carrying out the duties and responsibilities of the unified government. (c)  The salary and expenses of members of the commission may be changed by ordinance, subject to the following conditions: (1)  No action to increase the salary or expenses of commissioners shall be taken until notice of intent to take the action has been published in the official legal organ of Athens-Clarke County at least once a week for three (3) successive weeks immediately preceding the week during which the action is taken. (2)  Any action to increase the salary of commissioners shall not become effective until the date of commencement of the terms of those commissioners elected at the next regular election following such action. (3)  No action to increase the salary of commissioners shall be taken during the period between the date when candidates for election to the commission may first qualify as candidates and the date when members of the commission take office following their election. (2001 Ga. Laws, page 3873, § 1) 
Section 2-104. - Organization; oath; rules; quorum; meetings; records; mayor pro-tempore. (a)  The commission shall meet for organization and swearing-in purposes on the first Tuesday after January 1, next following its election or as soon thereafter as practicable. At this meeting, the newly elected or re-elected commissioners shall each take the following oath of office, to be administered by the judge of the probate court: "I do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will well and truly perform the duties of Commissioner of the Unified Government of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia, and that I will support and defend the Charter thereof, as well as the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia and of the United States of America, so help me God." (b)  The commission, by majority vote, shall adopt rules of procedure governing the transaction of its business consistent with the provisions of this Charter; shall adopt by ordinance the time, date and place for regular meetings, which will be held at least once each month; and shall provide for keeping minutes of its proceedings by the clerk as provided in section 4-102 of this Charter. (c)  At its first organization meeting, the commission shall select the date when it will hold its regular monthly meetings. (d)  Seven (7) of the ten (10) members of the commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business; however, a smaller number may adjourn from time to time. (e)  Special meetings of the commission may be called by the mayor or by any five (5) commissioners upon no less than twenty-four (24) hours' written notice to each member served personally or left at the usual place of business or residence of such member. Such notice of a special meeting may be waived in writing either before or after the meeting. Subject to O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1(d), special meetings may be held at any time without notice to all commissioners, upon attendance at such meeting by all members of the commission, or by waiver of notice of those not in attendance. (f)  All meetings of the commission, except for those exceptions provided for in general law, shall be public and any citizen shall have access to the minutes and records thereof at reasonable times. (g)  At its first meeting in January of each year a chief elected officer (referred to as the mayor in this Charter, see article III of this Charter) pro-tempore shall be elected by and from the membership of the commission to serve for a term of one (1) year. Such an election shall take place at the first regular meeting of the commission each year and whenever necessary to fill a vacancy in the office. A commissioner elected to fill a vacancy shall only serve as such until an election for a new mayor pro-tempore is held the following year. (h)  In the absence of the mayor for any cause, the mayor pro-tempore shall preside over meetings and discharge the duties of mayor until either the return of the mayor or the election of a new mayor. While serving as the mayor, the mayor pro-tempore shall have the same powers as a mayor and not those of a commissioner. (Ord. of 7-2-96, § 1; Ord. of 7-6-99, § 1; Ord. of 12-4-2001, § 1) 
Section 2-105. - Powers of the commission. (a)  All legislative powers of the Unified Government of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia, including any such powers which may hereafter be conferred by law upon said government, shall be vested exclusively in the mayor and the commission, in accordance with the provisions of this Charter. (b)  In addition to its legislative powers, the commission shall specifically have the power to: (1)  Adopt and from time to time amend the budget; (2)  Approve or reject recommendations concerning the appointments of the manager, attorney and internal auditor; (3)  Remove from office the manager, attorney and internal auditor by majority vote of the entire commission; and (4)  Override the mayor's veto with the affirmative vote of seven (7) commissioners. (5)  Appoint the clerk of commission by a majority vote of the entire commission, describe duties and the compensation for said office, and terminate said clerk at any time by a majority vote of the entire commission. (c)  In the exercise of its powers, the commission shall adopt and provide for the execution of such ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations, not inconsistent with this Charter, as may be necessary or proper for the purpose of carrying into effect the powers conferred by this Charter and for the promotion and protection of the safety, health, peace, security and general welfare of the inhabitants of the unified government and may enforce such ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations by imposing penalties for violations thereof, as prescribed by ordinance, by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00, or by imprisonment for a period not exceeding six (6) months, or both. (d)  Except as otherwise provided by the Constitution, general or local law or this Charter, the commission may by ordinance create, change, alter, combine, abolish, consolidate and redefine the manner of appointment, membership, powers and duties of bureaus, boards, commissions, departments, divisions, authorities, offices and agencies of the unified government, including positions of public employment, and may transfer and delete functions and assign additional functions to any bureaus, offices, agencies, departments, divisions, boards, authorities, commissions and positions of public employment existing under this Charter. The commission may by ordinance transfer all the assets, liabilities and obligations thereof to a department, a division or other unit of a department of the unified government, which shall have the power, and its duty shall be to perform and exercise all the functions and powers theretofore performed and exercised by such board, commission, authority, division, agency, bureau, office, department or position of public employment. (e)  Subsection (d) of section 2-105 of this Charter does not apply to any authorities or boards which were created by either a local constitutional amendment or by a local act of the General Assembly. (f)  The commission shall have the power to conduct or cause to be conducted inquiries and investigations of the operations of any office, department, or agency or the conduct of any officer or employee thereof administering the affairs of the unified government. In conducting inquiries and investigations, the commission shall have the right to administer oaths; subpoena witnesses, documents, records or other evidence; take testimony; and require the production of evidence. The conduct of proceedings at commission inquiries and investigations shall be subject to such rules and regulations as the commission may prescribe by general ordinance. (g)  The commission shall provide for the form of oaths and the amount and condition of surety bonds as may be required of any officer or employee of the unified government. (h)  The commission shall have and exercise such other powers as conferred upon it by this Charter and the laws of Georgia. (Ord. of 7-2-96, § 1; Ord. of 7-6-99, § 1; Ord. of 7-5-2000, § 1; 2002 Ga. Laws, p. 4737, § 1; Ord. of 4-7-2015(1) , § 2) 
Section 2-106. - Filling of vacancies. (a)  In the event that the office of a member of the commission shall become vacant by reason of death, resignation or any other cause, and the term shall expire in less than one hundred eighty (180) days, the vacant position shall be filled by appointment of the remaining members of the commission. Any individual so appointed must have the same qualifications required for election to the office. (b)  If the term of the vacant commission position will continue for more than one hundred eighty (180) days, a special election shall be held as provided in this Charter and in general state law to elect a new member of the commission to serve for the remainder of the term. 
CHAPTER 2. - LEGISLATIVE PROCEDURE 
Section 2-201. - Legislation by ordinance.     Every official act of the commission which is to have the force and effect of law shall be by ordinance and shall begin with the words: "The Commission of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia, hereby ordains." All other acts of the commission shall be by resolution or shall take such other form as prescribed by its rules. 
Section 2-202. - Introduction, consideration and passage of ordinances and resolutions. (a)  Every proposed ordinance and every amendment shall contain not more than one (1) subject which shall be expressed clearly in its title. (b)  It shall be the duty of the attorney to draft all ordinances. Prior to the introduction of any ordinance, copies of it shall be prepared by the clerk of the commission and distributed to each member of the commission. (c)  Every proposed ordinance shall be in writing and shall be introduced by reading the title thereof at a regular monthly, or a properly called special, meeting of the commission of Athens-Clarke County, at which time it may be acted upon. (d)  The adoption of any ordinance shall require a vote of at least six (6) affirmative votes. (e)  The passage of all ordinances shall be contingent upon the recording of the "ayes" and "nays" of each person voting, and the names of each person voting for and against each proposed ordinance or amendment, those abstaining, and those absent shall be entered upon the minutes of the proceedings of the commission. (Ord. of 12-5-91 § 1) 
Section 2-203. - Reserved. Editor's note— Section 2 of Ord. No. 91-10-100, adopted Dec. 5, 1991, deleted § 2-203 of the Charter in its entirety. Said section pertained to emergency ordinances and was derived from the Charter of the Unified Government adopted Aug. 7, 1990. 
Section 2-204. - Submission of ordinances to mayor; effective date. (a)  Every ordinance or resolution adopted by the commission shall be certified by the clerk of the commission and presented to the mayor within two (2) business days following its adoption. (b)  The mayor shall approve or veto the ordinance or resolution within ten (10) business days after adoption, and no ordinance or resolution shall become effective without his or her approval except as provided herein. (c)  If an ordinance or resolution is approved by the mayor, it shall become law upon the date of the mayor's approval. If the mayor vetoes an ordinance or resolution, he or she shall within two (2) business days following such veto return the ordinance or resolution to the clerk with a written statement of the reasons for the veto. The clerk shall then record the date of the receipt of the vetoed ordinance or resolution and thereupon shall notify the commission members of such veto. If the commission shall pass the ordinance or resolution by a vote of seven (7) of the ten (10) members at the meeting next held after the ordinance or resolution has been returned with the mayor's veto, it shall become law with or without his or her approval. In the event the mayor does not approve or veto the ordinance or resolution within the time required, it shall become law with or without his or her approval. (Ord. of 12-5-91, § 3; Ord. of 7-2-96, § 1; Ord. of 7-6-99, § 1) 
Section 2-205. - Authentication; recording.     The clerk of the commission shall authenticate by signature and record in full, in a properly indexed book kept for that purpose, all ordinances and resolutions adopted by the commission. (Ord. of 12-5-91, § 4) 
Section 2-206. - Codes of technical regulations. (a)  The commission may adopt any standard code of technical regulations by reference thereto in an adopting ordinance. The procedure and requirements governing such adopting ordinance shall be prescribed for ordinances generally, except that: (1)  The requirements of subsection (b) of section 2-202 of this Charter for distribution of copies of the ordinance to each commission member shall be construed to include copies of the code of technical regulations which shall be maintained in the clerk's office, as well as the adopting ordinance; and (2)  A copy of each adopted code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance, shall be authenticated by the clerk as provided in section 2-205 of this Charter. (b)  Copies of any adopted code of technical regulations shall be made available by the clerk for public inspection and for purchase at a reasonable price as fixed by the commission. (Ord. of 12-5-91, § 5) 
Section 2-207. - Codification and printing of ordinances. (a)  The commission shall, within two (2) years of the effective date of this Charter, provide for the preparation of a general codification of all ordinances of a general or permanent nature. Such code shall be adopted by the commission by ordinance and shall be published promptly in loose-leaf form, together with all amendments thereto, this Charter, any amendments hereto, and such codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations as the commission may specify. This compilation shall be known and cited officially as the "Code of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia." As determined by the commission, copies of the Code shall be furnished to officers, departments and agencies of the unified government; placed in libraries and public offices for public reference; and made available for purchase by the public at a reasonable price. (b)  Following publication of the first Code of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia, from time to time thereafter, the ordinances and Charter amendments shall be printed in substantially the same style as the Code then in effect and shall be suitable in form for integration therein. 
Section 2-208. - Prima facie evidence.     A record or entry made by the clerk of commission of a copy of such record or entry, duly certified by the clerk of commission, shall be prima facie evidence of the terms of every ordinance and its due adoption. (Ord. of 12-4-2001, § 2) 
CHAPTER 3. - ETHICS AND PROHIBITED PRACTICES 
Section 2-301. - Conflict of interest.     No elected official, appointed officer or employee of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia, or any agency or political entity to which this Charter applies shall knowingly: (1)  Engage in any business or transaction in which the person has a financial interest which is incompatible with the proper discharge of official duties; (2)  Disclose confidential information concerning the property, government or affairs of the governmental body by which such person is engaged or is a member of without proper legal authorization or use that information to advance the financial or other private interest of such person or others; (3)  Accept any gift that has a value of $100.00 or more from any person, firm or corporation which to his or her knowledge is interested, directly or indirectly, in business dealings with the governmental body he or she is a member of or by which such person is engaged; provided, however, that an elected official who is a candidate for public office may accept campaign contributions and services in connection with any campaign; (4)  Represent private interests other than his or her own in any action or proceeding against Athens-Clarke County, Georgia, or any portion of its government; or (5)  Vote or otherwise actively participate in the negotiation or the making of any contract between Athens-Clarke County, Georgia, and any business or entity in which he or she has a financial interest. 
Section 2-302. - Disclosure.     Any elected official, appointed officer or employee of the unified government or of any board, commission, authority or agency thereof who shall have any private financial interest, direct or indirect, in any contract or matter pending before or within any department of the unified government shall disclose such private interest to the commission. Any commissioner who has a private interest in any matter pending before the commission shall disclose such private interest and such disclosure shall be entered on the records of the commission, and he or she shall disqualify himself or herself from participating in any decision or vote relating thereto. Any elected official, appointed officer or employee of any board, commission, authority or agency of the unified government who shall have any private financial interest, direct or indirect, in any contract or matter pending before or within such entity shall disclose such private interest to the commission. 
Section 2-303. - Testimony of public officials relating to public affairs.     Any officer or employee of the unified government or of any board, commission, authority or agency thereof who is duly and properly called as a witness before any unified government, state or federal judicial or administrative tribunal, and who shall before such tribunal fail to answer any proper question concerning the performance of his or her official duties shall be guilty of a violation of this Charter. 
Section 2-304. - Contracts voidable and rescindable.     Any contract between the unified government or any board, commission, authority, agency or entity thereof made in violation of the provisions of this Charter shall be voidable or rescindable at the option of the commission at any time if any elected official, appointed officer or employee of such unified government or board, commission, authority or agency thereof has any interest in such contract and does not disclose such interest in accordance with section 2-302 of this Charter. 
Section 2-305. - Hearings and determinations; penalties for violation. (a)  Upon the sworn complaint of any person alleging facts which if true would constitute a violation of this Charter, the commission may conduct a public hearing at which the accused shall be given an opportunity to be heard, either personally or through counsel. At the conclusion of such hearing, the commission shall, in written findings of fact and conclusions based thereon, make a determination concerning the propriety of the conduct of the official or employee in question. (b)  Any officer or employee of the unified government or of any board, commission, authority or agency thereof who is found to have knowingly concealed his or her personal financial interest, or who is found to have knowingly violated any of the requirements of this Charter, shall be deemed guilty of malfeasance in office or position. If such decision is upheld after all reviews and appeals provided by the merit system of the unified government have been exhausted, the officer or employee shall be subject to such punishment as may be deemed appropriate by the commission and which may include forfeiture of office or position. (c)  Any officer or employee of the unified government or of any board, commission, authority or agency thereof who shall forfeit his or her office or position as described in subsection (b) above shall be ineligible for appointment or election to or employment in a position in the unified government or of any board, commission, authority or agency thereof for a period of three (3) years thereafter. (Ord. of 12-5-91, § 10) 
ARTICLE III. - MAYOR Section 3-101. Election; term. Section 3-102. Qualifications of office. Section 3-103. Compensation. Section 3-104. Powers and duties. Section 3-105. Voting. Section 3-106. Vacancy in office of mayor. 
Section 3-101. - Election; term.     There is hereby created the office of "mayor of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia" (referred to at times in this Charter as the "mayor"). The mayor shall be elected from the unified government at-large and shall serve part-time for a term of four (4) years and until a successor is elected and qualified. Any mayor who has been elected for two (2) full consecutive four-year terms of office under the provisions of this Charter shall not be eligible to be elected for the succeeding term. (Ord. of 7-2-96, § 1; Ord. of 7-6-99, § 1) 
Section 3-102. - Qualifications of office. (a)  To be eligible for election as mayor, a person on the date of election must: (1)  Have attained the age of twenty-one (21) years; (2)  Have resided in the territory of the unified government for at least one (1) year immediately preceding the date of election and must continue such residence therein during the term of office; (3)  Be a registered voter of the unified government; and (4)  Meet any other requirements as established by law. (b)  No person elected as mayor shall, during that person's term of office, hold any other federal, state or local government office. (Ord. of 7-2-96, § 1; Ord. of 7-6-99, § 1) 
Section 3-103. - Compensation. (a)  The mayor shall receive as compensation for the services of this office an annual salary of $45,000.00, payable in equal monthly installments. (b)  In addition to the salary, the mayor shall be reimbursed for all direct expenses incurred in carrying out the duties and responsibilities of the unified government. (c)  The salary and expenses of members of the mayor may be changed by ordinance, subject to the following conditions: (1)  No action to increase the salary or expenses of the mayor shall be taken until notice of intent to take the action has been published in the official legal organ of Athens-Clarke County at least once a week for three (3) successive weeks immediately preceding the week during which the action is taken; (2)  Any action to increase the salary of the mayor shall not become effective until the date of commencement of the term of the mayor elected at the next regular election following such action; and (3)  No action to increase the salary of the mayor shall be taken during the period between the date when candidates for election to the office of mayor may first qualify as candidates and the date when the newly elected mayor takes office following the election. (Ord. of 7-2-96, § 1; Ord. of 7-6-99, § 1; 2001 Ga. Laws, page 3873, § 2) 
Section 3-104. - Powers and duties.     The mayor shall have the powers and duties to: (a)  Serve as the official representative of the unified government including serving as the unified government's representative to federal, state and local governmental bodies and officials; (b)  Initiate the process, with the involvement of commission members and appropriate staff, to search and screen candidates for the positions of manager, attorney, and internal auditor and to recommend candidates for these positions to the commission (appointment requires concurrence of a majority of the entire commission); (c)  Set the agenda, after receiving input from members of the commission, the manager and the public, for meetings of the commission; (d)  Preside over meetings of the commission; (e)  Make committee appointments; (f)  Present a proposed annual budget and a proposed capital improvements budget, which has been prepared by the manager with the assistance of all department and agency heads and all others who supervise the implementation of a budget that uses funds of the unified government for approval by the mayor, to the commission; (g)  Approve or veto proposed ordinances or resolutions as provided by this Charter; (h)  Call special meetings of the commission as provided by this Charter and by rules of the commission; (i)  Execute all deeds, contracts and obligations of the unified government except for contracts exempted from this requirement by section 7-501; such execution shall be attested to by the clerk; (j)  Recommend to the commission the adoption of such measures as deemed necessary or expedient; and (k)  Perform any other duties and exercise any other powers required by state or federal law or authorized by a duly adopted ordinance that is not in conflict with this Charter. (Ord. of 7-2-96, § 1; Ord. of 7-6-99, § 1; Ord. of 12-4-2001, § 3; Ord. of 4-7-2015(1) , § 3) 
Section 3-105. - Voting.     The mayor shall not be authorized to vote on any matter before the commission except in the case of ties. (Ord. of 7-2-96, § 1; Ord. 7-6-99, § 1) 
Section 3-106. - Vacancy in office of mayor.     In the event that the office of mayor shall become vacant by reason of death, resignation or any other cause, the vacancy shall be filled by the mayor pro-tempore who shall serve as mayor with all powers of the mayor until a new mayor is selected as provided below: (a)  If the term of the mayor will expire in less than one hundred eighty (180) days, the mayor pro-tempore shall serve as the mayor until the next general election when a new mayor will be elected. (b)  If the term of the mayor will continue for more than one hundred eighty (180) days, a special election shall be held as provided in general law to elect a new mayor for the remainder of the vacant mayor's term. (Ord. of 7-2-96, § 1; Ord. of 7-6-99, § 1) 
ARTICLE IV. - ADMINISTRATION Chapter 1. Officers Section 4-101. Manager; appointment; qualifications; compensation. Section 4-102. Manager; powers and duties. Section 4-103. Attorney; appointment; term; qualifications; duties; compensation. Section 4-104. Internal auditor; appointment; term; duties; qualifications; compensation. Section 4-105. Sheriff. Section 4-106. Judge of the Probate Court. Section 4-107. Clerk of Superior Court. Section 4-108. Tax commissioner. Section 4-109. Coroner. Section 4-110. Clerk of commission; duties. Chapter 2. Administrative and Service Departments Section 4-201. Creation and functions; generally. Section 4-202. Administrative reorganization. Section 4-203. Appointment of directors of departments. Section 4-204. Departments under state law. Chapter 3. Merit System of Personnel Administration Section 4-301. Establishment of merit system. Chapter 4. Boards, Commissions and Authorities Section 4-401. Certain boards, commissions and authorities continued. 
CHAPTER 1. - OFFICERS 
Section 4-101. - Manager; appointment; qualifications; compensation. (a)  The manager shall be the full-time administrative officer of the unified government. The manager shall be recommended by the Mayor and confirmed by a majority vote of the entire Commission on or before the first voting meeting in June of the year the term expires with the appointment to be effective July 1 of said year; shall be appointed for a term of two (2) years, beginning on July 1, 2009, except that the existing term of the Manager which expires on March 31, 2009 shall be extended through June 30, 2009; may succeed himself or herself; and at any time may be removed from office by a majority vote of the entire Commission. Whenever the office of the Manager is vacant, the Mayor may recommend a person to serve as acting Manager for the remainder of the term of office of the Manager or until a new Manager is appointed, whichever event occurs first, subject to approval by a majority vote of the entire Commission and subject to reappointment thereafter. The acting Manager at any time may be removed by a majority vote of the entire Commission. (b)  No person holding an elective office in Athens-Clarke County shall be eligible for appointment until two (2) years after leaving elective office. The manager shall be prohibited from engaging in any political activity, and the manager shall not be eligible to qualify as a candidate for an elective office in Athens-Clarke County for one (1) year after leaving office. The manager need not be a resident of Athens-Clarke County at the time of his or her appointment but shall establish residence therein within six (6) months of such appointment and continue to reside therein throughout such appointment. (c)  The qualifications and compensation of the manager shall be fixed by ordinance. (Ord. of 7-2-96, § 1; Ord. of 7-6-99, § 1; Ord. of 12-4-2001, § 4; Ord. of 10-5-2004, § 1; Ord. of 5-6-2008, § 1) 
Section 4-102. - Manager; powers and duties. (a)  The manager shall be responsible for: (1)  The management and coordination of the operations and activities of the various departments and agencies of the unified government; (2)  The appointment and removal of department heads; (3)  The preparation of the proposed annual budget with the assistance of all department heads for approval by the mayor; (4)  Keeping the commission at all times fully advised as to the financial condition and needs of the unified government; (5)  Conducting studies and investigations and making reports thereon to the commission concerning the operations of the departments, offices and agencies of the unified government; (6)  Requiring any department, board, commission or agency under the manager's jurisdiction to submit written reports and to provide other information deemed necessary; (7)  Prescribing, requiring, publishing and implementing standards of administrative, management, and operating practices and procedures to be followed and adhered to by all offices, departments, boards, commissions, authorities and other agencies of the unified government which are subject to the manager's supervision and jurisdiction; (8)  Acting as the purchasing agent of Athens-Clarke County as provided for in section 8-105 of this Charter. (b)  Except for the purpose of inquiry and investigation, the mayor and commission shall deal with employees of the unified government who are subject to appointment and removal by the manager solely through the manager and shall not give orders or directions to any such employee, either publicly or privately, directly or indirectly. (Ord. of 12-5-91, § 6; Ord. of 7-2-96, § 1; Ord. of 7-6-99, § 1; Ord. of 7-5-2000, § 2) 
Section 4-103. - Attorney; appointment; term; qualifications; duties; compensation. (a)  The Mayor shall make nonbinding recommendations to the Commission for the "attorney" of the unified government (referred to at times in this Charter as the "attorney"). The attorney shall be appointed by a majority vote of the entire Commission on or before the first voting meeting in June of the year the term expires with the appointment to be effective July 1 of said year; shall be appointed for a term of two (2) years, beginning on July 1, 2009, except that the existing term of the attorney which expires on March 31, 2009 shall be extended through June 30, 2009; may succeed himself or herself; and at any time may be removed by a majority vote of the entire Commission. (b)  The attorney shall be an active member of the State Bar of Georgia in good standing and shall satisfy any other qualifications established by ordinance. (c)  The attorney shall be the legal counsel to the unified government and shall perform such other duties as may be required by this Charter or by ordinance. (d)  The compensation of the attorney shall be as prescribed by a duly adopted ordinance. (Ord. of 7-2-96, § 1; Ord. of 7-6-99, § 1; Ord. of 10-5-2004, § 2; Ord. of 5-6-2008, § 2) 
Sec. 4-104. - Internal auditor; appointment; term; duties; qualifications; compensation. (a)  The Mayor shall make nonbinding recommendations to the Commission for the "internal auditor" of the unified government (referred to at times in this Charter as the "internal auditor"). The internal auditor shall be appointed by a majority vote of the entire Commission on or before the first voting meeting in June of the year the term expires with the appointment to be effective July 1 of said year; shall be appointed for a term of two (2) years, beginning on July 1, 2009; may succeed himself or herself; and at any time may be removed by a majority vote of the entire Commission. (b)  The qualifications, duties and compensation of the internal auditor shall be as prescribed in a duly adopted ordinance. (Ord. of 7-2-96, § 1; Ord. of 7-6-99, § 1; Ord. of 10-5-2004, § 3; Ord. of 5-6-2008, § 3; Ord. of 4-7-2015(1) , § 1) 
Section 4-105. - Sheriff.     The sheriff of Clarke County in office on the effective date of this Charter shall be the Sheriff of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia. The sheriff shall serve for the same term as provided by law, and the compensation shall be fixed as provided by law. Subsequent elections for sheriff shall be on the same basis as provided by law for the election of sheriffs generally. The sheriff shall be responsible for the operation of the jail, the transport of prisoners, the service of process and such other duties being provided on the effective date of this Charter. The sheriff shall have such other or different powers and duties as provided by the constitution and laws of Georgia. 
Section 4-106. - Judge of the Probate Court.     The judge of the Probate Court of Clarke County in office on the effective date of this Charter shall be the judge of the Probate Court of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia. The judge of Probate Court of Athens-Clarke County shall serve for the same term as provided by law, and the compensation shall be fixed as provided by law. Subsequent elections for the judge of the Probate Court shall be on the same basis as provided by law for the election of probate judges generally. The judge of the Probate Court shall perform the same duties and exercise the same powers as conferred on probate judges generally by the constitution and laws of Georgia. 
Section 4-107. - Clerk of Superior Court.     The clerk of Superior Court of Clarke County in office on the effective date of this Charter shall be the clerk of Superior Court of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia. The clerk of Superior Court shall serve for the same term as provided by law, and the compensation shall be fixed as provided by law. Subsequent elections for the clerk of Superior Court shall be on the same basis as provided by law for the election of clerks of superior court[s] generally. The clerk of Superior Court shall perform the same duties and exercise the same powers as conferred on clerks of superior court[s] generally by the constitution and laws of Georgia. 
Section 4-108. - Tax commissioner.     The tax commissioner of Clarke County in office on the effective date of this Charter shall be the tax commissioner of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia. The tax commissioner shall serve for the same term as provided by law, and the compensation shall be fixed as provided by law. Subsequent elections for tax commissioner shall be on the same basis as provided by law for the election of tax commissioners generally. The tax commissioner shall perform the same duties and exercise the same powers as conferred on tax commissioners generally by the constitution and laws of Georgia. 
Section 4-109. - Coroner.     The coroner of Clarke County in office on the effective date of this Charter shall be the Coroner of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia. The coroner shall serve for the same term as provided by law, and compensation shall be fixed as provided by law. Subsequent elections for coroner shall be on the same basis as provided by law for the election of coroners generally. The coroner shall perform the same duties and exercise the same powers as conferred on coroners generally by the constitution and laws of Georgia. 
Section 4-110. - Clerk of commission; duties.     The clerk of commission shall be responsible for: (1)  Maintaining all required records of the operations and activities of Athens-Clarke County, including the minutes of all meetings of the Athens-Clarke County Commission; (2)  Certify[ing] ordinances upon adoption for presentation to the mayor for approval or veto and certify to the authenticity of ordinances which have become law; (3)  Attesting the mayor's signature on deeds, contracts, agreements and any other obligations on the part of government and the signature of any other officer pursuant to section 7-501 on any such document; (4)  Keep[ing] and affix[ing] the seal; (5)  Providing administrative support to the commission, the mayor and the manager of Athens-Clarke County and to carry out such other duties as may be directed by the commission. (Ord. of 12-5-91, § 8; Ord. of 7-2-96, § 1; Ord. of 7-6-99, § 1; Ord. of 7-5-2000, § 3; Ord. of 12-4-2001, § 5) 
CHAPTER 2. - ADMINISTRATIVE AND SERVICE DEPARTMENTS 
Section 4-201. - Creation and functions; generally.     Except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by law, the administrative and service departments of the unified government shall be created and established by ordinance and shall perform such functions, duties, services and responsibilities as enumerated therein and as prescribed by administrative regulations. 
Section 4-202. - Administrative reorganization.     The commission may, by ordinance, reorganize, combine, consolidate or discontinue any department or agency of the unified government subject to the jurisdiction of the commission and may, by ordinance, prescribe the functions and duties thereof and may establish, abolish or alter all nonelective offices and positions of employment as necessary for the proper administration of the unified government. 
Section 4-203. - Appointment of directors of departments.     All directors of departments under the supervision and direction of the manager shall be appointed by the manager. The directors of all such departments shall serve at the pleasure of the manager. 
Section 4-204. - Departments under state law.     All departments, which are created pursuant to state or federal law and which administer various state and federal programs and services, shall continue their operations without interruption resulting from the adoption of this Charter. 
CHAPTER 3. - MERIT SYSTEM OF PERSONNEL ADMINISTRATION 
Section 4-301. - Establishment of merit system. (a)  The commission shall establish, by ordinance, a merit system of personnel administration for Athens-Clarke County, Georgia. All positions in the service of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia, shall be in the classified (merit system) service except the following which are declared to be in the unclassified service: (1)  Officers elected by the people and persons appointed to fill vacancies in elective offices; (2)  Members of boards and commissions; (3)  Directors of departments; (4)  Persons temporarily employed in a professional or scientific capacity or to conduct a special inquiry, investigation, examination or installation; (5)  Temporary and part-time employees; and (6)  The clerk of commission and such other employees as may be excluded from coverage under the merit system as provided by ordinance or other applicable law. (b)  The merit system of personnel administration shall provide for classification of positions, the manner and method of publicizing vacancies, employing and appointing personnel, the qualifications of employees, employee performance evaluations, salaries, hours of employment, vacations, sick leave, special workers' compensation, job security, promotion, demotion, disciplinary procedures, transfer, layoff, removal, welfare of employees, retirement policy, payment of premiums of employee insurance benefits, grievance procedures, service awards, training leave and any other measures that promote the hiring and retaining of capable, diligent and honest career employees, all of which shall be in accordance with the concept of affirmative action as provided by federal law. (c)  For employees hired after July 1, 2002, whether to continue to offer a program of health care benefits, the nature and structure of such a program, the benefits provided in such a program, and the premiums to be paid by employees for their participation or the participation of their families or dependents, if offered, shall be subject to change from time to time in the sound discretion of the mayor and commission. (Ord. of 12-4-2001, § 6; Ord. of 6-4-2002, § 1) 
CHAPTER 4. - BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND AUTHORITIES 
Section 4-401. - Certain boards, commissions and authorities continued.     All existing boards, commissions and authorities are continued without interruption on the effective date of this Charter. As used in the acts and amendments creating the existing boards, commissions and authorities, the terms Athens City Council and Clarke County Board of Commissioners shall mean the commission of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia, and the terms mayor of the City of Athens and chairman of the Clarke County Board of Commissioners shall mean the mayor of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia. (Ord. of 7-2-96, § 1; Ord. of 7-6-99, § 1) 
ARTICLE V. - JUDICIARY Section 5-101. Superior Court and district attorney; unaffected by Charter; redesignation. Section 5-102. State Court and solicitor; unaffected by Charter; redesignation. Section 5-103. Juvenile Court; unaffected by Charter; redesignation. Section 5-104. Probate Court; unaffected by Charter; redesignation. Section 5-105. Magistrate Court; unaffected by Charter; redesignation. Section 5-106. Municipal Court of the City of Athens; continuation of operations in the court of the unified government. 
Section 5-101. - Superior Court and district attorney; unaffected by Charter; redesignation.     The Superior Court of Clarke County, including the office of the district attorney, shall continue its operations without interruption resulting from the adoption of this Charter, and nothing herein shall be construed as affecting the status of said court. The court shall be known as the Superior Court of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia. 
Section 5-102. - State Court and solicitor; unaffected by Charter; redesignation.     The State Court of Clarke County, including the office of the solicitor, shall continue its operations without interruption resulting from the adoption of this Charter, and nothing herein shall be construed as affecting the status of said court. The court shall be known as the State Court of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia. 
Section 5-103. - Juvenile Court; unaffected by Charter; redesignation.     The Juvenile Court of Clarke County shall continue its operations without interruption resulting from the adoption of this Charter, and nothing herein shall be construed as affecting the status of said court. The court shall be known as the Juvenile Court of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia. 
Section 5-104. - Probate Court; unaffected by Charter; redesignation.     The Probate Court of Clarke County shall continue its operations without interruption resulting from the adoption of this Charter, and nothing herein shall be construed as affecting the status of said court. The court shall be known as the Probate Court of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia. 
Section 5-105. - Magistrate Court; unaffected by Charter; redesignation.     The Magistrate Court of Clarke County shall continue its operations without interruption resulting from the adoption of this Charter, and nothing herein shall be construed as affecting the status of said court. The court shall be known as the Magistrate Court of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia. 
Section 5-106. - Municipal Court of the City of Athens; Continuation of Operations in the Court of the Unified Government.     On the effective date of this charter the operations and employees of the Municipal Court of the City of Athens shall continue as the operations and employees of a court of the Unified Government of Athens-Clarke County. The Judge of the Municipal Court of the City of Athens shall be authorized to serve as the Judge of said court. The Unified Government of Athens-Clarke County shall have the authority by ordinance to establish and define the method of selecting the Judge and other personnel necessary to operate the court, their terms of office and compensation, a schedule of fees to defray the cost of operation, and the jurisdiction and powers of said court insofar as permitted by general law and any other applicable law; provided, however, that no such fee so charged shall exceed $5.00 per case or matter before the court. (2009 Ga. Laws (Act No. 224), p. 3791, § 1) 
ARTICLE VI. - ELECTIONS Chapter 1. Conduct of Elections Section 6-101. Applicability of general laws. Section 6-102. Regular election, time for holding; voting. Section 6-103. Special elections. Section 6-104. Nonpartisan elections. Chapter 2. Election Districts; Reapportionment Section 6-201. Number of districts; boundaries. Section 6-202. Reapportionment of election districts. 
CHAPTER 1. - CONDUCT OF ELECTIONS 
Section 6-101. - Applicability of general laws.     Except as otherwise provided by this Charter, primaries and regular and special elections shall be conducted in accordance with provisions of chapter 2 of title 21, of the O.C.G.A. [§ 21-2-1 et seq.], the "Georgia Election Code." As used in said Code, the terms "election" or "general election" shall be construed to include the term "regular election" as provided in section 6-102 of this Charter; the term "governing authority" shall include the mayor and the commissioners of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia; the terms "municipal," "municipality" or "county" shall include Athens-Clarke County, Georgia; and the term "public office" shall include elective offices of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia. (Ord. of 7-2-96, § 1; Ord. of 7-6-99, § 1) 
Section 6-102. - Regular election, time for holding; voting. (a)  Except for the initial elections which may or may not be held on the date of regular state elections (see section 9-101 of this Charter), regular elections for the elective public officers of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia, shall be held every two (2) years on the same Tuesday in November when regular state elections are held. (b)  Only the electorate of each of the ten (10) election districts as defined in section 6-201 of this Charter shall be entitled to vote in the election for the commissioner to be elected from that district. 
Section 6-103. - Special elections.     All special elections shall be held and conducted in accordance with applicable provisions of chapter 2 of title 21 of the O.C.G.A. [§ 21-2-1 et seq.], the Georgia Election Code, that govern the conduct of county elections. 
Section 6-104. - Nonpartisan elections.     All regular elections for the elective public officers of the unified government of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia, and all special elections for such officers shall be nonpartisan elections without a prior nonpartisan primary, as provided in Code Section 21-2-139 of the O.C.G.A. (Ga. L. 2003, p. 3910) 
CHAPTER 2. - ELECTION DISTRICTS; REAPPORTIONMENT 
Section 6-201. - Number of districts; boundaries. (a)  For the purpose of electing members of the unified government of Athens-Clarke County, the territory of the unified government of Athens-Clarke County is divided into ten commissioner districts. The boundaries of such districts shall be and correspond to those ten numbered districts described in and attached to and made a part of this Act and further identified as 'Plan:clarkeccprop2r-2012 Plan Type: Local Administrator: s046 User: Gina'. (b)  (1)  For the purposes of such plan: (A)  The term 'VTD' shall mean and describe the same geographical boundaries as provided in the report of the Bureau of the Census for the United States decennial census of 2010 for the State of Georgia. The separate numeric designations in a district description which are underneath a VTD heading shall mean and describe individual Blocks within a VTD as provided in the report of the Bureau of the Census for the United States decennial census of 2010 for the State of Georgia; and (B)  Except as otherwise provided in the description of any district, whenever the description of any district refers to a named city, it shall mean the geographical boundaries of that city as shown on the census maps for the United States decennial census of 2010 for the State of Georgia. (2)  Any part of the territory of the unified government of Athens-Clarke County which is not included in any district described in subsection (a) of this section shall be included within that district contiguous to such part which contains the least population according to the United States decennial census of 2010 for the State of Georgia. (3)  Any part of the territory of the unified government of Athens-Clarke County which is described in subsection (a) of this section as being included in a particular district shall nevertheless not be included within such district if such part is not contiguous to such district. Such noncontiguous part shall instead be included within that district contiguous to such part which contains the least population according to the United States decennial census of 2010 for the State of Georgia. (2002 Ga. Laws, p. 4246, § 2; 2012 Ga. Laws (Act No. 409), § 2) Editor's note— The description of the districts as set forth in § 6-201 above may be found in appendix A to this Charter. 
Section 6-202. - Reapportionment of election districts. (a)  The election district boundaries of the unified government shall be reapportioned following the publication of each official federal decennial census of the population of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia. Such reapportionment shall be accomplished by the adoption of an amendment to this charter by the General Assembly of Georgia. (b)  The reapportionment of election districts shall comply with the following specifications: (1)  Each election district shall be formed of contiguous territory and its boundary lines shall be the center lines of streets or other well defined boundaries as utilized by the United States Bureau of the Census; and (2)  Such election districts shall be nearly equal in population as practicable, and they shall comply with the requirements of the federal Voting Rights Act of 1965, as amended. (2012 Ga. Laws (Act No. 409), § 3) Editor's note— Act No. 409, Section 4 states: "Those members of the unified government of Athens-Clarke County who are serving as such on the effective date of this Act and any person selected to fill a vacancy in any such office shall continue to serve as such members until the regular expiration of their respective terms of office and upon the election and qualification of their respective successors."   Additionally, Act No. 409, Section 5 states: "Election Districts 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, and 10, as they exist immediately prior to the effective date of this Act, shall continue to be designated as Election Districts 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, and 10, respectively, but as newly described under this Act, and on and after the effective date of this Act, such members of the board serving from those former election districts shall be deemed to be serving from and representing their respective districts as newly described under this Act." 
ARTICLE VII. - REVENUE AND FINANCE Chapter 1. Taxation and Other Revenues Section 7-101. Levy and collection of taxes, fees, charges and assessments; appropriations. Section 7-102. Collection of delinquent taxes and fees. Section 7-103. Homestead exemptions. Section 7-104. Tax and services districts; taxation therein. Chapter 2. Borrowing and Indebtedness Section 7-201. Issuance of general obligation bonds. Section 7-202. Debt limitation; general obligation bonds. Section 7-203. Revenue bonds. Section 7-204. Use of bond proceeds. Section 7-205. Allocation of indebtedness. Chapter 3. Financing of Services Section 7-301. General and urban services areas. Section 7-302. Creation of services areas by ordinance. Section 7-303. Requirements for defining boundaries. Section 7-304. Notice of hearing prior to adoption of ordinance. Chapter 4. Financial Administration Section 7-401. Fiscal year. Section 7-402. Preparation of budgets. Section 7-403. Scope of budgets. Section 7-404. Submission of budgets to the commission. Section 7-405. Adoption of budgets. Section 7-406. Property tax levies. Section 7-407. Limitation of funds. Section 7-408. Transfer of funds. Section 7-409. Lapse of appropriations. Section 7-410. Continuing audit. Section 7-411. Post-audit. Chapter 5. Procurement and Disposition of Property Section 7-501. Contracting procedures. Section 7-502. Sale and disposition of property. 
CHAPTER 1. - TAXATION AND OTHER REVENUES 
Section 7-101. - Levy and collection of taxes, fees, charges and assessments; appropriations. (a)  For the purpose of raising revenue for the support and maintenance of the government of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia, the commission shall have full power and authority to levy and collect taxes to the extent hereinafter provided and to appropriate funds and expend money: (1)  For the purposes authorized by this Charter; (2)  For the discharge of the powers, duties, obligations, liabilities and functions specified in this Charter; (3)  For any and all purposes and any and all subjects of taxation for which the City of Athens or Clarke County may have been authorized and in accordance with those authorizations to levy and collect taxes and to appropriate and expend funds under the Constitution or any general or special law of Georgia applicable to the City of Athens or Clarke County on the effective date of this Charter; and (4)  For any purpose authorized by the Constitution or any general or special law of Georgia applicable to municipal corporations and counties generally now of force or hereafter enacted. (b)  The commission shall have full power and authority to levy and collect the following taxes, charges and assessments: (1)  Ad valorem taxes on all real and personal property situated within Athens-Clarke County, Georgia, which is subject to taxation for state, county and municipal purposes, or for any other public purpose, to the full extent permitted by the Constitution and laws of Georgia, whether local (of the City of Athens or Clarke County) or general; (2)  Occupation and business license taxes that are not prohibited by the Constitution and general laws of Georgia. These taxes may be levied upon any person, firm, partnership, company or corporation which transacts business within Athens-Clarke County, Georgia, or which practices or offers to practice any trade, business, calling, avocation, or profession therein. The commission may classify businesses, occupations, professions or callings for the purpose of these taxes in any manner as is reasonable. The commission shall have authority to provide by ordinance for the return or registration for taxation of any trade, business, calling, avocation or profession subject to such taxes. In levying and collecting those taxes, the commission, by ordinance, may require any individual person, firm, partnership, company or corporation which transacts business within Athens-Clarke County, Georgia, or which practices or offers to practice any trade, business, calling, avocation or profession therein to obtain a license or permit for these activities from the unified government and to pay a reasonable fee for the license or permit for the regulation of any activities not prohibited by general law. The commission, by ordinance, may establish reasonable requirements for obtaining or keeping licenses as the public health, safety and welfare necessitates, including, but not limited to, denial or revocation for any violation of federal or state law or local ordinance; (3)  An excise tax on rooms, lodgings or accommodations as now or hereafter provided by law for counties and municipalities; (4)  License fees and taxes on insurance companies as authorized by O.C.G.A., §§ 33-8-8—33-8-8.6; (5)  A public utility franchise tax, fee or both on each electric light and power company, gas company, telephone and telegraph company, and other public utility making use of the roads, streets, alleys or other public ways of the unified government for the purpose of rendering services therein; (6)  Charge and collect franchise fees on cable television systems as now or hereafter provided by law for counties; (7)  Fees, assessments and charges for the cost of constructing, reconstructing, widening or improving any public way, street, sidewalk, curbing, gutters, storm sewers, drainage structures or other utility mains and appurtenances from the abutting property owners under any terms and conditions as provided by ordinance; (8)  Fees, assessments, charges and tolls for sanitary and health services or any other services rendered within and without the limits of the unified government under such terms and conditions as provided by ordinance; (9)  All other such taxes, charges or assessments as the City of Athens or Clarke County were authorized and empowered to make and collect upon the effective date of this Charter, which powers may be exercised throughout the area of the unified government, or appropriate portions thereof, including any tax now or hereafter authorized by state law and the specific mention of any right, power or authority in this Charter shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general powers of the commission to govern its local affairs. When authorized by this Charter or a statute or the Constitution of the State of Georgia, the commission shall have full power and authority to assess, levy, charge and collect taxes, rentals, interest, fees, penalties, fines and costs; to receive income on investments; to accept funds, services or property from other political subdivisions and public agencies, either local, state or national and from private persons, firms or corporations; and to contract with them for any public purpose; (10)  An excise tax upon the sale of distilled spirits or alcoholic beverages for beverage purposes by the drink as now or hereafter provided by law for counties and municipalities; (11)  An excise tax upon the sale, transfer or dispensing of malt beverages and alcoholic beverages within Athens-Clarke County, Georgia, by wholesale or retail dealers as now or hereafter provided by law for counties and municipalities. In addition, the commission shall have the authority to impose, assess, levy and collect an excise tax upon the sale, transfer or dispensing of wine by wholesale or retail dealers within Athens-Clarke County, Georgia, as now or hereafter provided by law for counties and municipalities; and (12)  Such other taxes and charges as provided by law. 
Section 7-102. - Collection of delinquent taxes and fees.     The collection of delinquent taxes and fees shall be as provided in state law for the collection of delinquent property taxes by counties. 
Section 7-103. - Homestead exemptions.     The homestead exemptions provided under the Constitution and laws of Georgia presently in force or as hereafter amended shall be applicable to all such property subject to ad valorem taxes within Athens-Clarke County, Georgia. 
Section 7-104. - Tax and services districts; taxation therein. (a)  The general services area, as defined and authorized in paragraph (1) of subsection (a) of section 7-301 of this Charter, shall constitute a general services tax district wherein the commission shall levy and collect taxes and shall appropriate money to perform and discharge those powers, functions and services provided therein by the unified government. (b)  The urban services area, as authorized in paragraph (2) of subsection (a) of section 7-301 of this Charter, together with any enlargement or modification thereof pursuant to the provisions of this Charter, shall constitute an urban tax district, as the case may be, wherein the commission may levy and collect additional taxes and may appropriate additional money therefrom to perform and discharge those additional powers, functions and additional services provided therein by the unified government. (c)  The assessment of real and personal property for ad valorem tax purposes shall be upon a uniform basis throughout the entire area of the unified government; provided, however, the rate and manner of additional taxation of services districts may vary in any services tax district from that in another or other services tax districts in such a way as to reflect reasonably the kind, character, type, degree and level of services afforded to such services tax district or districts. 
CHAPTER 2. - BORROWING AND INDEBTEDNESS 
Section 7-201. - Issuance of general obligation bonds. (a)  The commission shall be authorized to issue and sell general obligation bonds, after approval of the qualified voters, under the provisions of the Constitution and general laws of Georgia for any public purpose for the benefit of the unified government or any tax area or services district thereof; provided, however, that for the purpose of issuing and selling such general obligation bonds, the unified government shall be deemed a county and the provisions of the Constitution and laws of Georgia governing the limitations, terms and procedures for the issuance and sale of bonds by counties shall apply to the unified government unless otherwise provided by this Charter. (b)  All general obligation bonds shall be issued in the name of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia, and shall be an obligation thereof, and the full faith and credit of the unified government shall be pledged for all general obligation bonds issued thereunder which are payable from ad valorem taxes, and for such purpose, the commission shall have the authority to levy and collect ad valorem taxes without limit as to rate or amount on all taxable property within the territorial limits of the unified government. 
Section 7-202. - Debt limitation; general obligation bonds.     The total general obligation bond indebtedness of the unified government payable from ad valorem taxes (including all outstanding general obligation bonds of the former City of Athens and Clarke County on the effective date of this Charter) shall not exceed ten (10) percent of the assessed value of all taxable property within the territorial limits of the unified government. 
Section 7-203. - Revenue bonds.     The commission shall be empowered and authorized to issue revenue bonds for the purposes and in the manner as now or hereafter provided by article 3 of chapter 82 of title 36 of the O.C.G.A. [§ 36-82-60 et seq.], "The Revenue Bond Law." 
Section 7-204. - Use of bond proceeds.     All revenue derived by the unified government from the issuance and sale of bonds shall be used exclusively for the purposes for which such bonds were issued, and all ad valorem taxes collected for the purpose of servicing or retiring such bonds shall be used exclusively for the payment of principal and interest thereof. 
Section 7-205. - Allocation of indebtedness. (a)  All general indebtedness of Clarke County, whether represented by general obligation bonds or otherwise, which may be outstanding upon the effective date of this Charter shall be allocated to the general services area as defined in paragraph (1) of subsection (a) of section 7-301 of this Charter and is hereby recognized as the obligation of the general services area of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia. All general indebtedness of the City of Athens, whether represented by general obligation bonds or otherwise which may be outstanding upon the effective date of this Charter, shall be allocated to the urban services area as is defined in paragraph (2) of subsection (a) of section 7-301 of this Charter. The commission is hereby authorized to levy taxes and otherwise provide for the retirement thereof, subject to the terms of this Charter. Any funds in the control of the heretofore existent City of Athens and Clarke County, now consolidated into Athens-Clarke County, Georgia, by this Charter, which theretofore had been allocated to the retirement of any bonded indebtedness of said municipality and county shall be so applied by the commission. (b)  All general obligation bonds issued prior to the effective date of this Charter by Clarke County and all bonds authorized but unissued by Clarke County on the effective date of this Charter and thereafter issued by Athens-Clarke County, Georgia, shall be allocated to the general services area, and the principal of and interest on such bonds shall be paid from ad valorem taxes or other revenues collected in the general services area. All general obligation bonds issued prior to the effective date of this Charter by the City of Athens and all bonds authorized but unissued by the City of Athens on the effective date of this Charter and thereafter issued by Athens-Clarke County, Georgia, shall be allocated to the urban services area, and the principal and interest on such bonds shall be paid from ad valorem taxes or other revenues collected in the urban services area. (c)  Any revenue bonds issued prior to the effective date of this Charter by the City of Athens or Clarke County under article 3 of chapter 82 of title 36 of the O.C.G.A. [§ 36-82-60 et seq.], the "Revenue Bond Law," and any such revenue bonds authorized but unissued by the said city or county on the effective date of this Charter and thereafter issued by Athens-Clarke County, Georgia, shall be payable as to principal and interest from the revenues or sources and in the manner provided in the proceedings which authorized the issuance of such revenue bonds. (d)  Neither the allocation of bonds to the general services area nor any of the other provisions of this Charter shall impair or diminish any of the rights, revenues, or security and source for payment of any of such bonds or revenue bonds issued by the City of Athens or by Clarke County prior to the effective date of this Charter, or authorized but unissued by the City of Athens or by Clarke County on the effective date of this Charter and thereafter issued by Athens-Clarke County, Georgia, and such holders of such bonds or revenue bonds shall have and be entitled to enforce any and all rights, remedies, and security and sources for payment granted such holders by the proceedings which authorized the issuance of such bonds or revenue bonds as fully and to the same extent as if this Charter had not been adopted. 
CHAPTER 3. - FINANCING OF SERVICES 
Section 7-301. - General and urban services areas. (a)  In Athens-Clarke County, Georgia, there shall be: (1)  A general services area which shall consist of the total area of Clarke County as fixed and established upon the effective date of this Charter or as hereafter modified according to law; (2)  An urban services area which shall consist of the area embraced within the corporate limits of the City of Athens as the same exists upon the day immediately preceding the effective date of this Charter or as such area may be hereafter expanded as herein provided; and (3)  Such special services areas as the commission may thereafter establish. (b)  All other tax districts existing in the City of Athens or Clarke County immediately prior to the effective date of this Charter are continued in effect by this Charter. (c)  Such services areas shall be tax districts wherein taxes and other assessments shall be assessed, levied and collected by the unified government in accordance with the kind, character, type and degree of services actually provided therein and may vary in any one services area from that of another or other areas in accordance with the provisions of this Charter. The powers, authority, duties, liabilities, services and functions of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia, may vary in any services area from that in another or other services area. (d)  The unified government is hereby empowered to exercise and provide within the general services area and within any urban services area established by this Charter or by ordinance of the commission those powers, functions and services which have theretofore been exercised and provided by Clarke County or the City of Athens, or both; all powers, functions and services authorized by this Charter, and any amendments thereto; and all powers, functions and services which counties and municipal corporations, or both, are now or hereafter authorized to exercise under the Constitution and laws of Georgia. (e)  The unified government shall perform or procure the performance within the general services area of those governmental duties, functions and services which are generally available and accessible to all residents throughout the total territory of the unified government. As provided in subsection (a) of section 1-105 of this Charter, all services provided in the general services area shall be made available to the citizens of Winterville at the same rate provided all other citizens of the general services area pursuant to a contract executed between the governments of the City of Winterville and Athens-Clarke County for the amount of $1.00 for a period not to exceed fifty (50) years as is provided in article IX, section III, paragraph 1 of the Constitution of the State of Georgia. (f)  The unified government shall perform within its urban services areas those additional, more comprehensive and intensive, and higher levels of governmental duties, functions and services which benefit primarily the residents of such urban services areas. 
Section 7-302. - Creation of services areas by ordinance.     Except as otherwise provided by this Charter, services areas of the unified government shall be created, expanded, merged, unified or reduced only by ordinance duly adopted by the commission under such general rules, procedures, regulations, requirements and specifications as are established by the commission and this Charter. Such rules and regulations shall set forth the manner and method for the creation of new services areas and the expansion, unification, reduction or merger of existing services areas; set forth requirements for defining functions and policies for rendering services, for changing levels of services within existing services areas, and for transferring territory from one (1) services area to another; and set forth requirements for defining boundaries of services areas. 
Section 7-303. - Requirements for defining boundaries.     Whenever in this chapter it is required that the boundaries of a services area be set out, it shall suffice if the boundaries are described in such a way as to convey an intelligent understanding of the location of the land. In the discretion of the commission, the boundaries may be described: (1) by reference to a map; (2) by metes and bounds; (3) by general description referring to roads or natural boundaries or to the boundaries of particular tracts or parcels of land; or (4) by any combination of the above methods. 
Section 7-304. - Notice of hearing prior to adoption of ordinance.     Before it adopts any ordinance authorized or described in sections 7-301 through 7-303 of this Charter, the commission shall give notice of its intentions to consider the ordinance and shall provide an opportunity for interested persons to be heard as is provided for in section 1-105 of this Charter. 
CHAPTER 4. - FINANCIAL ADMINISTRATION 
Section 7-401. - Fiscal year.     The fiscal year of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia, shall begin on the first (1st) day of July of each year and shall end on the thirtieth (30th) day of June next following. The commission may adopt a different fiscal year by ordinance, which shall not be effective until at least six (6) months after the date of adoption thereof. The fiscal year shall constitute the budget year and the year for financial accounting and reporting of each and every office, department, institution, agency and activity of the unified government, unless otherwise provided by state or federal law. 
Section 7-402. - Preparation of budgets.     The preparation of an annual budget and a capital improvements budget shall be as prescribed by ordinance and provisions of this Charter. 
Section 7-403. - Scope of budgets. (a)  The annual budget should consist of two (2) parts: (1)  Part I of the annual budget shall apply only to the operating expenses of the unified government; and (2)  Part II of the annual budget shall apply only to capital improvement expenses of the unified government. (b)  Each section of the annual operating and capital budget shall contain with respect to each of the operating funds of the government of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia, to which they are applicable: (1)  A reasonable estimate of cash revenues to be received during the ensuing year, classified according to source; (2)  Proposed expenditures detailed by each department, board, commission, office, agency and activity in accordance with an established classification of accounts, including those capital outlays which are to be financed from the revenues of the ensuing year and including all debt service requirements in full for such fiscal year; and (3)  Such other information as may be considered necessary or desirable by the manager, the mayor, or the commission. (c)  In no event shall the total proposed expenditures from any fund exceed the total anticipated revenues plus the estimated unappropriated surplus or fund balance and applicable reserves less any estimated deficit at the end of the current fiscal year. (d)  The capital improvements budget shall describe capital projects anticipated, the proposed expenditures therefor and the revenues or other sources of funds anticipated to finance such capital projects. (Ord. of 7-2-96, § 1; Ord. of 7-6-99, § 1) 
Section 7-404. - Submission of budgets to the commission. (a)  In advance of initiating preparations of the annual budget, the mayor, with participation of the commission, shall develop a statement of the general fiscal policies of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia, the important features of the budgets, explanations of major changes recommended for the next fiscal year, a general summary of the budgets, and such other comments and information as may be deemed pertinent. (b)  On or before a date fixed by the commission but not later than sixty (60) days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the mayor of the unified government shall submit to the commission a proposed operating budget and a proposed capital improvements budget for the ensuing fiscal year. Such budgets shall be accompanied by a message from the mayor containing a statement of the general fiscal policies of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia, the important features of the budgets, explanations of major changes recommended for the next fiscal year, a general summary of the budgets and such other comments and information as may be deemed pertinent. A summary of the budgets and the mayor's message thereon shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation designated as the legal organ of the unified government. The operating budget and the capital improvements budget, the budget message and all supporting schedules shall be filed in the manager's office and shall be open to public inspection. (Ord. of 7-2-96, § 1; Ord. of 7-6-99, § 1) 
Section 7-405. - Adoption of budgets. (a)  The commission may approve, reject or modify the proposed budget. The budget as finally adopted must provide for all expenditures required by law or by other provisions of this Charter and for all debt service requirements for the ensuing fiscal year. The total appropriations from any fund shall not exceed the estimated fund balance, reserves and revenues constituting the resources available of such fund. (b)  The commission shall adopt the final annual operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than the thirtieth (30th) day of June of each year and such budget shall be effective for the fiscal year beginning on the first day of July. In the event the commission fails to adopt the budget by this date, the amounts appropriated for current operation for the current fiscal year shall be deemed adopted for the ensuing fiscal year, with appropriate items prorated accordingly until such time as the commission shall adopt a budget for the ensuing fiscal year. Adoption of the annual operating budget shall take the form of an appropriation ordinance setting out estimated revenues in detail by source and making appropriations accordingly to fund organizational units, purposes or activities as set forth in the budget document. (c)  The amount set out in the adopted operating budget for each organizational unit, purpose or activity shall constitute the annual appropriation for such item, and no expenditure shall be made or encumbrance created in excess of the otherwise unencumbered balance of the appropriation, or allotment thereof, to which it is chargeable. (d)  The commission shall adopt by ordinance the capital improvements program and capital budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than the thirtieth (30th) day of June of each year. The capital budget ordinance shall show in detail the capital expenditures intended to be made or incurred in the ensuing fiscal year that are to be financed from funds subject to control or appropriation by the commission and shall be in full conformity with that part of the capital program applicable to the year which it covers. Amounts specified as intended to be spent out of new appropriations shall, upon enactment of the capital budget ordinance, constitute appropriations of such amounts. 
Section 7-406. - Property tax levies.     Following the adoption of the operating and capital improvements budgets for each fiscal year: (a)  The commission shall levy by ordinance a general services area tax on all real and personal property within the general services tax district as provided by this Charter. The tax rate set by such ordinance shall be such that a reasonable estimate of cash revenues from such levy shall be at least sufficient, together with other anticipated revenues, fund balances and applicable reserves, to equal the total amount appropriated for each of the several funds set forth in the annual operating budget for defraying the expenses of the general services area for services to be rendered throughout the entire area of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia. Such services shall include those functions set forth in section 7-301(c) and (d) of this Charter, and such other purposes, functions and services as may be authorized by the laws of Georgia, by this Charter or by ordinance of the commission. (b)  The commission shall levy by ordinance an urban services area tax on all real and personal property within the urban services tax district as authorized by this Charter. The tax rates set by such ordinance for each district shall be such that a reasonable estimate of cash revenues from such levy shall be at least sufficient, together with other anticipated revenues, fund balances and applicable reserves, to equal the total amount appropriated for each of the several funds set forth in the annual operating budget for defraying the expenses of a higher level of services to be rendered in urban services areas. (c)  The commission shall levy by ordinance a special services area tax on all real and personal property within the special services tax district as authorized by this Charter. The tax rates set by such ordinance for each district shall be such that a reasonable estimate of cash revenues from such levy shall be at least sufficient, together with other anticipated revenues, fund balances and applicable reserves, to equal the total amount appropriated for each of the several funds set forth in the annual operating budget for defraying the expenses of a higher level of services to be rendered in a special services areas. 
Section 7-407. - Limitation of funds.     Upon certification by the manager that the revenues or other resources actually realized with respect to any fund will be less than was anticipated and will be insufficient to meet the amounts appropriated from such fund, it shall be the duty of the manager, upon the instruction of the mayor of the unified government, to limit such appropriations as may be necessary to prevent deficit operation. (Ord. of 7-2-96, § 1; Ord. of 7-6-99, § 1) 
Section 7-408. - Transfer of funds.     Upon recommendation of the manager and approval of the mayor, the commission may make interfund or interdepartmental transfers in the current operating budget or capital improvements budget at any regular or special meeting called for such purpose, provided funds are also available. (Ord. of 7-2-96, § 1; Ord. of 7-6-99, § 1) 
Section 7-409. - Lapse of appropriations.     All unencumbered balances of appropriations in the current operating budget at the end of the fiscal year shall lapse into the unappropriated surplus or reserves of the fund or funds from which such appropriations were made. 
Section 7-410. - Continuing audit.     The internal auditor shall conduct a continuing internal audit of the fiscal affairs and operations of every department, office and agency of the unified government. ( Ord. of 4-7-2015(1) , § 4) 
Section 7-411. - Post-audit. (a)  The commission shall provide annually for an independent audit of the accounts and other evidences of financial transactions of the government of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia, and of every office, department, board, commission, authority or other agency. The audit shall be made by a certified public accountant who shall have no personal interest, direct or indirect, in the fiscal affairs of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia, or of any of its departments, offices, boards, commissions, authorities or agencies. The commission shall by competitive bids, taking into consideration the lowest and/or best bid, designate such accountant or firm annually or for a period not exceeding three (3) years. (b)  The audit may be conducted on a quarterly or continuing basis and the final report of the annual audit shall be completed as soon as practicable after the close of the fiscal year, and in no event later than six (6) months after the close of the fiscal year. The audit report shall be filed with the manager and made available to the public. (c)  The commission may at any time order an examination or special audit of any office, department, board, commission or other agency of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia. 
CHAPTER 5. - PROCUREMENT AND DISPOSITION OF PROPERTY[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- Code reference— Purchasing, § 1-7-1 et seq. 
Section 7-501. - Contracting procedures.     The commission shall prescribe by ordinance rules and regulations which must be followed in the making of contracts in order to bind the government of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia. Except where otherwise provided by law or by ordinance, all contracts of the government of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia, shall be signed by the mayor and authenticated by the manager. (Ord. of 7-2-96, § 1; Ord. of 7-6-99, § 1) 
Section 7-502. - Sale and disposition of property. (a)  The commission is authorized to sell any real or personal property owned or held by Athens-Clarke County, Georgia, and not needed for governmental or other public purposes in such manner as is required in state law for counties as provided for in O.C.G.A. §§ 36-9-2 and 36-9-3. (b)  The commission is empowered to authorize the following transactions: (1)  A transfer of any real or personal property owned by Athens-Clarke County, Georgia, to another governmental entity upon finding that such transfer is in the public interest; (2)  A sale of any such property to another governmental entity; and (3)  An exchange of such property for property that is owned privately or by some other governmental entity. In each instance, whether the property is transferred, sold or exchanged, the requirements of a public sale shall not be required, but a statement thereof shall be published in the newspaper designated as the legal organ of the unified government once a week for the two (2) weeks preceding the day in which such transaction is to be concluded. Such statement shall contain a description of the property or properties involved and the prices and estimated values as to each item of property. (c)  Athens-Clarke County, Georgia, may quitclaim any rights it may have in property not needed for public purposes upon a report by the manager of the unified government and the adoption by the commission of a resolution, both finding that the property is not needed for public purposes and that the interest of the government of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia, therein has no readily ascertainable monetary value. (d)  Whenever in opening, extending or widening any street, avenue, alley or public place of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia, a small parcel or tract of land is cut off or separated by such work from a larger tract of land owned by Athens-Clarke County, Georgia, the commission may authorize the execution and deliverance in the name of the government of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia, of a deed conveying said cut-off or separated parcel or tract of land to an abutting or adjoining property owner or owners in exchange for rights- of-way in said street, avenue, alley or public place, or in settlement of any alleged damages sustained by said abutting or adjoining property owner. All deeds and conveyances so executed and delivered shall convey all title and interest the government of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia, has in such property. 
ARTICLE VIII. - GENERAL PROVISIONS Section 8-101. Application of laws; laws in force. Section 8-102. Limitation on claims and service. Section 8-103. Tort and nuisance liability. Section 8-104. Conflict of laws. Section 8-105. Competitive bidding. Section 8-106. Execution of assessments. Section 8-107. Authority to deal with federal and state agencies. Section 8-108. Federal and state aid. Section 8-109. Budgets of county officers and agencies. Section 8-110. Existing pension rights protected. Section 8-111. Establishment of new pension systems; merging of existing systems. Section 8-112. Amending Charter. Section 8-113. Fidelity bonds. Section 8-114. Examples of powers. Section 8-115. Provision of services. Section 8-116. The overview commission. Section 8-117. Historic items. Section 8-118. Section captions. Section 8-119. Effect of repeals. Section 8-120. Severability clause. Section 8-121. Repeal of conflicting laws. 
Section 8-101. - Application of laws; laws in force. (a)  The general laws of the State of Georgia of a criminal nature shall be applicable to and within the limits of the unified government. General laws of local application through classification by population, not in conflict with this Charter: (1)  Which on the effective date of this Charter apply to the City of Athens or Clarke County, Georgia, shall be applicable to the unified government; and (2)  Which apply to the unified government as either a city or a county at the time of their enactment or thereafter shall be effective; but those which did not apply to the City of Athens or Clarke County or the unified government at the time of their enactment shall not become applicable to the unified government except through the adoption of a resolution to that effect by the commission. (b)  Local acts of the State of Georgia which apply specifically to either Clarke County, the City of Athens, or both shall be applicable to the unified government. (c)  In construing the applicability of provisions of the Constitution and the general laws of Georgia which apply in general terms to either counties, municipalities or both, and local acts of the General Assembly that apply specifically to Clarke County, the City of Athens, or both, the following terms as used in such laws shall be construed to include the unified government as follows: (1)  "County" shall be construed to include Athens-Clarke County, Georgia; (2)  "City," "town," "municipal corporation" or "municipality" shall be construed to include Athens-Clarke County, Georgia; (3)  "Commissioners of roads and revenues" and "board of county commissioners" shall be construed to include the Commission of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia; (4)  "Council," "mayor and council," "aldermen" and "board of aldermen" shall be construed to include the Commission of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia; (5)  "Chairman of the commissioners of roads and revenues" and "chairman of the board of county commissioners" shall be construed to include the mayor of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia; (6)  "Mayor" shall be construed to include the chief elected officer of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia; and (7)  Any other terms and provisions as used in such acts to refer specifically to Clarke County or the City of Athens, or both, and the officers, employees, departments and agencies thereof shall be construed to mean Athens-Clarke County, Georgia, and its officers, employees, departments and agencies. (d)  In construing the applicability of laws in force to the unified government, the following order shall prevail: (1)  The Constitution of the State of Georgia; (2)  The general laws of uniform application now in force or hereafter enacted by the General Assembly (as distinguished from general laws of local application through classification by population) applicable to municipal corporations, or counties, or both; (3)  The general laws of local application through classification by population as and to the extent provided in subsection (a) of this section; (4)  Special laws applicable to Clarke County not in conflict with this Charter; (5)  Special laws applicable to the City of Athens not in conflict with this Charter; (6)  This Charter and all ordinances and resolutions passed pursuant thereto; and (7)  Existing ordinances and resolutions of the former City of Athens and existing ordinances and resolutions of the former County of Clarke not in conflict with this Charter. (e)  The Athens-Clarke County Industrial Development Authority, created by a local amendment to the Constitution (Ga. L. 1960, p. 1379) and continued in force and effect by an Act approved March 27, 1985 (Ga. L. 1985, p. 4134), provides that the membership of that Authority is composed of or appointed by governmental authorities which no longer exist because of the unification of those authorities as the Unified Government of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia, effected by this Act. Article XI, Section I, Paragraph IV and Article X, Section I, Paragraph I of the Constitution prohibit the amendment of such local constitutional amendments. Article IX, Section III, Paragraph II(a) of the Constitution, however, grants the General Assembly the power in providing for local government consolidation to 'provide by law for any matters necessary or convenient to authorize the consolidation....' It is thus found by the General Assembly that the consolidation which resulted in the Unified Government necessitates, and therefore constitutionally authorizes, that the membership positions on the Athens-Clarke County Industrial Development Authority be construed to mean the following: (1)  The membership position on the Authority specified to be held by the Mayor of the City of Athens shall be construed to refer to the Mayor of the Unified Government; (2)  The membership position on the Authority specified to be held by the Chairman of the Board of Commissioners of Roads and Revenue of Clarke County shall be construed to refer to a member of the Commission of the Unified Government who has been appointed to the Authority by such Commission; (3)  The membership position on the Authority specified to be held by a person appointed by the Commissioners of Roads and Revenues of Clarke County shall be construed to refer to a person recommended by the Mayor of the Unified Government and appointed by the Commission of that government; (4)  The membership position on the Authority specified to be held by a person appointed by the Mayor and Council of the City of Athens shall be construed to refer to a person appointed by the Commission of the Unified Government; and (5)  The membership position on the Authority specified to be held by the President of the Athens Chamber of Commerce, Inc., shall be construed to refer to the Chairperson of the Board of the Athens Area Chamber of Commerce, Inc. (Ga. Laws 1992, p. 6556, § 1; Ord. of 7-2-96, § 1; Ord. of 7-6-99, § 1; Ga. Laws 2003, p. 4250, § 1; 2009 Ga. Laws (Act No. 223), p. 3788, § 1) 
Section 8-102. - Limitation on claims and service. (a)  All claims against the unified government must be presented within twelve (12) months after they accrue or become payable or the same are barred, provided that minors or other persons laboring under disabilities shall be allowed twelve (12) months after the removal of the disability to present their claims. This provision is intended to afford the unified government the same ante litem notice requirements afforded to counties under Code Section 36-11-1 of the O.C.G.A. (b)  Service on the unified government of any suit, process or order of court shall be served upon the mayor. (Ord. of 7-2-96, § 1; Ord. of 7-6-99, § 1; 2002 Ga. Laws, p. 4737, § 2) 
Section 8-103. - Tort and nuisance liability.     The tort and nuisance liability of the unified government shall follow the law and rules of tort liability applicable to counties in Georgia. 
Section 8-104. - Conflict of laws.     For purposes of all applicable laws, the unified government shall constitute a municipality and a county or both. Except as otherwise provided by this Charter, if a law applicable to municipalities and the same or another law applicable to counties are in conflict, the law applicable to municipalities shall prevail. 
Section 8-105. - Competitive bidding.     All departments and agencies of the unified government must utilize competitive bidding procedures, as specified in an ordinance of the commission, for all purchases in excess of an amount provided for in an ordinance of the commission, unless such purchase shall be otherwise approved by seven (7) of the ten (10) commissioners. 
Section 8-106. - Execution of assessments.     Whenever any tax or special assessment is authorized or empowered to be levied or imposed by this Charter which is required to be collected by the unified government and such is not paid within the time period specified by the commission and no specific provision is elsewhere provided in this Charter for its collection, then the manager shall issue execution in the name of the unified government against such person, firm or entity liable therefor or property subject thereto for such sums as may be due with interest at the legal rate from due date, and penalties and costs. The unified government shall have the right to enforce payment of such execution by levy and sale as in the case of county taxes, and the purchaser at such sale shall acquire the same title and rights as a purchaser at a sale for county taxes. Executions issued by the manager of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia, and the levy and sale thereunder shall be governed by general law. 
Section 8-107. - Authority to deal with federal and state agencies.     The unified government shall have the power and authority to participate in, cooperate in and take all necessary action with respect to any and all projects, programs and undertakings of any nature authorized by any statute, rule or regulation of the United States, the State of Georgia, or any federal or state agency or instrumentality, including, but not limited to, community development, highways, aviation, aviation terminals, airports, airport facilities, municipal area or regional development, sewer and sewage disposal, public housing, housing for the aged, and transportation or mass transit or any phase thereof; to borrow money and issue promissory notes, general obligation bonds or revenue bonds or a combination thereof for any such purposes in accordance with provisions of this Charter; and to execute mortgages or deeds of trust in favor of any federal agency, secured by property of which the unified government is the legal or beneficial or equitable owner, or in favor of any private agency where the loan is guaranteed by a federal agency. 
Section 8-108. - Federal and state aid.     The unified government shall be deemed a county but shall also be deemed an incorporated city or municipality for the purpose of determining its right to receive, and for the purpose of receiving state aid or grant-in-aid from the State of Georgia or from the United States or from any agency or instrumentality thereof or from any other source, public or private. The unified government shall be entitled to receive as state aid or as grant-in-aid from the State of Georgia or from the United States or from any agency or instrumentality thereof or from any other source, public or private, all funds to which a county is, or may hereafter be, entitled and also all funds to which an incorporated city or municipality is or may be hereafter entitled, and to receive the same without diminution or loss by reason of unification. When state aid or other grant-in-aid is distributed to any county on the basis of population or area, or both, then the entire population and the total area of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia, shall be considered in calculating and determining the basis for such distribution. When state aid or other grant-in-aid is distributed to any county on the basis of rural area, rural road mileage or rural population, or any combination thereof, then that area of the general services area outside of the urban services area or areas shall be deemed to constitute rural area, its road mileage to constitute rural road mileage, and its population to constitute rural population. When state aid or other grant-in-aid is distributed to any incorporated city or municipality on the basis of population or area, or both, then the population or the area of the urban services area or areas of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia, shall be deemed the population and the area used in calculating and determining the basis of such distribution. 
Section 8-109. - Budgets of county officers and agencies.     All elective officers and all agencies not under the direct control and jurisdiction of the manager, such as the board of health and the board of family and children services, which receive appropriations from the commission shall, on the same date as is applicable to budgets submitted by department heads, submit to the manager annual operating and capital budget requests for the ensuing fiscal year. Such budget requests, after any revisions therein by the manager and the mayor, shall be incorporated into the overall unified government budget for submission by the mayor to the commission, which shall grant a hearing to any such officer or agency on such proposed budgets. (Ord. of 7-2-96, § 1; Ord. of 7-6-99, § 1) 
Section 8-110. - Existing pension rights protected. (a)  Persons who, at the time this Charter takes effect, are employed by any office, department, board, commission or agency of the former City of Athens shall retain all pension rights which have accrued to them under any existing pension system. The unified government shall continue in force and effect any existing pension system for city employees covered thereby who are employed by the unified government, and the services of such employees shall not be deemed to have been interrupted by the adoption of this Charter. (b)  Persons who, at the time this Charter takes effect, are employed by any office, department, board, commission or agency of the former County of Clarke shall retain all rights which have accrued to them under any existing pension system. The unified government shall continue in force and effect any existing pension system for county employees covered thereby who are employed by the unified government, and the services of such employees shall not be deemed to have been interrupted by the adoption of this Charter. 
Section 8-111. - Establishment of new pension systems; merging of existing systems.     The commission is hereby authorized and empowered to establish and maintain a new pension system or pension systems affecting new employees and such other employees as desire to be covered thereby and to revise, combine and consolidate any pension system in effect on the effective date of this Charter; provided, however, that in no event shall any revision, combination or unification of any existing pension system in effect when this Charter is adopted result in the curtailment or diminishment of any right accrued under any existing pension system to any person heretofore employed by the City of Athens, Clarke County or of any agency of such former governments. 
Section 8-112. - Amending Charter.     This Charter may be modified, rescinded, changed or amended by only the following methods: (1)  An Act of the General Assembly of Georgia; or (2)  An ordinance adopted by the Commission of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia, as provided for in article IX, section II, paragraph 1 of the Constitution of the State of Georgia. 
Section 8-113. - Fidelity bonds.     All officers of the unified government, both elective and appointive, shall execute such official bonds in such amounts and upon such terms and conditions as the law or the commission may require. 
Section 8-114. - Examples of powers.     The powers of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia, shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following powers: (1)  Ad valorem taxation: To levy, assess and collect ad valorem taxes on all taxable property; (2)  Other taxes: To levy, assess and collect other taxes allowed by general law and in accordance therewith; (3)  Business regulation and taxation: To levy, assess and collect occupational and business taxes and to license and regulate occupations and businesses. Such taxes may be based on any one or combination of the following criteria: A.  Gross receipts, notwithstanding the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 48-8-6; B.  Square footage; C.  Number of employees; D.  Fixed fee; or E.  Any other criterion reasonably related to the purposes of this power. (4)  Appropriations: To make appropriations and expend funds for support of the unified government and any other lawful purpose; (5)  Debts: To borrow money and issue bonds as authorized by general law; (6)  Property: To own property and interests in property; (7)  Gifts: To accept gifts and grants for any purpose related to the powers and duties of the unified government on such terms as the donor may impose; (8)  Condemnation: To condemn property inside the unified government for present or future use; (9)  Public utilities: To acquire, lease, operate and dispose of public utilities; (10)  Franchises: To grant franchises or make contracts for public utilities and to prescribe the conditions of such franchises and contracts; (11)  Roadways: To open, maintain, improve, and close streets and roads and to grant franchises and rights-of-way thereon; (12)  Public facilities: To acquire, operate and dispose of public buildings, public projects, parks, cemeteries, recreational facilities and other public improvements inside the unified government; (13)  Building regulation: To regulate the building trades and the construction of buildings and to adopt and enforce building, housing, plumbing, electrical, gas, heating and air-conditioning codes; (14)  Planning and zoning: To adopt land use plans and exercise the power of zoning, subdivision regulation and the like; (15)  Police power: To exercise the police power for the public safety and well-being of the citizens of the unified government; (16)  Roadside regulation: To prohibit or regulate signs, bill-boards and other items upon or adjacent to streets and roads; (17)  Health: To prescribe and enforce health and sanitation standards; (18)  Pollution: To regulate emissions which pollute the air and water; (19)  Fire safety: To fix fire limits and to prescribe and enforce fire-safety regulations; (20)  Public hazards: To provide for the destruction or removal of public hazards; (21)  Waste disposal: To provide for and regulate the collection, disposal, and recycling of garbage and wastes; (22)  Water and sewer fees: To fix and collect water and sewer fees; (23)  Garbage fees: To fix and collect garbage fees; (24)  Nuisances: To define and provide for the abatement of nuisances; (25)  Property protection: To preserve and protect the property of the unified government; (26)  Prisoners: To provide for public work by prisoners and for their confinement; (27)  Animal control: To regulate or prohibit the keeping of animals; (28)  Motor vehicles: To regulate the operation and parking of motor vehicles; (29)  Taxicabs: To regulate vehicles operated for hire in the unified government; (30)  Pensions: To provide and maintain a system of pensions and retirement for employees and officers of the unified government; (31)  Special assessments: To levy, assess and collect special assessments to cover the cost of public improvements; (32)  Contracts: To enter into lawful contracts and agreements; (33)  Agencies: To create, alter or abolish departments, boards, offices, commissions, authorities and agencies of the unified government and to confer appropriate authority upon them; (34)  Penalties: To provide penalties for violations of ordinances of the unified government; (35)  Police and fire protection: To exercise the power of arrest through appointed policemen and to operate a fire department; (36)  Emergencies: To provide for the determination, proclamation and combatting of emergencies; (37)  Urban redevelopment: To organize and operate an urban redevelopment program; (38)  Public transportation: To organize and operate public transportation systems; and (39)  General health, safety and welfare: To define, regulate and prohibit any act, practice, conduct or use of property which is detrimental to the health, sanitation, cleanliness, welfare and safety of the inhabitants of the unified government. 
Section 8-115. - Provision of services.     When determining services to be provided, the unified government shall always attempt: (1)  To efficiently allocate resources to increase the quality of life for all citizens of Athens-Clarke County; (2)  To provide the highest quality services to all citizens of Athens-Clarke County; (3)  To ensure efficient utilization of community resources; (4)  To promote equity for all citizens in the delivery of governmental services throughout Athens-Clarke County; and (5)  To recognize and consider the advantages of the provision of services through contractual arrangements with other governments and private enterprises. 
Section 8-116. - The overview commission. (a)  In order to provide a more efficient and responsive government for the citizens of Athens-Clarke County, an overview commission shall be established to review the operation of the unified government. Such evaluation shall be completed every ten (10) years, or sooner if determined to be necessary by a majority vote of the commission. (b)  The overview commission shall be composed of a minimum of twenty-one (21) individuals to be appointed by the grand jury sitting immediately prior to January 1st of the year of convocation of the overview commission. Members of the overview commission shall be registered voters in Athens-Clarke County and not members of the appointing grand jury. Two (2) members shall be selected from each commission district and one (1) member, who shall serve as chair, from the county at-large. In making appointments to the overview commission, the grand jury shall solicit and consider applications from the citizens of Athens-Clarke County. (c)  The overview commission shall be convened on the first Tuesday after January 1st beginning in the year 2010, unless sooner convened as determined by a majority vote of the commission of Athens-Clarke County, and every tenth year from the date of convocation thereafter. The overview commission shall complete its review within twelve (12) months of the first meeting date. In reviewing the unified government, the following factors shall be considered: (1)  The goals and objectives of the unified government; (2)  The extent to which the unified government has achieved its original objectives in an effective and responsible manner; (3)  The performance and accomplishments of the agencies of the unified government in the preceding fiscal year, budgetary costs incurred, projected activities and budgets; and (4)  The extent to which additional programs are needed. (d)  Upon completion of its review, the overview commission shall make written recommendations published to the mayor and commission and made available to the public. (Ord. of 12-4-2001, § 7) 
Section 8-117. - Historic items.     It shall be the responsibility of the unified government to collect, preserve, and display documents and other items of historical significance to the City of Athens, the City of Winterville and Clarke County. 
Section 8-118. - Section captions.     The captions to the several sections of this Charter are informative only and are not be construed as a part thereof. 
Section 8-119. - Effect of repeals.     No law heretofore repealed, expressly or by implication, shall be revived by the repeal herein of the repealing act, or by any provision of this Charter that disclaims an intention to repeal or affect enumerated laws. 
Section 8-120. - Severability clause.     If any provision of this Charter or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of this Charter which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this Charter are declared to be severable. 
Section 8-121. - Repeal of conflicting laws.     All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Charter are hereby repealed. 
ARTICLE IX. - TRANSITION PROVISIONS Section 9-101. Special election of first officials. Section 9-102. Initial terms of office. Section 9-103. Provision of services during transition. Section 9-104. Protection and compensation of existing employees. Section 9-105. Effective date of Charter. Section 9-106. Initial budget. Section 9-107. Number of employees. Section 9-108. Cooperation of former governments. Section 9-109. Existing ordinances and resolutions continued in effect. Section 9-110. Contracts and obligations. Section 9-111. Dissolution of existing governments. Section 9-112. Transfer of records and equipment. Section 9-113. Officers serve until successors qualify. Section 9-114. Changes required by the U.S. Department of Justice after adjournment of the 1990 Session of the General Assembly. Section 9-115. Referendum on the Charter. 
Section 9-101. - Special election of first officials. (a)  A special election shall be held on a date fixed by the board of elections, as provided in section 9-115 of this Charter, for the purpose of electing the first mayor and members of the commission of the unified government. The board of elections shall publish notice of the call for such election in a newspaper of appropriate circulation at least thirty (30) days prior to the date of such election. Candidates may qualify no later than twenty-five (25) days prior to the election. (b)  In all other respects, the election shall be held in accordance with the provisions of chapter 2 of title 21 of the O.C.G.A. [§ 21-2-1 et seq.], the "Georgia Election Code," applicable to county elections. The officials elected at such election shall commence the term of their office on the effective date of this Charter. (c)  The qualifications for office for such initial election shall be as prescribed by applicable provisions of this Charter. (d)  Any elected official of Clarke County or of any municipality lying wholly or partially therein and who is otherwise qualified under this Charter shall be entitled to qualify and run for an office of the unified government. (Ord. of 7-2-96, § 1; Ord. of 7-6-99, § 1) 
Section 9-102. - Initial terms of office.     The initial terms of the first commissioners of the unified government elected from the odd-numbered districts shall be for four (4) years. The initial terms of the first commissioners of the unified government elected from even-numbered districts shall be for two (2) years. After the initial elections, all commissioners shall be elected for four-year terms. 
Section 9-103. - Provision of services during transition.     In order to unify the two (2) governments and to assure the common and continued administration of services currently provided by both the City of Athens and Clarke County, the following procedures shall apply: (1)  On the effective date of the new unified government, all services currently provided by the county shall be provided through the general services area to all residents of the county and all services provided by the city shall be provided through the urban services area to the current residents of the City of Athens. Assuming the continued availability of state and federal funds, these service arrangements shall apply until modified as provided under the provisions cited below; (2)  Within one (1) year of the completion of the rate study provided for in this paragraph, the unified government shall adopt a uniform residential rate for water and sewer services throughout Athens-Clarke County. During the first six (6) months after the effective date of this Charter a rate study shall be made, and the equalization of water and sewer rates shall be completed within one (1) year of the completion of the rate study; (3)  Within four (4) years of the effective date of this Charter the unified government shall adopt a service delivery plan that includes, but is not limited to, the following: (A)  A capital improvements plan to provide water and sewer services to all residents of the county; (B)  An administrative mechanism with appropriate status and adequate budget to develop and implement a comprehensive program of human and economic development. The program shall be responsible for identifying problems and needs that exist in the community and for identifying and securing resources needed to effectively address these problems and needs. The program shall encourage efforts to enable, empower and involve the disadvantaged; address the causes of crime; work to enhance the quality of life of all citizens; and to help ensure that the unified government will be responsive to the needs of all citizens; (C)  An administrative mechanism with appropriate status and adequate budget to develop and implement adequate parks and recreation programs that will be available to all citizens of Athens-Clarke County; (4)  The unified government shall work with due speed to equalize the charges for all services throughout the county. 
Section 9-104. - Protection and compensation of existing employees. (a)  All full-time employees of the City of Athens and Clarke County and all full-time employees of any department, office or agency thereof shall, upon the termination of said city and county governments and the inception of the unified government, become employees of the unified government or of a department, office, or agency thereof and shall be assigned to duties as similar in nature as may be practicable within said government. (b)  No permanent full-time employee of the City of Athens or Clarke County shall suffer any diminution of compensation resulting from the adoption of this Charter. The definition of compensation includes, but is not limited to, salary, insurance and retirement benefits, annual and sick leave, and rights provided by a merit system. (c)  Within twelve (12) months of the effective date of this Charter, the unified government shall have begun implementation of a plan that ensures that all employees performing the same functions and having the same responsibilities receive uniform compensation by the end of the fourth (4th) year of operation of the unified government. This requirement that there be a uniform level of compensation throughout Athens-Clarke County by the end of the fourth (4th) year does not require that there be any freeze on employee compensation. (d)  Elimination of the duplication of functions shall be addressed through attrition and reassignment; therefore, no permanent full-time employee of the City of Athens or Clarke County at the time of unification shall suffer any reduction of compensation resulting from the adoption of this Charter. (e)  No person shall be appointed to, removed from or in any way favored or discriminated against with respect to any position in the unified government because of race, gender, religion, age, handicap or national origin. 
Section 9-105. - Effective date of Charter.     This Charter shall become effective on January 1, 1991, or upon the election of a mayor and commission for Athens-Clarke County and their taking office as the governing authority of the unified government, whichever occurs last. (Ord. of 7-2-96, § 1; Ord. of 7-6-99, § 1) 
Section 9-106. - Initial budget. (a)  Until July 1, 1991, the unified government shall operate under the funds remaining from the fiscal year 1990—1991 of the combined budgets of the City of Athens and Clarke County. (b)  The first full twelve-month budget of the unified government (July 1, 1991 to June 30, 1992) shall not exceed an amount equal to the combined 1990—1991 fiscal year budgets of the City of Athens and Clarke County, plus increases due to inflation as specified in figures from the United States Government. 
Section 9-107. - Number of employees.     From the effective date of this Charter until June 30, 1992, the total number of employees of the unified government shall not exceed the combined number of employees authorized for the governments of the City of Athens and Clarke County on the effective date of this charter except as otherwise mandated by law. 
Section 9-108. - Cooperation of former governments. (a)  All officers, officials and employees of the former City of Athens and Clarke County shall cooperate with and assist the mayor, the commission, the manager, and other officers of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia: (1)  In planning the unification of departments, boards, commissions and agencies of said former governments and in transferring the functions, duties and responsibilities of such departments, boards, commissions, authorities and agencies to the appropriate agencies of the Unified Government of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia; and (2)  In all other respects in order that the transfer of the governments be accomplished in the most orderly manner possible. The officers of the unified government shall be entitled to examine all records, files and other data in the possession of the former governments and of all officers, officials, employees and departments thereof. The former governments shall, to the extent possible, provide working areas and facilities for the officers of the unified government. (b)  A schedule for activity during the transition period is contained in appendix B, attached to and made a part of this Charter. (Ord. of 7-2-96, § 1; Ord. of 7-6-99, § 1) 
Section 9-109. - Existing ordinances and resolutions continued in effect. (a)  Subject to subsection (d) of this section, existing ordinances and resolutions of the commission of Clarke County and existing rules and regulations of county departments or agencies, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Charter, shall continue in effect as ordinances, resolutions, rules or regulations of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia, or the appropriate department or agency thereof until they have been repealed, modified or amended. (b)  Subject to subsection (d) of this section, existing ordinances and resolutions of the City of Athens, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Charter, shall continue in effect as ordinances and resolutions of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia, and shall apply only to the area included within the urban services area until they have been repealed, modified or amended. (c)  Subject to subsection (d) of this section, in the event of a conflict between any of the ordinances or resolutions continued by this section, the provisions thereof shall apply only to the territory of the unified government that such ordinance or resolution applied prior to the effective date of this Charter and until such ordinance or resolution is repealed, changed or amended to eliminate the conflict. (d)  Twenty-four (24) months after the effective date of this Charter, all ordinances and resolutions shall apply uniformly throughout the area of the unified government. Prior to this date, the commission shall review all ordinances and resolutions and take whatever action is needed to remove any conflicts between ordinances and resolutions continued by this section in order to produce a uniform body of ordinances and resolutions, free of any conflicts or contradictions between such provisions. (Ord. No. 91-10-100, § 9, 12-5-91) 
Section 9-110. - Contracts and obligations. (a)  Except as otherwise provided by this Charter, all contracts, orders, leases, bonds and other obligations or instruments entered into by Clarke County or for its benefit prior to the effective date of this Charter shall continue in effect according to the terms thereof as obligations and rights of the unified government; provided, however, any obligation created by Clarke County to become effective after the date of approval of this Charter and prior to the effective date of this Charter shall be subject to ratification and approval by the commission of the unified government within six (6) months following the effective date of this Charter. (b)  Except as otherwise provided by this Charter, contracts, orders, leases, bonds and other obligations or instruments entered into by the City of Athens or for its benefit prior to the effective date of this Charter shall continue in effect according to the terms thereof as obligations and rights of the unified government; provided, however, any obligation created by the City of Athens to become effective after the date of approval of this Charter and prior to the effective date of this Charter shall be subject to ratification and approval by the commission of the unified government within six (6) months following the effective date of this Charter. (c)  No pending action or proceeding of any nature (whether civil, criminal, judicial, administrative or other) by or against the City of Athens or Clarke County or an agency or department thereof shall be abated or otherwise affected by the adoption of this Charter, and the unified government shall stand substituted as a party in lieu thereof. 
Section 9-111. - Dissolution of existing governments.     On the effective date of this Charter, the commission of Clarke County and the mayor and council of the City of Athens and all the officers thereof, and the offices thereof not continued under this Charter, are abolished and all emoluments appertaining thereto shall cease. Thereupon, the governments of Clarke County and the City of Athens shall terminate as separate political entities and all powers, functions, duties and obligations thereof shall be transferred to and vested in the unified government created by this Charter. 
Section 9-112. - Transfer of records and equipment.     When an agency of the City of Athens or of Clarke County is abolished or unified by this Charter, all books, papers, maps, charts, plans, records, other equipment and personal property in possession of the same shall be delivered to the agency to which its rights, powers, duties and obligations are transferred. 
Section 9-113. - Officers serve until successors qualify.     Notwithstanding any other provision of this Charter, any officer performing duties under the government of the City of Athens or Clarke County may continue to perform the duties thereof until a successor, whether under the same title or office of another, shall be elected or appointed and qualified to perform the duties, it being the intention hereof that no duty or service shall lapse or be abandoned because of lack of an officer to perform same. 
Section 9-114. - Changes required by the U.S. Department of Justice after adjournment of the 1990 Session of the General Assembly. (a)  In order to insure that a referendum on the question of the creation of a Unified Government of Athens-Clarke County will be held on the earliest possible date, the General Assembly, as provided in article IX, section III, paragraph II(a) of the Constitution of the State of Georgia, hereby constitutes the members of the Clarke County legislative delegation as a legislatively created Charter commission and authorizes the Clarke County legislative delegation acting as a legislatively created Charter commission, in consultation with the original informally created fifteen-member Athens-Clarke Unification Commission, to amend the Charter to satisfy any required changes raised by the United States Department of Justice after the adjournment of the 1990 Session of the General Assembly. (b)  If any member of the Athens-Clarke Unification Commission is unable to participate in such an effort for any reason, including, but not limited to death, illness, unwillingness or nonresidency in Clarke County, the remaining members shall select a citizen of Clarke County to assume the vacant position. 
Section 9-115. - Referendum on the Charter. (a)  After receipt of the certified copy of the proposed Charter and after receipt of approval by the Department of Justice of such proposed Charter, it shall be the duty of the Clarke County Board of Elections to call a special election for approval or rejection of the proposed Charter. The board shall cause the date and purpose of the election to be published once a week for two (2) calendar weeks immediately preceding the date thereof in the official legal organ of Clarke County. The ballot shall have written or printed thereon the following: "( )  ( ) YES NO Shall the Charter unifying the governments of the City of Athens and Clarke County and creating a single county-wide government to supersede and replace those governments be approved?"  (b)  All persons desiring to vote for approval of the Charter shall vote "YES," and those persons desiring to vote for rejection of the Charter shall vote "NO." If more than one-half of the votes cast by the qualified voters of Clarke County residing within the corporate limits of the City of Athens are for approval of the Charter and if more than one-half of the total votes cast by all the qualified voters of Clarke County are for approval of the Charter, then the Charter shall become effective. Otherwise, it shall be void and of no force and effect. The expense of such election shall be borne equally by the City of Athens and Clarke County. (c)  The special election shall be conducted pursuant to chapter 2 of title 21 of the O.C.G.A. [§ 21-2-1 et seq.], the "Georgia Election Code," except to the extent specifically provided otherwise by this Act. (d)  A qualified voter, as used herein, shall mean a voter of Clarke County qualified to vote for members of the General Assembly of Georgia. The board shall certify the returns to the Secretary of State. The board shall also furnish a certified copy of the Charter to the Secretary of State. The Secretary of State shall issue a proclamation showing and declaring the result of the election on the approval or rejection of the charter. One (1) copy of the proclamation shall be attached to the copy of the Charter certified to the Secretary of State. One (1) copy of the proclamation shall be delivered to the clerk of the governing authority of the City of Athens, who shall attach the same to the copy of the Charter previously certified to him or her. One (1) copy of the proclamation shall be delivered to the clerk of the governing authority of Clarke County, who shall attach the same to the copy of the Charter previously certified to him or her. (e)  Whenever a Charter for the unification of the governments of the City of Athens and Clarke County has been accepted, the above-certified copies thereof, with the proclamation of the Secretary of State of Georgia attached thereto, shall be deemed duplicate original copies of the Charter of the unified government for all purposes. The certified copy of the Charter and proclamation deposited with the clerk of the governing authority of the City of Athens and the certified copy of the Charter and proclamation deposited with the clerk of the governing authority of Clarke County shall subsequently be delivered by them to the successor government. The successor government may issue certified copies of the Charter and any copy so certified shall be deemed a duplicate original copy of the Charter of the unified government for all purposes. The Secretary of State is authorized to issue certified copies of the Charter on file, and copies so certified shall be deemed duplicate original copies of the Charter of the unified government for all purposes. 
EXHIBIT A. - [DISTRICTS][3] Plan: clarkeccprop2r-2012 Plan Type: Local Administrator: S046 User: Gina   District 001 Clarke County VTD: 0591A - W'VILLE TRAIN 140600: 1000 1001 1005 1006 1007 1008 1009 1010 1011 1012 1013 1015 1016 1017 1018 1019 1020 1021 1022 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2031 2033 2034 2056 2057 2058 2059 2062 VTD: 0591B - TUCKSTON CHURCH 140600: 2029 2030 2032 2035 2038 2039 2040 2041 2042 2043 2044 2045 2046 2047 2048 2049 2050 2051 2052 2053 2054 2055 2060 2061 2063 2064 3000 3001 3002 3003 3004 3005 3006 3007 3008 3010 3011 150700: 3000 3001 3002 3003 3004 3005 150900: 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2025 2026 VTD: 0591C - BARNETT SHLS SCHOOL VTD: 0591D - WHIT DAVIS SCHOOL   District 002 Clarke County VTD: 0591A - W'VILLE TRAIN 140500: 1006 1007 1008 1009 1014 1015 1016 1017 1018 1019 1020 1021 1022 1023 1025 1026 1027 1031 1032 1033 1034 1035 1036 1047 1048 1050 VTD: 0591B - TUCKSTON CHURCH 140600: 2036 2037 3009 3012 3013 3014 3015 VTD: 0592B - HOWARD STROUD 030100: 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2021 2022 2033 2034 2035 2039 030200: 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033 2034 2035 2037 2038 2039 3000 3001 3002 3003 3004 3005 3006 3007 3008 3009 3010 3011 3012 3013 3014 3015 3016 3017 3018 3019 3020 3021 3022 3023 3024 3025 3026 3027 3028 140500: 1038 1051 VTD: 0593B - THOMAS N. LAY 000100: 1000 030100: 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2036 2037 2038 VTD: 0594A - ATHENS TRANSIT 030200: 2036 140500: 1037 1039 1040 1041 1042 1043 1044 1045 1046 1049 150600: 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 VTD: 0594B - MEMORIAL PARK 000100: 1001 1002 1003 1004 1009 1010 1044 VTD: 0598C - FIRESTATION #7 150600: 1000 1001 1002 1003 1004 1005 1006 1007 1008 1009 1010 1011 2000 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021   District 003 Clarke County VTD: 0593A - CLARKE CENTRAL VTD: 0593B - THOMAS N. LAY 000100: 1005 1006 1007 1008 1011 1012 1013 1014 1015 1016 1017 1018 1019 1022 1023 1024 1025 1026 1027 1028 1029 1030 1031 1032 1033 1034 1035 1036 1037 1038 1039 1040 1041 1042 1043 1045 1046 000600: 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 VTD: 0595C - CHASE STREET SC VTD: 0595D - ACC FLEET MGT B 130300: 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2021 2022 2023 2024 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033 2034 2035 2036 2037 2038 2039 2040 2047 2048 2057 2058 2060 2062   District 004 Clarke County VTD: 0593B - THOMAS N. LAY 000402: 3006 3007 000600: 1000 1001 1010 1011 1012 VTD: 0594A - ATHENS TRANSIT 030200: 1000 1001 1002 1003 1004 1005 1106 1007 1008 1009 1010 1011 1012 1013 1014 1015 1016 1017 150500: 1000 1001 1002 1003 1004 1005 1006 1007 1011 VTD: 0594B - MEMORIAL PARK 000401: 1000 1001 1002 1003 1004 1005 1006 1007 1008 1009 1010 1011 1012 000402: 1000 1001 1002 1003 1004 1005 1006 1007 1008 1009 1010 1011 1012 1013 1014 1015 1016 1017 1018 1019 1020 1021 3000 3001 3002 3003 3004 3005 3008 3009 3010 3012 3013 3014 3015 3016 3017 002100: 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 002200: 1000 1001 1002 1003 1004 1005 1006 1007 1008 1009 1010 1011 1012 1013 1014 1015 1016 1017 1018 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 150400: 2000 2001 2009 2015 3000 3001 3002 3003 3004 3005 150500: 1008 1009 1010   District 005 Clarke County VTD: 0592A - FOWLER DRIVE 140300: 1003 1004 1005 1006 1007 1008 1009 1010 1011 1012 1013 1014 1015 1016 1017 1018 1019 1020 1021 1022 1023 1024 1025 1026 1027 1028 1029 1030 1031 1032 1033 1036 1037 2000 2001 2008 2009 2016 VTD: 0595A - OGLETHORPE SCHOOL VTD: 0595B - WHITEHEAD RD SCHOOL VTD: 0595D - ACC FLEET MGT B 130300: 1000 1001 1002 1003 1004 1005 1006 1007 1008 1009 1010 1011 1012 1013 1014 1015 1016 1017 1018 1019 1020 1021 1022 1023 1024 1025 1026 1027 1028 1029 1030 1031 1032 1033 1034 1035 1036 1037 1038 1039 1040 1041 1042 1043 1044 1045 1046 1047 1048 1049 2020 2041 2042 2059 140300: 1034 1035 VTD: 0596B - BOARD OF EDUCATION 130500: 1000 1015 1016   District 006 Clarke County VTD: 0596A - CLEVELAND RD SC VTD: 0596B - BOARD OF EDUCATION 130500: 1001 1002 1003 1004 1005 1006 1007 1008 1009 1010 1011 1012 1013 1014 1017 1018 1019 130600: 1000 1013 1017 1018 1019 1020 1021 1022 1023 1024 1025 1026 1034 1035 1036 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 3000 3001 3002 3003 3004 3005 3006 3007 3008 3009 3010 3011 3012 3013 3014 VTD: 0596D - FIRESTATION #4   District 007 Clarke County VTD: 0593B - THOMAS N. LAY 000402: 2000 2001 3011 000600: 1002 1003 1004 1005 1006 1007 1008 1009 1013 2031 2032 2035 2036 2039 2040 2041 2042 VTD: 0594B - MEMORIAL PARK 002100: 1000 1001 1002 VTD: 0597B - ALPS ELEM. SCHOOL 000402: 2002 002100: 1003 1004 1005 1006 1007 1008 1009 1010 1011 1012 1013 1014 1019 1020 1021 1022 1023 1024 VTD: 0597C - FIRESTATION #3   District 008 Clarke County VTD: 0591B - TUCKSTON CHURCH 150700: 3006 3007 3008 3009 3010 3011 3012 3013 3014 3015 3016 VTD: 0598A - GAINES SCHOOL VTD: 0598B - CEDAR SHLS HIGH VTD: 0598C - FIRESTATION #7 150500: 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 3000 3001 3002 3003 3004 3005 3006 3007 3008 3009 3010 3011 3012 3013 150800: 1021   District 009 Clarke County VTD: 0591A - W'VILLE TRAIN 140400: 1000 1001 1003 1004 1005 1006 1007 1008 1012 1013 1014 1015 1016 1017 1018 1019 1020 1021 1022 1023 140500: 1000 1001 1002 1003 1004 1005 1010 1011 1012 1013 1024 1028 1029 1030 140600: 1002 1003 1004 1014 VTD: 0592A - FOWLER DRIVE 140300: 1000 1001 1002 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 3000 3001 3002 3003 3004 3005 3006 3007 3008 3009 3010 3011 3012 3013 3014 3015 3016 3017 3018 3019 3020 3021 3022 3023 3024 3025 140400: 1002 1009 1010 1011 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 VTD: 0592B - HOWARD STROUD 030100: 1000 1001 1002 1003 1004 1005 1006 1010 1011 1012 1013 1017 1018 1019 1020 1021 1022 VTD: 0593B - THOMAS N. LAY 000100: 1020 1021 001900: 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 030100: 1007 1008 1009 1014 1015 1016 1023 1024 130300: 2025 2026 2027 2028 2043 2044 2056 2061   District 010 Clarke County VTD: 0596C - TIMOTHY RD ELEMENTARY VTD: 0597A - TIMOTHY BAPTST CHURCH VTD: 0597B - ALPS ELEM. SCHOOL 001200: 1000 1001 1002 1003 1004 1005 1006 1007 1008 1009 1010 1011 1012 1013 1014 1015 1018 1019 1020 1021 1022 1023 002000: 1000 1001 1002 1003 1004 1005 1006 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 002100: 1015 1016 1017 1018 1025 (2002 Ga. Laws, p. 4246, Exh. A; Act 409, 3-20-2012) Footnotes: --- (3) --- Editor's note— Section 3 of 2002 Ga. Laws, p. 4246, repealed former Appendix A of the Charter which pertained to districts. 
APPENDIX B. - TRANSITION SCHEDULE AND PLAN     The following four-stage transition plan shall govern the implementation of this Act: Stage 1: Referendum on Charter to Initial Election Upon approval of the unification, a transition team shall be formed. The transition team will be appointed and charged with anticipating implementation responsibilities, issues and opportunities related to the unification of the two (2) governments. Their effort will involve collecting data, assembling facts and presenting options to the unified government officials when they take office. The transition team does not have any decision-making power and will serve in an advisory function to the new government until such time as the newly elected officials assume the responsibilities described below. The transition team shall consist of: the county administrator; the city administrator; one (1) appointee of the mayor of the City of Athens who shall not be an elected official nor an employee of the City of Athens; one (1) appointee of the chairman of the Clarke County Board of Commissioners who shall not be an elected official nor an employee of Clarke County; two (2) individuals appointed by the mayor of Winterville neither of whom shall be an elected official or an employee of the city and three members of the Charter commission selected by the Charter commission, one (1) of whom shall serve as chair of the transition team. Stage 2: Initial Election to January 1, 1991 The newly elected government assumes limited powers to plan for new government. During this time, the mayor and commission may exercise the following powers: (a)  Begin preparation for the appointment of the manager, attorney and auditor; (b)  Hold meetings, establish committees, plan the establishment of boundaries of the general and urban services districts, and plan for and schedule the initial organization of the unified government in accordance with the applicable provisions of this Charter. The mayor and commission shall be authorized to receive and expend appropriations from the Athens City Council and the Clarke County Board of Commissioners for the purposes of performing its responsibilities as provided herein; (c)  Initiation of the preparation of the initial (FY 1992) budget of the unified government; (d)  Begin preparation of plans and schedules for the unification of the various departments and agencies of the City of Athens and Clarke County; (e)  All officers, officials and employees of the City of Athens and Clarke County shall cooperate and assist the mayor and commission and other officers of the unified government in planning for and scheduling the unification of departments, boards, commissions of said former governments, and in transferring functions, duties and responsibilities of such departments, boards, commissions and agencies to the appropriate agencies of the unified government and in all other respects in order that the transfer of the governmental and corporate functions of the former governments shall be accomplished in the most orderly manner possible. The mayor, commission and officers of the unified government shall be entitled to examine all records, files and other data in possession of the former governments and all officers, officials and employees thereof. The former governments shall, to the extent possible, provide working areas and facilities to the transition team and the newly elected mayor and commission of the unified government. Stage 3: January 1, 1991 to June 30, 1991 The unified government takes office operating under the combined city and county budgets subject to the budget and employee caps specified above. The unified government budget for FY 1992 is prepared. During this period the government would begin combining operations. Stage 4: July 1, 1991 to June 30, 1992 The unified government begins operation under the first unified government budget. The budget for this fiscal year, FY 1992, shall be capped by combining the FY 1991 budgets of the city and county, plus increases due to inflation. (Ord. of 7-2-96, § 1; Ord. of 7-6-99, § 1) 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES  This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and ordinances amending it. Adoption  Date Section  Section this Charter  8- 7-90 1-101—1-106 1-101—1-106 2-101—2-106 2-101—2-106 2-201—2-208 2-201—2-208 2-301—2-305 2-301—2-305 3-101—3-106 3-101—3-106 4-101—4-109 4-101—4-109 4-201—4-204 4-201—4-204 4-301 4-301 4-401 4-401 5-101—5-106 5-101—5-106 6-101—6-103 6-101—6-103 6-201, 6-202 6-201, 6-202 7-101—7-104 7-101—7-104 7-201—7-205 7-201—7-205 7-301—7-304 7-301—7-304 7-401—7-411 7-401—7-411 7-501, 7-502 7-501, 7-502 8-101—8-121 8-101—8-121 9-101—9-115 9-101—9-115 App. A App. A App. B App. B 12- 5-91 1 2-202 2       Deleted 2-203 3—5 2-204—2-206 6       Deleted 4-102(a)(9) 7 4-102(a)(9) 8 4-110 9 9-109(d) 10 2-305(b)  7- 2-96 1 2-104, 2-105 2-204 Art. III(title) 3-101—3-106 4-101—4-104 4-110 4-401 6-101 7-403, 7-404 7-407, 7-408 7-501 8-101, 8-102 9-101 9-105 9-108 App. B  7- 6-99 1 2-104, 2-105 2-204 Art. III(title) 3-101—3-106 4-101—4-104 4-110 4-401 6-101 7-403, 7-404 7-407, 7-408 7-501 8-101, 8-102 9-101 9-105 9-108 App. B  7- 5-2000 1 2-105(b)(5) 2 4-102(a) 3 4-110(5) 12- 4-2001 1 2-104(a) 2 2-208 3 3-104(i) 4 4-101 5 4-110(3) 6 4-301(a)(6) 7 8-116  6- 4-2002 1       Added 4-301(c) 10- 5-2004 1 4-101(a) 2, 3 4-103(a), 4-104(a)  5- 6-2008 1 4-101(a) 2 4-103(a) 3 4-104(a)  4- 7-2015(1) 1 4-104 2 2-105(b)(2), (b)(3) 3 3-104(b) 4 7-410  
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE - GEORGIA LAWS  This table shows the location of the sections of the Georgia Laws cited in the Charter. Georgia Laws Year  Page Number Section  Section this Charter 1992 6556 1       Added 8-101(e) 2001 3873 1 2-103(a) 2 3-103(a) 2002 4246 1 2-102(a) 2 6-201 3       Rpld App. A Exh. A       Added Exh. A 2002 4737 1 2-105(a) 2 8-102(a) 2003 3910 1 6-104 2003 4250 1 8-101(e)(5) 2009 3788 1 8-101(e) 2009 3791 1 5-106 2012 Act. No. 409 1 2-102(a) 2 6-201(a) 3 6-202(a), (b) Exhibit A  
PART II - SPECIAL AND RELATED LAWS[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Editor's note— These related laws are provided for reference purposes only. For official citation, see the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, Local and Special Laws. 
CHAPTER 1. - ATHENS-CLARKE COUNTY INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY Georgia Laws 1960, p. 1379—Athens-Clarke County Industrial Development Authority Sec. 1. [Created; purpose; membership; etc.] Georgia Laws 1981, p. 3972—Athens-Clarke County Industrial Development Authority—Powers Sec. 1. Definitions. Sec. 2. Purpose. Sec. 3. Additional powers granted. Sec. 4. Financing of pollution control projects authorized. Sec. 5. Financing of industrial projects authorized. Sec. 6. Use of bond proceeds. Sec. 7. Conditions precedent to issuance of bonds. Sec. 8. Validation. Sec. 9. Interest rates. Sec. 10. Repealer. Sec. 11. Construction of act. Sec. 12. Severability. Sec. 13. Effective date. Georgia Laws 1985, p. 4134—Athens-Clarke County Industrial Development Authority—Local Constitutional Amendment Continued Sec. 1. [Continuation of Georgia Laws 1960, p 1379.] Sec. 2. [Passage pursuant to Article XI, Section I.] Sec. 3. [Repealer.] Georgia Laws, 1992, p. 6556—Athens-Clarke CountyIndustrial Development Authority—MembershipSec. 1. [Amendment to Section 8-101 of An Act Establishing the Unified Government of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia, Approved March 2, 1990 (Ga. L. 1990, p. 3560)]. Sec. 2. [Repealer.] 
GEORGIA LAWS 1960, P. 1379—ATHENS-CLARKE COUNTY INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY 
Sec. 1. - [Created; purpose; membership; etc.]     Article VII, section V, paragraph I of the constitution is hereby amended by adding at the end thereof the following: Athens-Clarke County Industrial Development Authority. "A.  Created. There is hereby created a body corporate and politic to be known as the Athens-Clarke County Industrial Development Authority; which shall be deemed to be an instrumentality of the State of Georgia and a public corporation, and in that name, style and title said body may contract and be contracted with, sue and be sued, plead and be interpleaded, and complain and defend in all courts of law and equity. In the event the name of said Authority shall ever become the subject of change same may be accomplished by an act of the General Assembly. "B.  Purpose. The said Authority is created for the purpose of expanding and developing industry in Clarke County and for improving the general welfare of said county. "C.  Members; terms; vacancies; oath; compensation. The said Authority shall consist of five (5) members, one (1) of whom shall be the mayor of the City of Athens; one (1) of whom shall be the chairman of the board of commissioners of roads and revenues of Clarke County; one (1) of whom shall be the president of the Athens Chamber of Commerce[,] Inc.; one (1) of whom shall be appointed by the commissioners of roads and revenues of Clarke County; and one (1) of whom shall be appointed by the mayor and council of the City of Athens. "(1)  The terms of office of the members who are the mayor of the City of Athens, the chairman of the board of commissioners of roads and revenues of Clarke County, and the president of the Athens Chamber of Commerce, Inc. shall run concurrently with their tenure of office, and their successor in such respective offices shall succeed them as members of the said Authority. "(2)  The member initially appointed by the mayor and council of the City of Athens shall be appointed for a term expiring December 31, 1961; and the member initially appointed by the commissioners of roads and revenue of Clarke County shall be appointed for a term expiring December 31, 1962; and thereafter their successors shall be appointed for terms of two (2) years. In the event of the death or resignation of one (1) of said members, his successor shall be appointed by the appropriate appointing authority for the balance of the unexpired term. "(3)  Prior to taking office the members shall subscribe to the following oath which shall be filed in the office of the clerk of the City of Athens to-wit: "[']I do solemnly swear that I will fully and fairly perform the duties as a member of the Athens-Clarke County Industrial Development Authority. So Help Me God.[']" "(4)  The members of the said Authority shall be entitled to no compensation. "D.  Definitions. As used herein, the following words and terms shall have the following meanings, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context: "(1)  The word "Authority" shall mean the "Athens-Clarke County Industrial Development Authority," created hereby. "(2)  The word "project" shall be deemed to mean and include the acquisition of lands, properties and improvements for development, expansion and promotion of industry and the construction of buildings and plants or the acquisition of equipment for the purpose of selling, leasing or renting such structures or equipment to private persons, firms or corporations. "(3)  The term "cost of project" shall embrace the cost of construction, cost of lands, properties, easements, rights and franchises acquired, the cost of machinery and equipment, financing charges, interest prior to and during construction, architectural and legal expenses, and plans and specifications and other expenses necessary or incident to determining the feasibility or practicability of the project, administrative expenses, and such other expenses as may be necessary or incident to the financing herein authorized, the construction of any project and placing the same in operation; provided, however, that in no event shall entertainment or promotional expenses be considered a part of the cost of any project. "E.  Quorum. Any three (3) members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of ordinary business of the Authority; however, any action with respect to any project of the Authority must be approved by not less than three (3) affirmative votes. "F.  Powers. The powers of the Authority herein created shall include, but not limited to, the power: "(1)  To have a seal and alter the same at pleasure. "(2)  To contract and be contracted with, sue and be sued, implead or be impleaded, and complain and defend in all courts of law and equity, to contract with other political subdivisions and with private persons and corporations. "(3)  To acquire, hold, and dispose of real and personal property, including the stock of other corporations for its corporate purposes. "(4)  To buy, acquire, receive as gifts, improve, own, operate, maintain, sell, lease as lessor and lessee, and mortgage as well as execute deeds to secure debt to and for land, buildings, and property of all kinds within the County of Clarke. "(5)  To enter into contracts for periods of time not in excess of one hundred (100) years. "(6)  To acquire in its own name by purchase on such terms and conditions, and in such manner as it may deem proper, real property or rights of easement therein or franchises necessary or convenient for its corporate purposes, and to use the same so long as its corporate existence shall continue and to lease or make contracts with respect to the use of or dispose of the same in any manner it deems to be the best advantage of the Authority. If the Authority shall deem it expedient to construct any project or use any project already constructed on lands, the title to which shall be in the County of Clarke and/or the mayor and council of the City of Athens, the governing authorities of the County of Clarke and the mayor and council of the City of Athens are authorized in their discretion to convey title to such lands, including any improvements thereon, to the Authority. "(7)  To encourage and promote the expansion of industry in the City of Athens and in the County of Clarke, and to make a long range plan therefor. "(8)  To appoint and select officers, agents, and employees, including engineering, architectural and construction experts, fiscal agents and attorneys, and to fix their compensation. "(9)  To make contracts, and to execute all instruments necessary or convenient, including contracts for construction of projects, and leases, and rental and sale of projects, or contracts with respect to the use of projects, which it erects or acquires. "(10)  To construct, erect, acquire, own, repair, remodel, maintain, extend, improve, sell, equip, expand, add to, operate and manage projects and to pay the costs of any such project from the proceeds of revenue-anticipation certificates or bonds or any other income of the Authority, or from any contribution or loans by persons, firms, or corporations, all of which the Authority is hereby authorized to receive and accept and use. "(11)  To elect its own officers from the membership of the Authority; to elect an executive director who is not required to be a member of the Authority; and to authorize and empower such officers to act for the Authority generally or in any specific matter. "(12)  To issue revenue-anticipation certificates for the purpose of paying all or any part of the cost of any project of the Authority. To exercise all of the rights, powers and privileges and be subject to the same liabilities as a municipality under the provisions of the Revenue Certificate Law of 1937 (Ga. L. 1937, pp. 761-774), and as subsequently amended, with reference to the issuance of such revenue-anticipation certificates and validation of same insofar as such pertain to the corporate purposes of the Authority. "(13)  To borrow money for any of its corporate purposes and to issue negotiable revenue bonds payable solely from funds or property pledged for that purpose, and to provide for the payment of the same and for the rights of the holders thereof. "(14)  To use the rents, profits and proceeds from the projects erected, leased or sold, to provide maintenance for such projects, and to discharge the principal and interest of revenue bonds or certificates issued by the Authority. "(15)  To borrow money for any of its corporate purposes and to execute debentures, bonds, notes, mortgages, deeds to secure debt, trust deeds and other such instruments as may be necessary or convenient to evidence and secure such borrowing. "(16)  To do all things within its powers to encourage industrial growth development in Clarke County, and to encourage the location of new industries in said County. "(17)  To exercise any power granted by the laws of the State of Georgia to public or private corporations performing similar functions, which is not in conflict with the constitution and laws of this state. "(18)  To accumulate its funds from year to year and to invest accumulated funds in any manner that public funds of the State of Georgia or any of its political subdivisions may be invested. "(19)  To receive and administer gifts, grants and donations and to administer trusts. "(20)  To do all things necessary and convenient to carry out the powers expressly conferred by this resolution [this section] upon the Authority. "(21)  To adopt, alter or repeal its own bylaws, rules and regulations governing the manner in which its business may be transacted and in which the power granted to it may be enjoyed, as the Authority may deem necessary or expedient in facilitating its business. "G.  Bonds. It shall be the duty of the Authority to have all persons handling funds of the Authority fully and adequately bonded for their faithful accounting for such funds. "H.  Debt. The Authority shall not be allowed to create in any manner any debt, liability or operation, against the mayor and council of the City of Athens, the State of Georgia, nor Clarke County. "I.  Tax exemptions. The obligations and interest on the obligations of the Authority shall have the same exemptions from taxation as obligations and interests on the obligations of the mayor and council of the City of Athens and of Clarke County. "J.  Projects. All projects of the Authority shall be on a self-liquidating basis, and the Authority shall not make gifts, directly or indirectly, to any person, firm or corporation. "K.  Title to property if Authority dissolved. Should said Authority for any reason be dissolved, title to all property of every kind and nature, real and personal, held by the Authority at the time of such dissolution, shall revert to the mayor and council of the City of Athens and to Clarke County[,] subject to any mortgages, liens, leases or other encumbrances outstanding against or in respect to said property. "L.  Audits; records. The books and records of the Authority shall be audited at least annually, at the expense of the Authority, by a competent independent auditor; and the minutes and records of the same shall be filed with the clerk of the mayor and council of the City of Athens and shall be available for public inspection. "M.  Intent. The rights and powers herein [in this section] conferred upon the Authority are self executing and no enabling act of the General Assembly shall be necessary." (Ga. L. 1960, p. 1379, § 1) State Law reference— Revenue Bond Law, OCGA § 36-82-60 et seq. 
GEORGIA LAWS 1981, P. 3972—ATHENS-CLARKE COUNTY INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY—POWERS[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- State Law reference— Revenue Bond Law, OCGA § 36-82-60 et seq. 
Sec. 1. - Definitions.     As used in this Act: (a)  The term "assisted person" means any private persons, firms, or corporations for which a project is undertaken or proposed to be undertaken. (b)  The term "Authority" shall mean the Athens-Clark[e]s County Industrial Development Authority created pursuant to an amendment to the constitution of Georgia ratified at the general election held on November 8, 1960 (Ga. Laws 1960, p. 1379, et seq.) [section 1.1]. (c)  The term "Authority act" shall mean the above referred to constitutional amendment pursuant to which the Authority was created. (d)  The term "bonds" shall mean any bonds, notes, certificates or obligations of any kind issued by the Authority to evidence any repayment obligations for money borrowed by the Authority. (e)  The term "cost" with respect to any project herein authorized shall have the same meaning as the definition of "cost of project" in the Authority act. (f)  The term "industrial project" shall mean projects consisting of lands, properties and improvements for development, expansion and promotion of industry and the construction of buildings and plants or the acquisition of equipment for the use and benefit of assisted persons. (g)  The term "pollution control project" shall mean the acquisition, construction, improvement or modification of any property, real or personal, to be used as air or water pollution control facilities which any federal, state or local agency having jurisdiction in the premises shall have certified as necessary for the operation or the continued operation of the industry or the industries which the same is to serve and is necessary for the public welfare. For purposes hereof, the term "air pollution control facility" shall mean any property used primarily to abate or control atmospheric pollution or contamination by removing, containing, altering, disposing or storing atmospheric pollutants or contaminants if such facility is in furtherance of federal, state or local standards for control of atmospheric pollution or contaminants. For the purposes hereof, the term "water pollution control facility" shall mean any property used primarily to control water pollution by removing, storing, altering or disposing of pollutants, contaminants, wastes or heat, including, but not limited to, the necessary intercepting sewers, outfall sewer pumping, power and other equipment, holding ponds, lagoons and appurtenances thereto, if such facility is in furtherance of federal, state or local standards for the control of water pollution. (Ga. L. 1981, p. 3972, § 1) 
Sec. 2. - Purpose.     It is the purpose of this Act to grant to the Authority additional powers so that the Authority may more effectively carry out the purpose for which it was created, namely expanding and developing industry in Athens and Clarke County and for improving the general welfare of said city and county. (Ga. L. 1981, p. 3972, § 2) 
Sec. 3. - Additional powers granted.     The Authority is hereby empowered, in addition to the powers granted to it pursuant to the aforesaid constitutional amendment, to exercise the powers granted to it by this Act. (Ga. L. 1981, p. 3972, § 3) 
Sec. 4. - Financing of pollution control projects authorized.     The authority may issue bonds to finance, for the benefit of assisted persons, pollution control projects if any federal, state or local agency having jurisdiction in [on] the premises shall have certified that the project is necessary for the operation or the continued operation of the industry or industries which the same is to serve and is necessary for the public welfare. (Ga. L. 1981, p. 3972, § 4) 
Sec. 5. - Financing of industrial projects authorized.     The Authority may issue bonds to finance, for the benefit of the assisted persons, industrial projects. (Ga. L. 1981, p. 3972, § 5) 
Sec. 6. - Use of bond proceeds.     The Authority may use the proceeds derived from the sale of bonds to finance the cost of any pollution control project or any industrial project by acquiring the project in the name of the Authority for the purpose of leasing or selling the same to the assisted person for whom the project is undertaken, or by lending the proceeds of the sale of the bonds to such assisted person directly, all as shall be provided in the resolution adopted by the Authority to authorize the issuance of the bonds. (Ga. L. 1981, p. 3972, § 6) 
Sec. 7. - Conditions precedent to issuance of bonds.     Prior to the issuance of any bonds by the Authority for the benefit of any assisted person, the assisted person shall have become irrevocably obligated, by whatever type of contract is deemed to be appropriate in connection with the form of the transaction selected, to make payments to the Authority at appropriate times and in amounts which are at least sufficient to permit the payment of the principal of, premium (if any) and the interest on the bonds as the same mature and become payable, and all costs and expenses in connection therewith. (Ga. L. 1981, p. 3972, § 7) 
Sec. 8. - Validation.     Bonds issued to finance projects authorized pursuant to this Act [this section] shall be validated pursuant to the provisions of the Revenue Bond Law (Ga. Laws 1937, page 761, et seq.), as now or hereafter amended. (Ga. L. 1981, p. 3972, § 8) 
Sec. 9. - Interest rates.     Any bonds issued by the Authority shall be exempt from all laws of the state governing usury or prescribing or limiting interest rates to be borne by any such bonds. The interest rate or rates to be borne by any bonds issued by the Authority shall be fixed, and with respect to any interest rate which floats in response to a variable the method of calculation shall be fixed, by the governing body of the Authority in the resolution adopted by the governing body of the Authority authorizing the issuance of any such bonds. (Ga. L. 1981, p. 3972, § 9) 
Sec. 10. - Repealer.     All provisions in all laws are hereby repealed to the extent the same are in conflict with the provisions of this Act. (Ga. L. 1981, p. 3972, § 10) 
Sec. 11. - Construction of act.     The provisions of this Act shall be liberally construed to effect the purposes hereof, and insofar as the provisions of this Act [this section] may be inconsistent with the provisions of any other law, this Act shall control. (Ga. L. 1981, p. 3972, § 11) 
Sec. 12. - Severability.     The provisions of this Act [this section] are hereby declared to be severable. If any provision of this Act [this section] or the application of such provision to any circumstance is held invalid for any reason whatsoever, the remainder of this Act [this section] or the application of the provision to other circumstances shall not be affected thereby. (Ga. L. 1981, p. 3972, § 12) 
Sec. 13. - Effective date.     This Act shall become effective upon its approval by the Governor or upon its becoming law without the Governor's approval. (Ga. L. 1981, p. 3972, § 13) 
GEORGIA LAWS 1985, P. 4134—ATHENS-CLARKE COUNTY INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY—LOCAL CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENT CONTINUED 
Sec. 1. - [Continuation of Georgia Laws 1960, p. 1379.]     That constitutional amendment creating the Athens-Clarke County Industrial Development Authority which was proposed by Resolution Act No. 194 enacted at the 1960 session of the General Assembly (Ga. L. 1960, p. 1379) and which was duly ratified shall not be repealed or deleted on July 1, 1987, as a part of the constitution of the State of Georgia but is specifically continued in force and effect on and after that date as a part of the constitution of the State of Georgia. (Ga. L. 1985, p. 4134, § 1) 
Sec. 2. - [Passage pursuant to Article XI, Section I.]     This Act is passed pursuant to Article XI, section I, paragraph IV of the constitution of the State of Georgia which authorizes the continuation of certain amendments to the constitution. (Ga. L. 1985, p. 4134, § 2) 
Sec. 3. - [Repealer.]     All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are repealed. (Ga. L. 1985, p. 4134, § 3) 
GEORGIA LAWS, 1992, P. 6556— ATHENS-CLARKE COUNTY INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY—MEMBERSHIP 
Sec. 1. - [Amendment to Section 8-101 of an Act establishing the Unified Government of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia, approved March 2, 1990 (Ga. L. 1990, p. 3560)].     An Act establishing the Unified Government of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia, approved March 2, 1990 (Ga. L. 1990, p. 3560), as amended, is amended by adding at the end of Section 8-101 a new subsection to read as follows: "(e) The Athens-Clarke County Industrial Development Authority, created by a local amendment to the Constitution (Ga. L. 1960, P. 1379) and continued in force and effect by an Act approved March 27, 1985 (Ga. L. 1985, p. 4134), provided that the membership of that Authority is composed of or appointed by governmental authorities which no longer exist because of the unification of those authorities as the Unified Government of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia, effected by this Act. Article XI, Section I, Paragraph IV and Article X, Section I, Paragraph I of the Constitution prohibit the amendment of such local constitutional amendments. Article IX, Section III, Paragraph II(a) of the Constitution, however, grants the General Assembly the power in providing for local government consolidation to 'provide by law for any matters necessary or convenient to authorize the consolidation ….' It is thus found by the General Assembly that the consolidation which resulted in the Unified Government necessitates, and therefore constitutionally authorizes, that the membership positions on the Athens-Clarke County Industrial Development Authority be construed to mean the following: (1)  The membership position on the Authority specified to be held by the Mayor of the City of Athens shall be construed to refer to the Chief Executive Officer of the Unified Government; (2)  The membership position on the Authority specified to be held by the Chairman of the Board of Commissioners of Roads and Revenue of Clarke County shall be construed to refer to a person recommended by the Chief Executive Officer of the Unified Government and appointed by the Commission of that government; (3)  The membership position on the Authority specified to be held by a person appointed by the Commissioners of Roads and Revenue of Clarke County shall be construed to refer to a member of the Commission of the Unified Government who has been appointed to the Authority by such Commission; (4)  The membership position on the Authority specified to be held by a person appointed by the Mayor and Council of the City of Athens shall be construed to refer to a person appointed by the Commission of the Unified Government; and (5)  The membership position on the Authority specified to be held by the President of the Athens Chamber of Commerce, Inc., shall be construed to refer to the Chairman of the Board of the Athens Area Chamber of Commerce, Inc." (Ga. L. 1992, p. 6556, § 1; Ga. L. 2003, p. 4250, § 1) 
Sec. 2. - [Repealer.]     All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are hereby repealed. (Ga. L. 1992, p. 6556, § 2) 
CHAPTER 2. - ATHENS-CLARKE COUNTY PUBLIC FACILITIES AUTHORITY Georgia Laws 1960, p. 2531—Athens Public Facilities Authority Act Sec. 1. Short title. Sec. 2. Athens-Clarke County Public Facilities Authority created. Sec. 3. General powers. Sec. 4. Commissioners; meetings; officials; minutes and records. Sec. 5. Definitions. Sec. 6. Revenue bonds. Sec. 7. Revenue bonds; execution. Sec. 8. Revenue bonds; negotiability and exemption from taxation. Sec. 9. Revenue bonds; sale and price. Sec. 10. Revenue bonds; proceeds of bonds. Sec. 11. Revenue bonds; replacement of lost or mutilated bonds. Sec. 12. Conditions precedent to issuance of revenue bonds. Sec. 13. Credit not pledged. Sec. 14. Revenue bonds; trust indenture as security. Sec. 15. Revenue bonds; to whom the proceeds of the bonds shall be paid. Sec. 16. Revenue bonds; sinking fund. Sec. 17. Revenue bonds; remedies of bond holders. Sec. 18. Revenue bonds; refunding bonds. Sec. 19. Venue; jurisdiction; service. Sec. 20. Revenue bonds; validation. Sec. 21. Interest of bond holders protected. Sec. 22. Monies received considered trust funds. Sec. 23. Rates, charges and revenues of projects. Sec. 24. Projects confined to Clarke County. Sec. 25. Powers declared supplemental and additional. Sec. 26. Authority without taxing power. Sec. 27. Liberal construction of act. Sec. 28. Effect of partial invalidity of Act. Sec. 29. Repeal. 
GEORGIA LAWS 1960, P. 2531—ATHENS PUBLIC FACILITIES AUTHORITY ACT 
Sec. 1. - Short title.     This Act may be cited as the "Athens-Clarke County Public Facilities Authority Act." (Ga. L. 1960, p. 2531, § 1; Ga. L. 1996, p. 3746, § 1) 
Sec. 2. - Athens-Clarke County Public Facilities Authority created.     There is hereby created a body corporate and politic to be known as the Athens-Clarke County Public Facilities Authority, which shall be deemed to be a political subdivision of the State of Georgia and a public corporation by that name, style, and title to be known. Said corporation shall be separate and distinct from any public corporation heretofore created by the General Assembly and shall be an instrumentality of the State of Georgia exercising governmental powers. All property owned by said corporation shall be public property held and owned for governmental purposes and shall be exempt from taxation. The name of the Athens Public Facilities Authority is changed to the Athens-Clarke County Public Facilities Authority, and all references in this Act to such authority shall be to the renamed authority. All references in this Act to Athens, the City of Athens, or to Clarke County wherever they appear in this Act shall be construed to refer to Athens-Clarke County. The authority shall not undertake to acquire real property by any means nor to improve any real property, whether owned by the authority or by any other person or corporation, without first obtaining from the chief elected officer (CEO) and Commission of the Unified Government of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia, an inducement resolution which clearly describes the real property affected and the amount of money to be spent on the project. Further, the authority shall not acquire real property by eminent domain nor finance any project by the issuance of revenue bonds, as set out in this chapter, without first obtaining from the CEO and Commission of the Unified Government of Athens-Clarke County an inducement resolution which clearly sets out that said property is to be acquired by eminent domain or said project financed by the issuance of revenue bonds. Further, the authority shall not enter into any intergovernmental contract without first obtaining from the CEO and Commission of the Unified Government of Athens-Clarke County an inducement resolution which clearly sets out that said contract is in the best interest of the citizens of Athens-Clarke County. (Ga. L. 1960, p. 2531, § 2; Ga. L. 1996, p. 3746, § 1) 
Sec. 3. - General powers.     The Athens Public Facilities Authority shall have the power: (a)  To hold, own and convey real and personal property; (b)  To sue and be sued; (c)  To have and to use a seal and to alter the same at pleasure; (d)  To acquire, construct, purchase, own, equip, operate, extend, improve, lease and sell any project as hereinafter [in this chapter defined; (e)  To exercise the powers conferred upon a "public corporation or authority" by Article VII, section VI, paragraph 1 of the constitution of Georgia, said Authority being hereby expressly declared to be a "public corporation or authority" within the meaning of said portion of the constitution of Georgia; (f)  To exercise the power and right of eminent domain in accordance with the provisions of any law now or hereafter adopted applicable to the condemnation of property for public use; (g)  To accept gifts and bequests for its corporate purposes; (h)  To appoint, select and employ officers, agents and employees, including engineering, architectural and construction experts, fiscal agents and attorneys, and to fix their compensation; (i)  To make contracts and leases, and to execute all instruments necessary or convenient, including contracts for the construction or improvement or extension of any project as hereinafter [in this chapter defined; (j)  To cancel contracts, to compromise claims against itself and to dispose of and convey property not required by it for its corporate purposes upon such terms as it may in its discretion deem best; (k)  To accept loans and grants of money or property of any kind from the United States, the State of Georgia, or any political subdivision of the State of Georgia; (l)  To employ the services of any state or national bank having an office within the City of Athens as custodian of the funds belonging to it and as collecting and disbursing agent for any funds belonging to or held by it; (m)  To make such rules and regulations with respect to the use by the public of any property owned by it as it shall in its discretion deem proper; [and (n)  To make such rules and regulations governing its employees and property as it may in its discretion deem proper. (Ga. L. 1960, p. 2531, § 3) Editor's note— The constitutional reference in paragraph (e) refers to the constitution of 1945. In the constitution of 1976, this section became Art. VIII, § IX, para. I. In the constitution of 1983, this section became Art. VIII, § V, para. VII. 
Sec. 4. - Members; meetings; officials; minutes, and records. (a)  The Athens-Clarke County Public Facilities Authority shall be governed by and its powers exercised by five (5) members who shall be nominated and elected by the CEO and commission of Athens-Clarke County. The three (3) commissioners serving as such on the effective date of this Act shall become three (3) members and shall complete the terms for which they were elected. All references in this Act to commissioners of the authority shall be to the members of the authority. For the additional members created by this Act and upon the expiration of terms of members, the CEO shall nominate a person as member, and in the event the commission fails to elect the person so nominated, then the CEO shall immediately submit an additional nomination, and in the event the commission fails to elect the second person so nominated, then the commission shall immediately proceed to nominate and elect the member in question. One of the two (2) additional members shall be nominated and elected for a term ending December 31, 1996, and the second additional member shall be nominated and elected for a term ending December 31, 1997. Thereafter, members shall be elected for terms of three (3) years. Whenever any member shall die, resign or be removed from office prior to the expiration of that member's term, a successor shall be nominated and elected to fill the unexpired term in the same manner as set out in this subsection. A member shall hold office until that member's successor has been elected and qualified. Members shall be more than twenty-five (25) years of age, shall have resided in Athens-Clarke County for two (2) years prior to taking office, and shall be registered voters of Athens-Clarke County. Each member shall take an oath before entering on the discharge of the member's duties to the effect that he or she will faithfully and honestly discharge the duties of office. At their first meeting each year the members shall designate one of their number as chairperson, and the member so designated shall serve as chairperson for the calendar year of such designation. Any member may be removed from office for physical or mental incompetency or for removal from Athens-Clarke County or for malfeasance in office by a two-thirds vote of the commission of Athens-Clarke County after service with written notice upon such member of the charges against him or her and after the member has been accorded a hearing with respect to such charges by the commission of Athens-Clarke County. (b)  The initial meeting of the commissioners of the Athens-Clarke County Public Facilities Authority shall be held at 7:30 p.m. on the second Wednesday following the nomination and election of the two (2) members initially nominated and elected under the terms of this Act. Thereafter, meetings of the authority shall be held on the second Wednesday in April and October of each year. Additional meetings may be held at such time as the chairperson of the authority may designate upon the giving of 24 hours' written notice in advance of such meeting to each member. All meetings of the authority shall be public meetings and shall be held in the council chamber in the city hall in Athens, Georgia, or at any other place in Athens-Clarke County designated by its chairperson. The presence of three (3) members shall be necessary at a meeting to constitute a quorum, and the concurrence of two (2) members shall be necessary to take action on behalf of and binding upon the authority. The chairperson shall be entitled to vote on all questions coming before the authority. Each member shall be entitled to a fee of $25.00 for each meeting of the authority at which he or she is present or to such other compensation as may hereafter be fixed by law. (c)  The manager of the Unified Government of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia, or such manager's designee from his or her staff shall be ex officio treasurer of the Athens-Clarke County Public Facilities Authority; and a member of the manager's staff as designated by the manager shall be ex officio engineer of the Athens-Clarke County Public Facilities Authority. The attorney for the Unified Government of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia, shall serve as the ex officio attorney for the Athens-Clarke County Public Facilities Authority. (d)  Minutes of each meeting of the members of the authority shall be kept under the supervision of the chairperson. Such minutes shall constitute public records and shall be filed in the office of the clerk of the commission of the unified government of Athens-Clarke County. Such additional records of the funds, property, and actions of the authority as may be required by the members shall be kept at such place or places as may be designated by the members from time to time." (Ga. L. 1960, p. 2531, § 4; Ga. L. 1996, p. 3746, § 2) 
Sec. 5. - Definitions.     As used in this Act, the following words and terms shall have the following meanings: (a)  The word "Authority" shall mean the Athens-Clarke County Public Facilities Authority created in section 2 of this Act. (b)  The word "project" shall include the following revenue-producing undertakings or any combination of two (2) or more of such undertakings: (1)  Buildings and related facilities including driveways, walkways, appurtenances, and the land upon which the same are located which are necessary or convenient for the efficient operation of the Unified Government of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia; or of any of its departments or agencies; or any board or authority which performs any governmental or proprietary function for or in conjunction with the Unified Government of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia; or which are to be leased or used by the State of Georgia or any of its departments or agencies, the United States of America; or any of its departments or agencies or any regional authority or board of which the Unified Government of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia, is a member or with which the Unified Government of Athens-Clarke County has any intergovernmental contract; (2)  Any and all machinery, equipment, furniture, or real property necessary or convenient for the efficient operation of the Unified Government of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia; or of any of its departments or agencies; or any board or authority which performs any governmental or proprietary function for or in conjunction with the Unified Government of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia; or which are to be leased or used by the State of Georgia or any of its departments or agencies, or United States of America; or any of its departments or agencies or any regional authority or board of which the Unified Government of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia, is a member or with which the Unified Government of Athens-Clarke County has any intergovernmental contract; (3)  Causeways, tunnels, viaducts, bridges and other crossings, highways, parkways, airports, terminals, and other related facilities including parking facilities; (4)  Parks, golf links and fairways, tennis courts, swimming pools, playgrounds, athletic fields, grandstands and stadiums, and buildings to be used for various types of sports, including baseball and football; buildings to be constructed and used for the housing of exhibits for fairs and educational purposes; buildings to be used for the housing of livestock, horses, cattle, swine, poultry, and agricultural exhibits for exhibition purposes; the erection and construction of buildings to be used for amusement purposes or educational purposes or a combination of the two; and also such buildings to be used for fairs, expositions, or exhibitions in connection therewith; and (5)  Systems, plants, works, instrumentalities, and properties: (A) used or useful in connection with the obtaining of a water supply and the conservation, treatment, and disposal of water for public and private uses; (B) used or useful in connection with the collection, treatment, and disposal of sewerage, waste, and storm water; together with all parts of any such undertaking and all appurtenances thereto, including lands, easements, rights in land, water rights, contract rights, franchises, approaches, dams, reservoirs, generating stations, sewage disposal plants, intersecting sewers, trunk connecting and other sewer and water mains, filtration works, pumping stations, and equipment. (c)  The term "cost of the project" shall embrace the cost of construction, the cost of all lands, properties, rights, easements and franchises acquired and the cost of all conveyances in fee simple of the authority's title thereto and leases thereof, the cost of all machinery and equipment, financing charges, interest prior to and during construction, and for one (1) year after the completion of construction, cost of engineering, architectural, fiscal and legal expenses, and of plans and specifications, and other expenses necessary or incident to determining the feasibility or practicability of the project, administrative expenses, and such other expenses as may be necessary or incident to the financing herein authorized, the construction of any project, the placing of the same in operation, and the condemnation of property necessary for such construction and operation. Any obligation or expense incurred for any of the foregoing purposes shall be regarded as a part of the cost of the project and may be paid or reimbursed as such out of any funds of the authority, including the proceeds of any revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act for any such project or projects. (d)  The terms "revenue bonds," "bonds" and "obligations" as used in this Act shall mean revenue bonds issued by the Authority pursuant to the terms of this Act pledging to the punctual payment of the principal and interest of said bonds all or any part of the revenues of any designated project or projects. (e)  Any project shall be deemed "self liquidating" if, in the judgment of the Authority, the revenues and earnings to be derived by the Authority therefrom and all properties used, leased and sold in connection therewith will be sufficient to pay the cost of operating, maintaining and repairing, improving and extending the project and to pay the principal and interest of the revenue bonds which may be issued to finance, in whole or in part, the cost of such project or projects. (Ga. L. 1960, p. 2531, § 5; Ga. L. 1996, p. 3746, § 3) 
Sec. 6. - Revenue bonds.     The Authority shall have power and is hereby authorized at one (1) time, or from time to time, to provide by resolution for the issuance of negotiable revenue bonds for the purpose of paying all or any part of the cost as herein [in this chapter defined of the acquisition, construction, reconstruction, improvement, betterment or extension of any one (1) or more projects. The principal and interest of such revenue bonds shall be payable solely from such part of the revenues and earnings of such project or projects as may be designated in the resolution of the Authority authorizing the issuance of such revenue bonds. The revenue bonds of each issue shall be dated, shall bear interest as [sic] such rate or rates, shall be payable semiannually, shall mature at such time or times not exceeding thirty (30) years from their date or dates, shall be payable in such medium of payment as to both principal and interest as may be determined by the Authority, and may be made redeemable before maturity, at the option of the Authority, as such price or prices and under such terms and conditions as may be fixed by the Authority in the resolution providing for the issuance of the revenue bonds. Unless otherwise provided therein, such resolution or resolutions shall take effect immediately. The Authority shall by such resolution determine the form of the revenue bonds, including any interest coupons to be attached thereto, and shall fix the denomination or denominations of the revenue bonds and the place or places of payment of principal and interest thereof, which may be at any bank or trust company within or without the state. The revenue bonds may be issued in coupon or registered form, or both, as the Authority may determine; and provision may be made by such resolution for the registration of any coupon bond as to principal alone and also as to both the principal and interest. (Ga. L. 1960, p. 2531, § 6) 
Sec. 7. - Revenue bonds; execution.     In case any officer whose signature shall appear on any bonds or whose facsimile signature shall appear on any coupon shall cease to be such officer before delivery of such bonds, such signature shall nevertheless be valid and sufficient for all purposes the same as if he had remained in office until such delivery. All such bonds shall be signed by the chairman of the Authority and attested by the clerk and treasurer of the Authority and the official seal of the Authority shall be affixed thereto and any coupons attached thereto shall bear the facsimile signatures of the chairman and clerk and treasurer of the Authority. (Ga. L. 1960, p. 2531, § 7) 
Sec. 8. - Revenue bonds; negotiability and exemption from taxation.     All revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act shall have and are hereby declared to have all the qualities and incidents of negotiable instruments under the negotiable instruments law of this state. Such bonds are declared to be issued for an essential public and governmental purpose and the said bonds and the income thereof shall be exempt from all taxation within the state. (Ga. L. 1960, p. 2531, § 8) State Law reference— Uniform Commercial Code, OCGA Title 11. 
Sec. 9. - Revenue bonds; sale and price.     The Authority may sell such bonds in such manner and for such price as it may determine to be for the best interest of the Authority, but no such sale may be made at a price less than par. (Ga. L. 1960, p. 2531, § 9) 
Sec. 10. - Revenue bonds; proceeds of bonds.     The proceeds of such bonds shall be used solely for the payment of the cost of the project or projects, and unless otherwise provided in the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or in the trust indenture, additional bonds may in like manner be issued to provide the amount of any deficit, which unless otherwise provided in the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or in the trust indenture shall be deemed to be of the same issue and shall be entitled to payment from the same fund without preference or priority of the bonds first issued for the same purpose. If the proceeds of the bonds of any issue shall exceed the amount required for the purpose for which such bonds are issued, the surplus shall be paid into such funds as may be provided in the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or in the trust indenture. (Ga. L. 1960, p. 2531, § 10) 
Sec. 11. - Revenue bonds; replacement of lost or mutilated bonds.     The Authority may provide for the replacement of any bond which shall become mutilated or be destroyed or lost. (Ga. L. 1960, p. 2531, § 11) 
Sec. 12. - Conditions precedent to issuance of revenue bonds.     Such revenue bonds may be issued without any other proceedings or the happening of any other conditions or things other than those proceedings, conditions and things which are specified or required by this Act. (Ga. L. 1960, p. 2531, § 12) 
Sec. 13. - Credit not pledged.     Revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act shall not be deemed to constitute a debt of the State of Georgia or of Clarke County or of the mayor and council of the City of Athens, but such bonds shall be payable solely from such part of the revenues and earnings of such project or projects as may be designated in the resolution of the Authority authorizing the issuance of such bonds. The issuance of such revenue bonds shall not directly, indirectly or contingently obligate the mayor and council of the City of Athens or Clarke County to levy or to pledge any form of taxation whatever therefor or to make any appropriation for the payment thereof, and all such bonds shall contain recitals on their face covering substantially the foregoing provisions of this section. (Ga. L. 1960, p. 2531, § 13) 
Sec. 14. - Revenue bonds; trust indenture as security.     In the discretion of the Authority, any issue of such revenue bonds may be secured by a trust indenture by and between the Authority and a corporate trustee, which may be any trust company or bank having the powers of a trust company within or outside of the state. Such trust indenture may pledge to assign fees, tolls, rents, revenues and earnings to be received by the Authority, including the proceeds derived from the sale from time to time of any surplus property of the Authority, both real and personal. Either the resolution providing for the issuance of revenue bonds or such trust indenture may contain such provisions for protecting and enforcing the rights and remedies of the bondholders as may be reasonable and proper and not in violation of law, including covenants setting for [sic] the duties of the Authority in relation to the acquisition of property, the construction of the project, the maintenance, operation, repair and insurance of the property, and the custody, safeguarding and application of all monies, including the proceeds derived from the sale of property of the authority, both real and personal, and may also provide than [sic] any project shall be construed and paid for under the supervision and approval of consulting engineers or architects employed or designated by the Authority, and satisfactory to the original purchasers of the bonds issued therefor and may also require that the security given by contractors and by any depository of the proceeds of the bonds or revenues or other monies be satisfactory to such purchasers, and may also contain provisions concerning the conditions, if any, upon which additional revenue bonds pledging all or any part of the revenues and earnings of such project of [sic] projects may be issued. It shall be lawful for any bank or trust company incorporated under the laws of this state to act as such depository and to furnish such indemnifying bonds or pledge such securities as may be required by the Authority. Such indenture may set forth the rights and remedies of the bond holders and of the trustee. In addition to the foregoing, such trust indenture may contain such other provisions as the Authority may deem reasonable and proper for the security of the bond holders. All expenses incurred in carrying out such trust indenture may be treated as a part of the cost of maintenance, operation and repair of the project affected by such indenture. (Ga. L. 1960, p. 2531, § 14) 
Sec. 15. - Revenue bonds; to whom the proceeds of the bonds shall be paid.     The Authority shall, in the resolution providing for the issuance of revenue bonds or in the trust indenture, provide for the payment of the proceeds of the sale of the bonds to any officer or person who or to any agency, bank or trust company which shall act as trustee of such funds and shall hold and apply the same to the purposes hereof, subject to such regulations as this Act and such resolution or trust indenture may provide. (Ga. L. 1960, p. 2531, § 15) 
Sec. 16. - Revenue bonds; sinking fund. (a)  The revenues, fees, tolls and earnings derived from any particular project or projects, regardless of whether or not such fees, earnings and revenues were produced by a particular projects [sic] for which bonds have been issued and any monies derived from the sale of any properties, both real and personal, of the Authority, unless otherwise pledged and allocated, may be pledged and allocated by the Authority to the payment of the principal and interest on revenue bonds of the authority as the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or the trust instrument may provide, and such funds so pledged, from whatever source received, which said pledge may include funds received from one (1) or more or all sources not previously pledged and allocated, shall be set aside at regular intervals as may be provided in the resolution or trust indenture, into a sinking fund which said sinking fund shall be pledged to and charged with the payments of: (1)  The interest upon such revenue bonds as such interest shall fall due; (2)  The principal of the bonds as the same shall fall due; (3)  The necessary charges of paying agent or agents for paying principal and interest; and (4)  Any premium upon bonds retired by call or purchase as in this Act provided. (b)  The use and disposition of such sinking fund shall be subject to such regulations as may be provided in the resolution authorizing the issuance of the revenue bonds or in the trust indenture, but, except as may otherwise be provided in such resolution or trust indenture, such sinking fund shall be a fund for the benefit of all revenue bonds issued pursuant to such resolution or trust instrument without distinction or priority of one (1) over another. Subject to the provisions of the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or in the trust indenture, surplus monies in the sinking fund may be applied to the purchase or redemption of bonds issued pursuant to such resolution or trust indenture and any such bonds so purchased or redeemed shall forthwith be canceled and shall not again be issued. (Ga. L. 1960, p. 2531, § 16) 
Sec. 17. - Revenue bonds; remedies of bond holders. (a)  Any holder of revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act or of any of the coupons appertaining thereto, and the trustee under the trust indenture, if any, except to the extent the rights herein given may be restricted by a resolution of the Authority passed before the issuance of the bonds or by the trust indenture, may, either at law or in equity, by suit, action, mandamus or other proceedings brought in any court of competent jurisdiction[, protect and enforce any and all rights granted under this Act or under such resolution or trust indenture, and may enforce and compel the performance of all duties required by this Act or by such resolution or trust indenture to be performed by the Authority, or any officer thereof, including the fixing, charging and collecting of revenue, fees, tolls and other charges for the use of the facilities and services furnished. (b)  In the event that the Authority shall default in the payment of the principal or interest on any of the revenue bonds after the same shall become due, whether at maturity or upon call for redemption, and such default shall continue for a period of thirty (30) days, or in the event that the Authority or any officer thereof shall fail or refuse to comply in any material respect with any agreement made with the holders of the revenue bonds as embodied in the resolution authorizing the issuance of such revenue bonds or the trust indenture securing the same, any holder of such revenue bonds, and the trustee under the trust indenture, if any, except to the extent that the rights herein given may be restricted by a resolution of the Authority passed before the issuance of the bonds or by the trust indenture, shall have the right to apply in an appropriate judicial proceeding to any court of competent jurisdiction for the appointment of a receiver of the project or projects all or a portion of the revenue from which is pledged to the payment of such revenue bonds. Such right shall exist whether or not such revenue bond holder or such trustee therefor is seeking or has sought to enforce any other right in connection with such revenue bonds. Upon such application the court, if it deems such action necessary for the protection of the bond holders, may appoint, and if the application is made by the holders of twenty-five (25) percent in principal amount of such revenue bonds then outstanding or by a trustee for the holders of such revenue bonds in such principal amount, shall appoint a receiver for such project or projects. The receiver so appointed shall forthwith, directly or by his agents and attorneys, enter into and upon and take possession of the project or projects and each and every part thereof and if the court so directs may exclude the Authority, its commissioners, officers, agents and employees and all persons claiming under them wholly therefrom and shall have, hold, use, operate, manage and control the same and each and every part thereof, and, in the name of the Authority or otherwise, as to the receiver may seem best, shall exercise all the rights and powers of the Authority with respect to such project or projects as the Authority itself might do. Such receiver shall maintain, restore, insure and keep insured such project or projects, and from time to time shall make all such necessary or proper repairs as to such receiver may seem expedient, and shall establish, levy, maintain and collect such fees, tolls, rentals and other charges in connection with such project or projects as to such receiver may seem necessary or proper and reasonable and shall collect all revenues and shall deposit the same in a separate account and shall apply such revenues so collected and received in such manner as the court shall direct. Whenever all that is due upon said revenue bonds, and interest thereon, shall have been paid or deposited as provided in the resolution of the Authority authorizing the issuance of said bonds or in the trust indenture securing the same, and all default [sic] shall have been cured and made good, and it shall appear to the court that no default is eminent [sic, the court shall direct the receiver to surrender possession of such project or projects to the Authority, the same right of the holders of the revenue bonds, or of the trustee of the trust indenture, to secure the appointment of a receiver to exist upon any subsequent default as hereinabove provided. Such receiver shall, in the performance of the powers hereinabove conferred upon him, act under the direction and supervision of the court making such appointment and shall at all times be subject to the orders and decrees of such courts and may be removed thereby. Nothing herein contained shall limit or restrict the jurisdiction of such court to enter such other and further orders and decrees as such court may deem necessary or appropriate for the exercise by the receiver of any of the functions specifically set forth herein. Notwithstanding anything herein contained to the contrary, said receiver shall have no power to sell, assign, mortgage or otherwise dispose of any assets of whatever kind or character belonging to the Authority and useful for such project or projects, but the power of any such receiver shall be limited to the operation and maintenance of such project or projects; and no court shall have jurisdiction to enter any order or decree requiring or permitting such receiver to sell, assign, mortgage or otherwise dispose of any such assets. (Ga. L. 1960, p. 2531, § 17) 
Sec. 18. - Revenue bonds; refunding bonds.     The Authority is hereby authorized to provide by resolution for the issue of revenue refunding bonds of the Authority for the purpose of refunding any revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act and then outstanding, together with accrued interest thereon and any premium required for the payment of such bonds prior to maturity. The issuance of such revenue bonds, the maturities and all the details thereof, the rights of the holders thereof, and the duties of the Authority with respect to the same, shall be governed by the foregoing provisions of this Act insofar as the same may be applicable. (Ga. L. 1960, p. 2531, § 18) 
Sec. 19. - Venue; jurisdiction; service.     The principal office of the authority shall be in Clarke County and the venue of any action against it shall be in Clarke County. Any action pertaining to the validation of any bonds issued under the provisions of this Act and for the validation of any contract entered into by the Authority shall be brought in the superior court of Clarke County, Georgia, and such court shall have exclusive original jurisdiction of such actions. Service upon the authority of any process, subpoena or summons shall be effected by serving the same personally upon any commissioner of the Authority. (Ga. L. 1960, p. 2531, § 19) 
Sec. 20. - Revenue bonds; validation.     Revenue bonds of the Authority shall be confirmed and validated in accordance with the procedure now or hereafter set forth in the Revenue Bond Law (Ga. L. 1957, p. 36 et seq.) amending the law formerly known as the Revenue Certificate Law of 1937 (Ga. L. 1937, p. 761 et seq., as amended) as the same now exists or may hereafter be amended. The petition for validation shall also make a party defendant to such action any municipality, county, Authority, subdivision or instrumentality of the State of Georgia or the United States of America or any department or agency thereof, if subject to be sued, which has contracted with the Authority for the services and facilities of the project for which bonds are to be issued and are sought to be validated; and such municipality, county, Authority, subdivision or instrumentality shall be required to show cause, if any, why such contract or contracts and the terms and conditions thereof should not be inquired into by the court and the validity of the terms thereof be determined and the contract or contracts adjudicated as security for the payment of any such bonds of the Authority. The bonds when validated, and the judgment of validation shall be final and conclusive with respect to the validity of such bonds against the Authority issuing the same; and the validity of the contract or contracts and of the terms and conditions thereof when validated, and the judgment of validation, shall be final and conclusive against the municipality, county, Authority, subdivision or instrumentality of the United States of America contracting with the Authority of [sic] it be a party to the validation proceeding as herein provided for. (Ga. L. 1960, p. 2531, § 20) State Law reference— Revenue Bond Law, OCGA § 36-82-60 et seq. 
Sec. 21. - Interest of bond holders protected.     While any of the bonds issued by the Authority remain outstanding, the powers, duties or existence of said Authority or of its officers, employees or agents shall not be diminished or impaired in any manner that will affect adversely the interest and rights of the holders of such bonds, and no other entity, department, agency or Authority will be created which will compete with the Authority to such an extent as to affect adversely the interest and rights of the holders of such bonds, nor will the state itself so compete with the Authority. The provisions of this section of this Act shall be for the benefit of the Authority and of the holders of any such bonds, and upon the issuance of bonds under the provisions of this Act shall constitute a contract with the holders of such bonds. (Ga. L. 1960, p. 2531, § 21) 
Sec. 22. - Monies received considered trust funds.     All monies received by the Authority pursuant to this Act, whether as proceeds from the sale of revenue bonds, as grants or other contributions, or as revenues, income, fees and earnings, shall be deemed to be trust funds to be held and applied solely as provided in this Act and in such resolutions and trust indentures as may be enacted and entered into by the Authority pursuant to this Act. (Ga. L. 1960, p. 2531, § 22) 
Sec. 23. - Rates, charges and revenues of projects.     The Authority is hereby authorized to prescribe and fix and collect rates, fees, tolls, rents and charges and to revise from time to time and collect such revised rates, fees, tolls, rents and charges for the services, facilities or commodities furnished, including leases, concessions or subleases of its lands or facilities, and to determine the price and terms at and under which its lands or facilities may be sold, and in anticipation of the collections of the revenues and income of such project or projects as may be specified in the resolution of the Authority authorizing the issuance of revenue bonds[, is authorized to issue revenue bonds as in this Act provided to finance, in whole or in part, the cost of the acquisition, construction, reconstruction, improvement, equipment, betterment or extension of its lands and facilities and to pledge to the punctual payment of said bonds and the interest thereon all or any part of the revenues and incomes of such project or projects, including the revenues of improvements or extensions thereto thereafter made or the sale of any of its lands and facilities. (Ga. L. 1960, p. 2531, § 23) 
Sec. 24. - Projects confined to Clarke County.     The Authority shall not be authorized to acquire, construct or extend any project wholly or partially outside the limits of Clarke County as now constituted. (Ga. L. 1960, p. 2531, § 24) 
Sec. 25. - Powers declared supplemental and additional.     This Act does not in any way take away from Clarke County or any municipal corporation located therein any power which may have been heretofore conferred upon it by law, but is supplemental thereto. (Ga. L. 1960, p. 2531, § 25) 
Sec. 26. - Authority without taxing power.     The Authority shall not have the right to impose any tax on any person or property. (Ga. L. 1960, p. 2531, § 26) 
Sec. 27. - Liberal construction of act.     This Act being for the purpose of promoting the health, morals and general welfare of the citizens of the State of Georgia and of Clarke County, shall be liberally construed to effect the purposes hereof. (Ga. L. 1960, p. 2531, § 27) 
Sec. 28. - Effect of partial invalidity of Act.     The provisions of this Act are severable, and if any of its provisions shall be held unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, the decision of such court shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions of this Act. (Ga. L. 1960, p. 2531, § 28) 
Sec. 29. - Repeal.     All laws and parts of laws in conflict herewith are hereby repealed. (Ga. L. 1960, p. 2531, § 29) 
CHAPTER 3. - DOWNTOWN ATHENS DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY Georgia Laws 1975, p. 1698—Downtown Athens Development Authority Sec. 1. [General Assembly authorized to create authority.] Georgia Laws 1977, p. 3533—Downtown Athens Development Authority Created Sec. 1. [Creation; members; appointment; terms.] Sec. 2. [Downtown Athens area defined.] Sec. 3. [General corporate powers.] Sec. 4. [Purpose.] Sec. 5. [Special tax district.] Sec. 6. [Additional powers.] Sec. 7. [No taxes to be levied on certain property.] Sec. 8. [Eminent domain power.] Sec. 9. [Approval of mayor and council required to exercise taxing power, etc.] Sec. 10. [When effective.] Sec. 11. [Repealer.] Georgia Laws 1987, p. 3825—Downtown Athens Development Authority—Local Constitutional Amendment Continued Sec. 1. [Continuance authorized.] Sec. 2. [Passage pursuant to Article XI, Section I.] Sec. 3. [Repealer.] 
GEORGIA LAWS 1975, P. 1698—DOWNTOWN ATHENS DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY 
Sec. 1. - [General Assembly authorized to create authority.]     Article VII, section VII, paragraph I of the constitution is amended by adding at the end thereof the following:     "The General Assembly shall be authorized to create in and for the City of Athens, the Downtown Athens Development Authority for the purpose of the redevelopment of the downtown Athens area. Said Authority shall have the power to employ engineers and planners, to buy, sell and lease real estate, and other property, to contract for the construction, remodeling and altering of buildings, and to contract with the City of Athens for the construction, reconstruction, altering, changing and closing of streets and alleys. The General Assembly shall be authorized to empower the Authority to create special tax districts within the City of Athens, and to submit to the mayor and council of the City of Athens a proposed millage rate not to exceed one (1) mill for taxes on real property within said districts based on values of real property fixed by the tax digest of the City of Athens and upon approval of such rate by the mayor and two-thirds vote of the council of the City of Athens, to have such taxes levied and collected along with ad valorem taxes of the City of Athens, and to use the income therefrom to finance the projects undertaken by such Authority. The Authority shall have the power to issue bonds and/or revenue certificates, and to pledge revenues and taxes collected within said districts as herein provided for the retirement of said indebtedness. No taxes shall be levied by said Authority for any purpose against owner occupied property used exclusively for residential purposes or property used exclusively for school or church purposes. The Authority shall have the right and power of eminent domain for the purpose of acquiring property in carrying out its aims and objectives, subject to the approval of the mayor and two-thirds vote of the council of the City of Athens.     "The General Assembly shall provide for all matters relating to the composition of the members of the Authority, their terms of office and related matters, and the geographical limits within the City of Athens which shall be subject to the provisions of this amendment." (Ga. L. 1975, p. 1698, § 1; Ga. L. 1976, p. 1912, § 1) Editor's note— The constitutional reference in the above section refers to the constitution of 1945. In the constitution of 1976, this section became Art. IX, § VII, para. I. In the constitution of 1983, this section became Art. VII, § VII, para. I. 
GEORGIA LAWS 1977, P. 3533—DOWNTOWN ATHENS DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY CREATED 
Sec. 1. - Creation; members; appointment; terms.     Pursuant to an amendment to the constitution authorizing the creation of a public corporation to be known as the Downtown Athens Development Authority, having been ratified by the electors at the general election in November, 1976, there is hereby created in and for the City of Athens, Clarke County, Georgia, a public corporation to be known as the Downtown Athens Development Authority, to be composed of seven (7) members, two (2) of whom shall be owners of an interest of at least a life estate or greater interest in real estate located in the downtown Athens area as hereinafter [in this chapter] defined, and who are active members of the Athens Downtown Council so long as such council exists, and two (2) of whom shall be merchants operating businesses in the downtown Athens area as hereinafter defined, and who are active members of the Athens Downtown Council, so long as such council exists. Said four (4) members shall be appointed by the mayor and council of the City of Athens. One (1) member shall be the mayor of the City of Athens by virtue of his office, one (1) member shall be the chairman of the board of commissioners of Clarke County, Georgia, by virtue of his office, and one (1) member shall be the president of [the] Athens Area Chamber of Commerce, or its successor, by virtue of his office. The mayor of the City of Athens, the chairman of the board of commissioners of Clarke County, and the president of [the] Athens Area Chamber of Commerce shall serve for the term of their offices. One (1) of the downtown Athens area property owners and one (1) of the merchants shall be appointed for a period of one (1) year and one (1) of each shall be appointed for a period of two (2) years, and thereafter the terms of office for all of said downtown Athens area property owners and merchants shall be two (2) years. All appointed members shall hold office until their successors are appointed and qualified. (Ga. L. 1977, p. 3533, § 1) 
Sec. 2. - Downtown Athens area defined.     The downtown Athens area shall consist of that area in the City of Athens, Clarke County, Georgia, described as follows: Beginning at the intersection of Dougherty Street and Pulaski Street; running thence east on Dougherty Street to College Avenue; running thence north on College Avenue to Hoyt Street; running thence east on Hoyt Street to The Central of Georgia Railroad; running thence south on The Central of Georgia Railroad to Strong Street; running thence east on Strong Street to Foundry Street; running thence south on Foundry Street to Oconee Street; running thence southeast on Oconee Street to The Central of Georgia Railroad; running thence southwest on the Central of Georgia Railroad 150 feet; running thence northwest on a line of 150 feet southwest of and parallel to the southwesterly right-of-way line of Oconee Street to the intersection of South Thomas Street and South Street; running thence west on South Street to South Jackson Street; running thence north on South Jackson Street to East Broad Street; running thence west on East Broad Street to Lumpkin Street; running thence south on Lumpkin Street to Wray Street; running thence west on Wray Street to South Hull Street; running thence north on South Hull Street to a point 200 feet south of the southerly right-of-way line of West Broad Street; running thence west, on a line 200 feet south of and parallel to the southerly right-of-way line of West Broad Street, to the westerly property line of Dr. B.T. Beasley and the City of Athens, said line being located 181 feet east of the easterly right-of-way line of Florida Avenue, measured perpendicular from Florida Avenue; running thence north on said property line to West Broad Street; running thence west on West Broad Street to Newton Street; thence south to Newton Street to the southerly line of the Ramada Inn property; thence westerly along said property line and continuing westerly in the same direction to the easterly side of Finley Street; thence northerly along Finley Street to Reese Street; thence easterly along Reese Street to Pulaski Street; thence northerly along Pulaski Street to the intersection of Pulaski and Dougherty Streets, the beginning point. (Ga. L. 1977, p. 3533, § 2) 
Sec. 3. - General corporate powers.     The Downtown Athens Development Authority shall be a body corporate and politic, having the power to sue and be sued in its own name, to contract, to acquire, own, hold, lease, sell and convey real and personal property, tangible and intangible, to borrow money, pledge and convey property as security therefor and to do all things necessary to the accomplishment of its purposes; and to accept gifts or grants. (Ga. L. 1977, p. 3533, § 3) 
Sec. 4. - Purpose.     The purpose of said Authority shall be the redevelopment of the downtown Athens area, and said Authority shall have the power to employ engineers and planners, and other agents and professional services as it may deem necessary, to contract for the construction, remodeling and altering of buildings, and to contract with the mayor and council of the City of Athens and others for the construction, reconstruction, altering, changing and closing of streets, sidewalks, passageways and alleys. (Ga. L. 1977, p. 3533, § 4) 
Sec. 5. - Special tax district.     The downtown Athens area, as now or hereafter defined, shall constitute a special tax district. The Downtown Athens Development Authority shall have the power to submit for approval to the mayor and council of the City of Athens a proposed millage rate to be collected based on values of real property in the downtown Athens area, (as herein or hereafter defined) fixed from time to time by the tax digest of the City of Athens, such millage rate not to exceed one (1) mill, for the operation of said Authority. Upon approval by the mayor and a two-thirds vote of the council of the City of Athens such taxes shall be levied and collected by the mayor and council for the City of Athens in the same manner as other City of Athens ad valorem taxes are levied and collected but shall be kept in a special fund or funds restricted to the uses for which such taxes were levied and collected. (Ga. L. 1977, p. 3533, § 5) 
Sec. 6. - Additional powers.     The Authority shall have the power: (1)  To buy, acquire, construct, develop, rehabilitate, improve, own, operate, maintain, sell, lease and mortgage land, buildings, parking facilities, malls, arcades, roadways, street lights, sidewalks and property of all kinds and character, including, but not limited to machinery, apparatus, equipment and utilities useful or desirable in connection therewith, within the downtown Athens area which promote the economic improvement and development or redevelopment of the downtown Athens area; (2)  To receive and administer gifts, grants and donations and to administer trusts and to enter into trust indentures; (3)  To grant, loan, sell and lease any of its funds and property to private persons and corporations agreeing to operate, expand, acquire, construct, develop, rehabilitate, improve, own and maintain any commercial or business enterprise or establishment or any dwelling accommodations, cooperative apartments and condominiums within the downtown Athens area, which in the judgment of the governing body of the Authority will be of benefit to the economic improvement and development or redevelopment of said area; (4)  To borrow money and issue notes, obligations and revenue bonds therefor and to sell, convey, mortgage, pledge and assign proceeds of tax levied within the downtown Athens area, and any and all of its funds, revenues, property and income as security for the payment thereof and interest thereon and to secure the repayment of any such money so borrowed by the terms of the resolution authorizing such financing and to enter into a trust indenture relative thereto; (5)  To appoint and employ officers, agents and employees and to provide for their compensation in order to effectuate the purposes of this Act [this chapter]; (6)  To encourage and promote the economic improvement, development, redevelopment and rehabilitation of the downtown Athens area and to make long-range plans therefor in cooperation with the planning developments [sic] of the mayor and council of the City and Clarke County; (7)  To accumulate its funds from such tax levy herein authorized from year to year and to invest and reinvest such funds; (8)  To designate any of its officers to sign and act for the Authority pertaining to the rights, powers and privileges herein conferred; (9)  To do any and all acts and things necessary, convenient or desirable to accomplish the purpose of this Act [this chapter] and the rights, powers and privileges herein conferred; (10)  To contract with the mayor and council of the City of Athens for the collection of any taxes levied pursuant to this Act [this chapter]; (11)  To adopt such bylaws governing the conduct of the affairs of the Authority and to elect such officers as the Authority shall deem necessary; (12)  To exercise all of the powers vested in the Authority by Article IX, section VII, paragraph I of the constitution of the State of Georgia of 1976 and all other necessary and ancillary powers necessary to carry out the provisions of said paragraphs as it pertains to the Downtown Athens Development Authority; (13)  The revenue bonds or other obligations herein authorized to be issued shall not be deemed to constitute a debt of the mayor and council of the City of Athens within the meaning of Article IX, section VII, paragraph I of the constitution, nor a pledge of the faith and credit of said city nor shall the city be subject to any pecuniary liability thereon. The revenue bonds shall not be payable from, nor a charge upon, funds of the city. If given as security for bonds or other obligations, any bondholder or lender shall have the right to compel the Authority and the city to levy the special tax herein provided for within the limit herein prescribed to pay the bonds or other obligations and interest thereon. (14)  The Authority is hereby authorized to issue revenue bonds or other obligations from time to time, to carry out the purposes of this Act [this chapter]. Revenue bonds or other obligations so issued shall be paid solely from the revenues pledged to the payment thereof, which revenues may include any funds derived from the special tax levy provided hereunder. Such revenue bonds or obligations shall be authorized by resolution of the governing body of the Authority, which may be adopted at a regular or special meeting by a majority vote of the members of said governing body. The governing body of the Authority in determining the cost of any undertaking for which revenue bonds or obligations are to be issued may include all costs relative to the issuance thereof, and without intending to limit such costs, may include, architectural, engineering, inspection, fiscal agents' and legal expenses estimated to accrue from the date of any such bonds through the period of construction and for six (6) months after such construction and such bonds or other obligations shall bear such date or dates, mature at such time or times, not exceeding forty (40) years from their respective dates, bear interest at such rate or rates and may be in such denominations and may carry such registration privileges and be subject to redemption and may contain such terms, covenants, assignments and conditions as the resolution authorizing the issuance of such bonds may provide. The Authority is created for nonprofit and public purposes, and it is hereby found, determined and declared that the creation of the Authority and the carrying out of its corporate purposes is in all respects for the benefit of the people of the State of Georgia, that the Authority is an institution of purely public charity and will be performing an essential governmental function in the exercise of the power conferred upon it by this Act [this chapter], and for such reasons, the state covenants with the holders from time to time of the bonds and other obligations issued hereunder that the Authority shall be required to pay no taxes or assessments imposed by the state or any of its counties, municipal corporations, political subdivisions or taxing districts upon any property acquired by the Authority or under its jurisdiction, control, possession or supervision or leased by it to others, or upon its activities in the operation or maintenance of any such property or on any income derived by the Authority in the form of fees, recording fees, rentals, charges, purchase price, installments or otherwise, and that the bonds and other obligations of the Authority, their transfer and the income therefrom shall at all times be exempt from taxation within the State of Georgia. The terms, conditions, covenants and provisions contained in any such resolution authorizing the issuance of such bonds and other obligations shall bind said governing body then in office and its successors thereof, including any covenant to levy taxes within the limits herein prescribed for the purpose of providing such funds as may be necessary to pay the principal of and interest on any such issue or issues of said bonds and other obligations and to create and maintain a reserve for that purpose. Bonds issued by said Authority shall be validated in the superior court of Clarke County in the same manner as revenue bonds of municipalities are validated as provided under the Revenue Bond Law (Ga. L. 1937, p. 761) as amended. There shall be no limitation upon the amount of revenue bonds or other obligations which the Authority may issue. (Ga. L. 1977, p. 3533, § 6; Ga. L. 1980, p. 3053, § 1) Editor's note— In the constitution of 1983, the section referred to in paragraphs (12) and (13) above became Art. IX, § V, paras. I, IV and V. State Law reference— Revenue Bond Law, OCGA § 36-82-60 et seq. 
Sec. 7. - No taxes to be levied on certain property.     No taxes shall be levied for said Authority for any purpose against property occupied by the owner exclusively as a residence or property used exclusively for church and educational purposes. (Ga. L. 1977, p. 3533, § 7) 
Sec. 8. - Eminent domain power.     The Authority shall have the right and power of eminent domain for the purpose of acquiring property for public use in the carrying out of its aims and objectives; provided, however, that no such power shall be exercised as to any specific property until a resolution has been adopted by the Mayor and a two-thirds vote of the Council of the City of Athens approving the condemnation of such property. (Ga. L. 1977, p. 3533, § 8; Ga. L. 19) 
Sec. 9. - Approval of mayor and council required to exercise taxing power, etc.     The power to tax and to issue bonds or revenue certificates shall require the approval of the mayor and a two-thirds vote of the council of the City of Athens as a condition precedent thereto, and with regard to any tax levy recommended to pay any indebtedness evidenced by bonds or revenue certificates issued by the Authority, the approval of the levy shall be mandatory to the extent that the proceeds therefrom are necessary for the payment of current principal and interest requirements and the maintenance of sinking fund requirements therefor. (Ga. L. 1977, p. 3533, § 9) 
Sec. 10. - When effective.     This Act [chapter] shall become effective upon its approval by the Governor, or upon its becoming law without his approval, but the tax levies provided for herein shall be effective beginning January 1, 1978. (Ga. L. 1977, p. 3533, § 10) 
Sec. 11. - Repealer.     All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act [chapter] are hereby repealed. (Ga. L. 1977, p. 3533, § 11) 
GEORGIA LAWS 1987, P. 3825—DOWNTOWN ATHENS DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY—LOCAL CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENT CONTINUED 
Sec. 1. - [Local constitutional amendment continued.]     That constitutional amendment providing for the establishment of a Downtown Athens Development Authority (Res. Act No. 23; H.R. 205-781; Ga. L. 1975, p. 1698, as amended by Res. Act No. 221; H.R. 754-1946; Ga. L. 1976, p. 1912) shall not be repealed or deleted on July 1, 1987, as a part of the Constitution of the State of Georgia but is specifically continued in force and effect on and after that date as a part of the Constitution of the State of Georgia. (Ga. L. 1987, p. 3825, § 1) 
Sec. 2. - [Passage pursuant to Article XI, Section I.]     This Act is passed pursuant to Article XI, Section I, Paragraph IV of the Constitution of the State of Georgia which authorizes the continuation of certain amendments to the Constitution. (Ga. L. 1987, p. 3825, § 2) 
Sec. 3. - [Repealer.]     All laws and parts of laws in conflict with the Act are repealed. (Ga. L. 1987, p. 3825, § 3) 
CHAPTER 4. - CLARKE COUNTY AIRPORT AUTHORITY Georgia Laws 1988, p. 4906—Clarke County Airport Authority—Creation Sec. 1. Creation of authority. Sec. 2. Determination of need for the authority. Sec. 3. Declaration of purposes. Sec. 4. Definitions. Sec. 5. Authority; membership. Sec. 6. Election of officers, quorum, bylaws, procedures, and meetings. Sec. 7. Compensation of members. Sec. 8. Vacancies in authority. Sec. 9. Removal of members. Sec. 10. Executive director, treasurer, and other administrative officers and employees. Sec. 11. Conflicts of interest. Sec. 12. Powers of the authority. Sec. 13. Execution of contracts, leases, and other legal instruments. Sec. 14. Revenue bonds. Sec. 15. Validation of revenue bonds; location of authority. Sec. 4.16. Replacement of lost or mutilated bonds. Sec. 17. Bonds; trust indenture as security. Sec. 18. Revenue bonds; additional powers as to security. Sec. 19. Revenue bonds; interest of bondholders protected. Sec. 20. Revenue bonds; exemption from taxation. Sec. 21. Bonds as legal investments for trustees and as lawful deposits of securities with public officers. Sec. 22. Property of authority deemed to be public property. Sec. 23. Transfer of airports and related facilities from municipalities and counties to authority; public necessity. Sec. 24. Transfer of contracts to authority. Sec. 25. Conveyances and transfers pursuant to Sections 23 and 24 to be accomplished so as to protect interests of bondholders and others affected thereby. Sec. 26. Airports subject to control of authority. Sec. 27. Powers of authority limited to airports. Sec. 28. Funds of authority to be used only for airports. Sec. 29. Fiscal year, budget, and financial reporting. Sec. 30. Immunity from liability. Sec. 31. Taxation of the authority. Sec. 32. Dissolution. Sec. 33. Principal office of authority; service of process. 
GEORGIA LAWS 1988, P. 4906—CLARKE COUNTY AIRPORT AUTHORITY—CREATION 
Sec. 1. - Creation of authority.     There is created the Clarke County Airport Authority which is hereinafter referred to in this Act as the "authority." The authority created shall be an instrumentality and political subdivision of the State of Georgia and a public corporation. The authority may contract and be contracted with, sue and be sued, plead and be impleaded, and complain and defend in all courts of law and equity only as hereinafter set out. The authority may exercise the powers set out in this Act at any place within Clarke County and any contiguous land outside the county which is used for airport purposes as provided in this Act. (Ga. L. 1988, p. 4906, § 1) 
Sec. 2. - Determination of need for the authority.     It is determined and declared that the present and projected rapid growth in commercial and private air traffic in the Clarke County area, the need for adequate airports to serve safely and efficiently the air transportation needs of the state, Clarke County, and the metropolitan areas in Clarke County, the need to eliminate airport hazards, the need to raise large amounts of capital for the establishment, operation, and maintenance of present and future airports, and the need to coordinate the operation of various airports within certain metropolitan areas of the state necessitates the creation of an airport authority for the present and future operation of Clarke County's airport facilities and aviation business. It is further determined and declared that the establishment of such authority is necessary and essential to ensure the welfare, safety, and convenience of citizens of the entire state and to ensure the proper economic development of the entire state. (Ga. L. 1988, p. 4906, § 2) 
Sec. 3. - Declaration of purposes.     The purposes and objectives of this Act and the authority created hereunder shall be to meet the needs and requirements recognized in Section 2 of this Act through the establishment, maintenance, and operation of unified and coordinated airport systems in the Clarke County area, to ensure the orderly and proper use and growth of public airports; to ensure that the maximum public benefit is obtained from any public airports presently in existence and from any future airports; to ensure proper planning and establishment of airports needed in the future; to ensure the maximum participation of this state in national and international programs of air transportation; to promote public transportation and commerce; and all of this to the end of providing the most effective and economical use of public airports for the public welfare, safety, and convenience. (Ga. L. 1988, p. 4906, § 3) 
Sec. 4. - Definitions.     As used in this Act, unless the context in which they are used required otherwise, the following terms shall have the following meanings: (1)  The term "airport" means: (A)  Any area of land or water or any structure which is or has been used, or which the authority may plan to use, for the landing and taking off of commercial, private, and military aircraft, including helicopters; and all buildings, equipment, facilities, or other property and improvements of any kind or nature located within the bounds of any such land or water area or structure; (B)  Facilities of any type for the accommodation of passengers, maintenance, servicing, and operation of aircraft, business offices and facilities of private businesses and governmental agencies, parking of automobiles, and all other activities which are or have been carried on or which may be necessary or convenient in conjunction with the landing and taking off of commercial, private, and military aircraft; and (C)  All buildings, equipment, facilities, and other property and improvements of any kind or nature located outside the bounds of any such land or water area or structure which is or has been used or which the authority plans to use for the landing and taking off of commercial, private, and military aircraft which are necessary for the safe operation of aircraft, including without limitation, aviation easements and other real or personal property. (2)  The term "airport hazard" means any structure, terrain, or object of natural growth, or use thereof, which obstructs the airspace required for the flight, landing, or taking off of aircraft to or from an airport, or any other thing that is hazardous to the flight, landing, or taking off of aircraft to or from an airport. (3)  The term "county" means Clarke County. (Ga. L. 1988, p. 4906, § 4) 
Sec. 5. - Authority; membership. (a)  The authority shall be composed of six (6) members who shall be residents and qualified voters of Clarke County. At least one of the six (6) members shall reside within five (5) miles of the airport. Except for the initial term, which shall begin immediately upon the effective date of this amendment, the term of office of each member shall begin on the first day of July of each year beginning in the year 1989. All members of the authority shall be appointed by the governing authority of Clarke County for a term of four (4) years and until their qualified successors are duly appointed. Two (2) members of said authority shall initially be appointed for a term of one year. One member of said authority shall initially be appointed for a term of two (2) years. One member of said authority shall initially be appointed for a term of three (3) years. The remaining two (2) members of said authority shall be appointed for a term of four (4) years. Thereafter, each member shall serve for a term of four (4) years. All members of the said authority shall serve without compensation. Any members of the said authority otherwise qualified shall be eligible for reappointment unless such member has served for two (2) consecutive four-year terms in which case said member shall not be eligible for reappointment until after a period of one year's absence from authority membership. (b)  The county administrator of Clarke County, Georgia, shall serve as a nonvoting ex-officio member of the authority for the purpose of assisting in the coordination of activities between the authority and the Board of Commissioners of Clarke County. (c)  The policy pertaining to minority business participation applicable to the Board of Commissioners and departments of Clarke County shall also be applicable in like force and effect to the members and employees of the authority. (Ga. L. 1988, p. 4906, § 5; Ga. L. 1989, p. 5111) 
Sec. 6. - Election of officers, quorum, bylaws, procedures, and meetings.     After the appointment of all members, the full membership of the authority shall meet as soon as practicable and shall elect one of its members as chairman and one as vice-chairman, each of whom shall serve in such position until the first meeting in January of the succeeding year and until his successor is elected. Thereafter, a chairman and a vice-chairman shall be elected in the same manner in January of each year to serve for the succeeding year and until their successors are elected. The chairman shall preside at meetings of the authority and the vice-chairman shall preside in his absence, and they shall have such other powers, duties, and responsibilities as are set out elsewhere in this Act and in the bylaws of the authority. The authority shall also designate a secretary to keep the minutes and records of the authority. Four (4) members of the authority shall constitute a quorum for the purpose of transacting business, nevertheless, at least four (4) affirmative votes of the membership shall be required for the approval of any matter or the exercise of any of the powers of the authority. The authority shall, as soon as practicable, adopt its own bylaws, rules of procedure, and rules of conduct of its business. The authority shall meet at least once a month and at such other times as it may deem necessary. (Ga. L. 1988, p. 4906, § 6) 
Sec. 7. - Compensation of members.     The members shall receive no compensation but shall be reimbursed from the funds of the authority for reasonable and necessary expenses incurred in pursuing the business of the authority. (Ga. L. 1988, p. 4906, § 7) 
Sec. 8. - Vacancies in authority.     Should an appointed member vacate his office either by resignation, death, change of residence, or removal as provided in Section 9 of this Act or for any other reason, the governing authority of the county shall, as soon as practicable, appoint another qualified person to serve as a member of the authority for the unexpired term. (Ga. L. 1988, p. 4906, § 8) 
Sec. 9. - Removal of members.     Any member may be removed from office for good cause affecting his ability to perform his duties as a member, for misfeasance, malfeasance, or nonfeasance in office, or for violating the conflict of interests provisions of this Act, by vote of three (3) of the other members, but only after a public hearing at which such member is given the right to present evidence in his own behalf and only upon a finding by three (3) of the other members that good cause for removal affecting the member's ability to perform his duties as a member exists, that he was guilty of misfeasance, malfeasance, or nonfeasance in office, or that he violated the conflict of interest provisions of this Act. Any member who fails to attend three (3) consecutive regular meetings of the authority shall automatically by reason of such fact cease to be a member of the authority. However, such person shall be eligible for reappointment to the authority upon a showing of good cause for failure to attend such meetings. (Ga. L. 1988, p. 4906, § 9) 
Sec. 10. - Executive director, treasurer, and other administrative officers and employees.     The authority may appoint and fix the compensation of an executive director, under such terms and conditions as it deems appropriate. The executive director shall be the chief executive and operating officer of the authority. Under the supervision of the authority, the executive director shall be responsible for the operation, management, and promotion of all activities with which the authority is charged under this Act, together with such other duties as may be prescribed by the authority. The executive director shall have such powers as are necessarily incident to the performance of the duties of the office and such others as may be granted by the authority. Additionally, the authority may in a like manner appoint and fix the compensation of a treasurer who shall have custody of all moneys, funds, notes, bonds, and other securities as the authority may prescribe. The authority may also authorize and employ such other administrative officers and employees under such terms and conditions as it shall consider necessary and appropriate to effectuate its purposes under this Act. The county administrator of Clarke County, or the designee of the county administrator, shall be authorized to serve as a purchasing agent or officer for the authority for supplies, materials, equipment, or other items of property on such terms as deemed appropriate by the authority and the Board of Commissioners of Clarke County, Georgia. (Ga. L. 1988, p. 4906, § 10) 
Sec. 11. - Conflicts of interest.     No member of the authority or officer or employee thereof shall have a financial interest, direct or indirect, in any contract with the authority, or be financially interested, directly or indirectly, in the sale to the authority of any lands, material, supplies, or services, except on behalf of the authority as a member, officer, or employee thereof. Any violation of this provision by a member of this authority shall be grounds for removal pursuant to Section 9 of this Act. Any violation of this provision by the executive director or any officer or employee of the authority shall be grounds for removal by the authority. (Ga. L. 1988, p. 4906, § 11) 
Sec. 12. - Powers of the authority. (a)  The authority shall possess, subject to the conditions and limitations set out elsewhere in this Act, all the powers necessary or convenient for it to accomplish the purposes of this Act, including the following specific powers, which shall not be construed as a limitation upon the general or other specific powers conferred in this Act: (1)  To adopt a seal to be used for the authentication of legal documents, obligations, contracts, and other instruments and to alter same at its pleasure; (2)  To acquire by purchase, lease, gift, or otherwise and to hold, lease, sell, use, and dispose of real and personal property of every kind and character or any interest therein; (3)  To request the county to exercise the power of eminent domain to acquire any private real property or any rights or interests therein including any easements, as necessary or convenient for the accomplishment of the purposes of this Act, including the elimination of airport hazards, in accordance with the provisions of any and all existing laws applicable to the exercise of such power and to pay for such acquisition with its own funds; (4)  To appoint, select, and contract for the services of engineers, architects, building contractors, accountants and other fiscal agents, attorneys, and such other persons, firms, or corporations as are necessary to accomplish the purposes of this Act, for such fees or compensation and under such terms and conditions as it deems appropriate; (5)  To plan, acquire, establish, develop, construct, enlarge, improve, maintain, equip, and lease all airports which shall come under its control under the provisions of this Act or which it may acquire or plan to acquire; to regulate, protect, and police such airports and all related activities and facilities; to enter into any contracts, leases, or other agreements, promulgate any orders, set any tolls, fees, or other charges for the use of its property or services and collect and use same as necessary to operate the airports under its control and to accomplish any purposes of this Act; and to make any purchases or sales necessary for such purposes; (6)  To contract with any persons, firms, or public or private corporations to supply goods, commodities, facilities, and services to the public, employees of the authority, and employees of air carriers and other commercial interests located at any airport under its control under such terms and conditions as it may prescribe including, if desirable, exclusive rights, franchises, or concessions; (7)  To adopt and enforce reasonable rules and regulations for the orderly, safe, efficient, and sanitary operation of airports and related facilities under its control; to provide its own security force and peace officers with powers of arrest or to arrange for such security force or peace officers in connection with the county; and to prescribe reasonable penalties for the breach of any rule or regulation. All such rules, regulations, or orders shall become effective upon approval by the authority and after publication of a notice containing a substantive statement of the rules and regulations and the penalties for violation thereof in a newspaper of general circulation of all counties in which such rules and regulations are to be applied. The notice shall state that the breach of any such rule or regulation will subject the violator to a penalty, shall state the penalty, and shall state that the full text of all rules and regulations shall be maintained in the principal office of the authority where same will be open to public inspection and perusal. All rules and regulations shall in fact be so maintained. Said rules and regulations, when promulgated as provided herein shall be judicially recognized by and enforceable in the court having jurisdiction over the offense and located in the county in which the violation occurs; (8)  To provide its own fire and emergency medical protection and crash and rescue services or to arrange for such services in connection with any federal, state, municipal, or county agency or any private firm in the business of providing such services; (9)  To make application directly or indirectly to any federal, state, county, or municipal government or agency or to any other source, public or private, for loans, grants, guarantees, or other financial assistance in aid of airports under its control and to accept and use same upon such terms and conditions as are prescribed by the federal, state, county, or municipal government or agency or other source; (10)  To enter into agreements with the state, any subdivision thereof, or any county or municipality or the federal government or any agency thereof to use in the performance of its functions the facilities or the services of the state or such subdivision or such county or municipality or the federal government or any agency thereof in order to accomplish the purposes of this Act; (11)  To borrow money to accomplish its purposes and execute evidences of indebtedness therefor and secure such indebtedness in such manner as the authority may provide by its resolution authorizing such indebtedness to be incurred; provided that the authority shall not pledge to the payment of such indebtedness revenue pledged to the payment of any other indebtedness then outstanding or encumber property in violation of the terms of any existing contract, agreement, or trust indenture securing existing indebtedness; (12)  To issue negotiable bonds, including revenue and refunding bonds, under such terms and conditions as it deems appropriate and to provide for the payment of same and for the rights of the holders therefor; (13)  To sell, lease, or otherwise dispose of surplus personal property and to sell, lease, or otherwise dispose of land and any improvements thereon owned by the authority which the authority may determine is no longer required to accomplish the purposes of this Act, including property which is suitable for industrial development. Any such property shall be sold, leased, or otherwise disposed of pursuant to the same procedures and requirements as provided for by state law for the sale or disposal of county-owned property. The proceeds of any such sale may be used by the authority to accomplish any of the purposes of this Act; (14)  To determine what usage may be made of airports and to determine what classes of aircraft may use particular airports in order to derive the maximum public benefit from all airports; (15)  To exercise each and every power that any county could exercise, under laws existing at the time this Act becomes law, over airports owned or operated by any county; (16)  To enter into contracts, leases, or other agreements with federally certificated air carriers, other commercial air carriers, and other commercial users of its airports for the use of such airports under such terms and conditions as it deems appropriate and for such charges, rentals, and fees as it deems appropriate; (17)  To enter into such agreement with any municipality or the county presently operating airports of which the authority may subsequently assume control with respect to the manner of transfer of airport employees from any municipality or the county to the authority as the authority deems necessary and appropriate, or to contract with such governmental agency for the continued services of such officers and employees on such terms as are deemed to be appropriate; (18)  To establish a plan of civil service for officers and employees of the authority or to provide by resolution that such officers and employees of the authority shall be covered under any state, county, or municipal civil service plan which is available to such employees under the laws of the state or any county or municipality; and (19)  To establish a plan for retirement, disability, hospitalization, and death benefits for officers and employees of the authority or to provide by resolution that such officers and employees shall be covered under any state, county, or municipal plan available to them under the laws of the state or any county or municipality. (b)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act to the contrary, the authority shall not: (1)  Own or maintain aircraft or perform maintenance on aircraft owned by others; (2)  Engage in flight instruction, flight charter, or other aircraft for hire business; or (3)  Perform maintenance on radios, propellers, or other aircraft accessories. (Ga. L. 1988, p. 4906, § 12) 
Sec. 13. - Execution of contracts, leases, and other legal instruments.     Any and all contracts, leases, obligations, agreements, and other legal instruments of the authority shall be approved by resolution of the authority and shall be executed by those individuals designated in such resolution or, in the absence of such designation, by the chairman or vice-chairman. Nothing in this provision shall prohibit general resolutions authorizing the executive director or other officers, agents, or employees to execute such contracts, leases, or other legal documents as the authority may prescribe. (Ga. L. 1988, p. 4906, § 13) 
Sec. 14. - Revenue bonds.     The authority shall have the power and is authorized, at one time or from time to time as it deems necessary to accomplish the purpose of this Act, to issue revenue bonds pursuant to the "Revenue Bond Law," Article 3 of Chapter 82 of Title 36 of the O.C.G.A. The authority is determined to be a "governmental body" within the meaning of that law and is authorized to utilize any and all procedures set out herein, and to exercise any and all powers of a "governmental body" thereunder. The members of the authority shall constitute the "governing body" as that term is used therein. Nothing in this section shall be construed so as to limit the power of the authority to issue any bonds other than under the "Revenue Bond Law" which it may legally issue pursuant to Section 12 of this Act. (Ga. L. 1988, p. 4906, § 14) 
Sec. 15. - Validation of revenue bonds; location of authority.     For purposes of validation of bonds under the "Revenue Bond Law," Article 3 of Chapter 82 of Title 36 of the O.C.G.A., the authority shall be considered to be located in Clarke County. (Ga. L. 1988, p. 4906, § 15) 
Sec. 16. - Replacement of lost or mutilated bonds.     The authority may provide for the replacement of any bonds issued by it which shall be mutilated or destroyed. (Ga. L. 1988, p. 4906, § 16) 
Sec. 17. - Bonds; trust indenture as security. (a)  In the discretion of the authority, any issue of bonds pursuant to this Act may be secured by a trust indenture by and between the authority and a corporate trustee, which may be any trust company or bank having the powers of a trust company inside or outside the state. Such trust indenture may pledge or assign fees, tolls, revenues, and earnings to be received by the authority, including the proceeds derived from the sale from time to time of any surplus real or personal property of the authority. The resolution providing for the issuance of such bonds or the trust indenture may contain such provisions for protecting and enforcing the rights and remedies of the bondholders as may be reasonable and proper and not in violation of law, including covenants setting forth the duties of the authority in relation to the acquisition of property; the construction of airports; the maintenance, operation, repair, and insurance of property; and the custody, safeguarding, and application of all moneys of the authority. Such resolution or trust indenture may also: (1)  Provide that any project shall be construed and paid for under the supervision and approval of consulting engineers or architects satisfactory to the trustee or to the bondholders; (2)  Require that the security given by any contracts and by any depository of the proceeds of the bonds or revenues or other moneys be satisfactory to such trustee or bondholders; or (3)  Contain provisions concerning the conditions, if any, upon which additional revenue bonds may be issued. (b)  It shall be lawful for any bank or trust company incorporated under the laws of this state to act as such depository and to furnish such security as may be required by the authority. Such resolution or trust indenture may set forth rights and remedies of the bondholders and of the trustee and may restrict the individual right of action of bondholders as is customary in trust indentures securing bonds and debentures of corporations. In addition to the foregoing, such resolution or trust indenture may contain such other provisions as the authority may deem reasonable and proper for the security of the bondholders. All expenses incurred in connection with any such trust indenture may be treated as operating expenses of the authority. (Ga. L. 1988, p. 4906, § 17) 
Sec. 18. - Revenue bonds; additional powers as to security.     In addition to other powers granted in this Act as to the issuance of revenue bonds and security for such bonds, the authority shall have the power to enter into any financial and contractual arrangements with users of its airports, including commercial air carriers, which it deems appropriate in order to provide security to bondholders; and for such purposes the authority may also enter into joint agreements, arrangements, or trust indentures with such users and a trustee or trustees under any trust indenture authorized under Section 17 of this Act in order that funds may be procured to accomplish the purposes of this Act at the least possible cost to the authority. (Ga. L. 1988, p. 4906, § 18) 
Sec. 19. - Revenue bonds; interest of bondholders protected.     While any of the bonds issued by the authority remain outstanding, the powers, duties, or existence of the authority or of its officers, employees, or agents shall not be diminished or impaired in any manner that will adversely affect the interests and rights of the holders of such bonds; and no other entity, department, agency, or authority will be created which will compete with the authority to such an extent as to adversely affect the interests and rights of the holders of such bonds. (Ga. L. 1988, p. 4906, § 19) 
Sec. 20. - Revenue bonds; exemption from taxation.     All revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act are declared to be issued for an essential public and governmental purpose and the said bonds and the income therefrom shall be exempt from all taxation within the state. (Ga. L. 1988, p. 4906, § 20) 
Sec. 21. - Bonds as legal investments for trustees and as lawful deposits of securities with public officers.     Any bonds issued by the authority under the provisions of this Act are made securities in which public officers and bodies of this state, all municipalities, all municipal subdivisions, all insurance companies and associations and other persons carrying on an insurance business, all banks, bankers, trust companies, savings banks, savings associations, investment companies and other persons carrying on a banking business, all administrators, guardians, executors, trustees and other fiduciaries, and all other persons who are now or may hereafter be authorized to invest in bonds or other obligations of the state may properly and legally invest funds including capital in their control or belonging to them. The bonds are also made securities which may be deposited with and shall be received by all public officers and bodies of this state and all municipalities and municipal subdivisions for any purpose for which the deposit of the bonds or other obligations of this state is now or may hereafter be authorized. (Ga. L. 1988, p. 4906, § 21) 
Sec. 22. - Property of authority deemed to be public property.     It is declared that all property of the authority, held pursuant to the terms of this Act, whether real or personal, tangible or intangible, and of any kind or nature, and any income or revenue therefrom, is held for an essential public and governmental purpose, and all such property is deemed to be public property. (Ga. L. 1988, p. 4906, § 22) 
Sec. 23. - Transfer of airports and related facilities from municipalities and counties to authority; public necessity.     The authority may by resolution, at such times as it shall deem appropriate, determine what public airports within its territorial jurisdiction, as set out in Section 1 of this Act, are necessary to accomplish the purposes of this Act, and may inform the local government owning such airports of such determinations and the proper officials or officers of the local government may convey by deed all of their interest in real property and any other property making up such airports to the authority for a nominal consideration. It is declared that the conveyance of such property is necessary and essential in order to accomplish the purposes of this Act so as to secure the public welfare, safety, and convenience. (Ga. L. 1988, p. 4906, § 23) 
Sec. 24. - Transfer of contracts to authority.     Upon conveyance of airports to the authority pursuant to Section 23 of this Act, all contracts, commitments, leases and other obligations of the local government formerly owning the airport in respect to such airport shall be transferred to the authority; and the authority shall stand in the place of the local government for the purposes of such contracts, commitments, leases or other obligations, subject to the provisions of Section 25 of this Act. (Ga. L. 1988, p. 4906, § 24) 
Sec. 25. - Conveyances and transfers pursuant to Sections 23 and 24 to be accomplished so as to protect interests of bondholders and others affected thereby.     The conveyance of airports and related facilities by local governments to the authority pursuant to Section 23 of this Act, and the transfer of contracts, commitments, leases, and any other obligations to the authority from any local government pursuant to Section 24 of this Act shall be accomplished under such terms and conditions as may be necessary to protect the interests of bondholders of any local government affected by such conveyances and transfers and other parties affected thereby. Transfers may be conditioned so as to protect such interests; and the authority and any local government may enter into any agreements with each other or other parties necessary to protect such interests. (Ga. L. 1988, p. 4906, § 25) 
Sec. 26. - Airports subject to control of authority.     All airports acquired by the authority pursuant to this Act or acquired by the authority in any legal manner and any other property held by the authority shall be under the control of the authority and the authority shall have the right to exercise any and all of the powers set out in this Act in regard thereto. (Ga. L. 1988, p. 4906, § 26) 
Sec. 27. - Powers of authority limited to airports.     All of the powers, general and specific, granted to the authority pursuant to this Act shall be exercised only in regard to airports. The authority shall not have the power to plan, construct, finance, operate, or maintain any facilities other than airports and related facilities. However, nothing in this Act shall be construed to prohibit the authority from cooperating with other federal, state, county, or municipal governmental agencies or public corporations in order to coordinate other types of facilities with airports under its control or purchasing, selling, exchanging, or otherwise acquiring any property from or with same. (Ga. L. 1988, p. 4906, § 27) 
Sec. 28. - Funds of authority to be used only for airports.     The funds of the authority, from whatever source derived, shall be used only in support of airports as defined in Section 4 of this Act, but nothing in this section shall prohibit the authority from making any and all expenditures of any kind or nature necessary to support airports. (Ga. L. 1988, p. 4906, § 28) 
Sec. 29. - Fiscal year, budget, and financial reporting.     The authority shall operate on the same fiscal year as is used by the governing authority of Clarke County, Georgia, and at the end of each fiscal year the authority shall furnish to the governing authority of Clarke County, Georgia, an audit of its operations for the preceding year, or in the alternative, the authority may contract with the governing authority of Clarke County to have the required audit report of its operations prepared by the accounting firm employed by the county for the preparation of the county's annual audit. The annual audit of the authority shall constitute public information. (Ga. L. 1988, p. 4906, § 29) 
Sec. 30. - Immunity from liability.     The authority shall have the same immunity and exemption from liability from torts and negligent acts as the governing authority of Clarke County; and the members, officers, agents, and employees of the authority in performance of the work of the authority shall have the same immunity and exemption from liability from torts and negligent acts as the officers, agents, and employees of the State of Georgia when in performance of their public duties or work of the state. The authority may be sued in the same manner as private corporations on any contractual obligations of the authority. (Ga. L. 1988, p. 4906, § 30) 
Sec. 31. - Taxation of the authority.     The property, obligations, and interest on the obligations of the authority shall have the same immunity from taxation as the property, obligations, and interest on the obligations of Clarke County. The exemption from taxation herein provided shall not extend to tenants or lessees of the authority. (Ga. L. 1988, p. 4906, § 31) 
Sec. 32. - Dissolution.     In the event of dissolution of the authority, all property, real and personal, tangible and intangible, shall revert to, and be the property of the county, subject, however, to all rights and encumbrances thereon; and the county, by acceptance thereof, shall fulfill all obligations of the authority. (Ga. L. 1988, p. 4906, § 32) 
Sec. 33. - Principal office of authority; service of process.     The principal office of the authority shall be in Clarke County. Service of process on the authority may be had upon the executive director or other officers of the authority as in the case of private corporations incorporated or domesticated under the laws of this state. (Ga. L. 1988, p. 4906, § 33) 
CHAPTER 5. - CLASSIC CENTER AUTHORITY FOR CLARKE COUNTY Georgia Laws 1988, p. 3799—Classic Center Authority for Clarke County—Creation Sec. 1. Creation; purpose. Sec. 2. Members. Sec. 3. Public property. Sec. 4. Powers. Sec. 5. Power under revenue bond law. Sec. 6. Credit not pledged. Sec. 7. Legal investments. Sec. 8. Contracts for use of projects. Sec. 9. Revenue bonds. Sec. 10. Rental revenue. Sec. 11. Sinking fund. Sec. 12. Form of bonds. Sec. 13. Trust agreement. Sec. 14. Venue of actions; jurisdiction. Sec. 15. Validation of bonds. Sec. 16. Irrevocable contract. Sec. 17. Trust funds. Sec. 18. Construction. Sec. 19. Powers declared supplementary. Sec. 20. Severability. Sec. 21. Effective date. Sec. 22. Repealer. 
GEORGIA LAWS 1988, P. 3799—CLASSIC CENTER AUTHORITY FOR CLARKE COUNTY—CREATION 
Sec. 1. - Creation; purpose. (a)  There is created a body corporate and politic to be known as the Classic Center Authority for Clarke County, which shall be deemed to be a political subdivision of the State of Georgia and a public corporation and by that name, style, and title said body may contract and be contracted with, sue and be sued, implead and be impleaded, and complain and defend in all courts of law and equity. The authority shall have perpetual existence. (b)  The purpose of the authority shall be for the development and promotion in Clarke County and in this state of public projects for the cultural growth, public welfare, education, and recreation of the people of Clarke County and of this state, including the acquisition and construction of a building or buildings and related facilities, which shall be declared to be public buildings and structures, to be used for amusement, recreational, civil, cultural, parking, and educational purposes or a combination thereof, including fairs, expositions, exhibits, conventions, conferences, public meetings or gatherings, concerts, theaters, and for such other activities as are designed and intended to promote tourism and the arts, and for the purchase of land, easements, rights in land, and franchises for the construction of such facility or facilities and for use in connection therewith and any funds realized by said authority shall be expended for such purpose. (Ga. L. 1988, p. 3799, § 1) 
Sec. 2. - Members. (a)  The authority shall consist of five (5) members who shall be appointed by the governing authority of Clarke County, Georgia. No elected official of any government or government agency shall be eligible to serve on said authority. The initial members shall be appointed for the following terms: one member for a term of two (2) years; two (2) members for terms of three (3) years; and two (2) members for terms of four (4) years. Thereafter, all appointments shall be for terms of four (4) years, except that the appointment of any person to fill any unexpired term shall be only for the remainder of such term. In no event shall any member serve for more than eight (8) consecutive years. (b)  The members of the authority shall organize and enter upon the performance of their duties immediately after the effective date of this Act. The authority shall elect one of its members as chairman and one as vice chairman and shall elect a secretary-treasurer, who may or may not hold membership on the authority; however, if such secretary-treasurer is not a regularly appointed member of the authority, said position shall be ex officio. The officers shall serve for such terms as shall be prescribed by the rules of the authority or until their successors are elected and qualified. (c)  Three (3) members of the authority shall constitute a quorum, and no vacancy on the authority shall impair the right of the quorum to exercise all the rights and perform all the duties of the authority at every meeting, but in every instance the affirmative vote of at least three (3) members of the authority shall be required to authorize any legal act of the authority, including all things necessary to authorize and issue revenue bonds as provided for in this Act. (d)  The members of the authority shall not be entitled to compensation for their services but shall be reimbursed by the authority for their actual expenses properly incurred in the performance of their duties. The authority shall make rules and regulations for its own government and may employ professional staff and technical supervisors, assistants, and experts and any other agents and employees, temporary or permanent, it shall deem necessary and it shall establish the policies, rules, and regulations for the operations of its facilities as it may require. The members of the authority shall be accountable in all respects as trustees, and the authority shall keep suitable books and records of all its obligations, contracts, transactions, and undertakings and all income and receipts of every nature and of all expenditures of every kind. The financial books and records of the authority shall be audited annually by the same auditor employed to audit the books and records of the Clarke County government and said audit shall be paid for by the authority and copies shall be furnished to the Board of Commissioners of Clarke County. Said audit shall be public record. (e)  The code of ethics applicable to the employees of the Board of Commissioners of Clarke County shall also be applicable in like force and effect to the members and employees of the authority. (f)  The policy pertaining to minority business participation applicable to the Board of Commissioners and departments of Clarke County shall also be applicable in like force and effect to the members and employees of the authority. (Ga. L. 1988, p. 3799, § 2; Ga. L. 1989, p. 4867, § 1) 
Sec. 3. - Public property.     It is found, determined, and declared that the creation of the authority and the carrying out of its corporate purposes are in all respects for the benefit of the people of Clarke County and of this state and that the authority is an institution of purely public charity and that all property of said authority is and shall in all respects be considered to be public property and title to such property shall be held by the authority only for the benefit of the public, and the use of such property pursuant to the terms of this Act shall be and is declared to be for public and governmental purposes. The authority is granted the same exemptions and exclusions from taxes as are now granted to cities and counties for the operation of public facilities. Should the authority ever be dissolved for any reason, the total of real property and other assets held by the authority shall revert to the Board of Commissioners of Clarke County. (Ga. L. 1988, p. 3799, § 3) 
Sec. 4. - Powers.     The authority shall have all the powers necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purposes and provisions of this Act, including, but not limited to, the following powers: (1)  To adopt and alter a corporate seal; (2)  To acquire in its own name by purchase, on such terms and conditions and in such manner as it may deem proper, real property or rights of easements therein or franchises and personal property necessary or convenient for its corporate purposes and to use, lease, and dispose of real and personal property in any manner it deems to be to the best advantage of the authority and the purposes thereof. Title to such property, however, shall be held by the authority only for the benefit of the public; (3)  To accept, receive, and administer gifts, grants, loans, appropriations, and donations of money, materials, and property of any kind, including loans and grants from the United States or the State of Georgia or any agency, department, authority, or instrumentality of either upon such terms and conditions as the United States, the State of Georgia, or such agency, department, authority, or instrumentality shall impose; to administer trusts; and to sell, lease, transfer, convey, appropriate, pledge, mortgage, or encumber all of its property and assets; provided, however, that the sale, transfer, encumbrance, or conveyance of real property shall require the prior approval of the Board of Commissioners of Clarke County; (4)  To borrow money for any of its corporate purposes and, with the prior approval of the governing authority of Clarke County, to issue revenue bonds payable from the earnings of the projects of the authority; to execute trust agreements or indentures; and to sell, convey, mortgage, pledge, encumber, and assign any and all of its funds, assets, property, and income as security for the payment of such revenue bonds and to provide for the payment of the same and for the rights of the holders thereof; and to provide for foreclosure or forced sale of any property of the authority upon default either in payment of principal or of conditions pursuant to which such obligations were issued; (5)  To contract with the State of Georgia and the agencies, instrumentalities, departments, and political subdivisions thereof and with private persons and corporations in such manner as the legitimate and necessary purposes of this Act shall authorize or require, including contracts for construction and leasing, as lessor or as lessee, or projects which it causes to be erected or acquired; (6)  To construct, reconstruct, acquire, equip, own, alter, repair, maintain, add to, extend, improve, operate, and manage public projects, including the erection of a building or buildings in Clarke County, Georgia, which shall be and are declared to be public buildings, to be used for amusement, recreation, civic, cultural, and educational purposes or a combination thereof, including fairs, expositions, concerts, theater, and such other activities as are designed and intended to promote education, culture, and tourism; and to purchase lands, easements, rights in land, and franchises for the construction of such facility or facilities and for use in connection therewith, the cost of any such project to be paid in whole or in part from the proceeds of the sale of revenue bonds of the authority, as provided for in this Act, and the title to such property to be held by the authority only for the benefit of the public; (7)  With the prior approval of the governing authority of Clarke County, Georgia, to issue revenue bonds as authorized, defined, and provided for in this Act and in Article 3, Chapter 82, Title 36 of the O.C.G.A., known as the "Revenue Bond Law," in order to finance in whole or in part the cost of the acquisition, construction, reconstruction, improvement, equipment, addition to, or extension of any such project, which bonds may be issued in coupon or registered form, or both, as the authority may determine and provision may be made for the registration of any coupon bond as to the principal alone and also as to both the principal and interest; (8)  With the prior approval of the governing authority of Clarke County, Georgia, to issue revenue bonds; to call, refund, or refinance in whole or in part all outstanding revenue bonds secured by the anticipated revenue of such project; and to include in the amount of such refunding bonds all interest and any call premium that may be required for the redemption and refunding of such outstanding bonds; (9)  To do any and all things necessary or proper for the accomplishment of the objectives of this Act and any amendments hereto and to exercise any power usually possessed by private corporations performing similar functions which is not in conflict with the Constitution and laws of this state; and (10)  To invest any accumulation of its funds and any sinking fund or reserves in any manner that public funds of the State of Georgia or its political subdivisions may be invested and to purchase its own bonds at a price of not more than the call price thereof and accrued interest, but bonds so purchased shall be canceled and shall not be reissued. (Ga. L. 1988, p. 3799, § 4) 
Sec. 5. - Power under revenue bond law.     In addition to the foregoing powers and subject to any limitations herein contained, the authority shall have all the powers of municipalities under the provisions of Article 3, Chapter 82, Title 36 of the O.C.G.A., known as the "Revenue Bond Law," and shall have the power to expend such sums as may be necessary for the survey, study, financing, construction, and completion of any such project and the placing of the same in operation. (Ga. L. 1988, p. 3799, § 5) 
Sec. 6. - Credit not pledged.     Revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act shall not constitute a debt or a pledge of the faith and credit of Clarke County, Georgia, but such bonds shall be payable solely from the rentals, revenues, and funds of the authority as provided in the resolutions or trust agreements or indentures authorizing or securing the issuance and payment of such bonds. The issuance of such bonds shall not obligate the county to levy or pledge any form of taxation whatsoever for the payment thereof or to make any appropriation for their payment, and such bonds shall contain on their face a recital setting forth substantially the foregoing provisions of this Act. (Ga. L. 1988, p. 3799, § 6) 
Sec. 7. - Legal investments.     The bonds herein authorized are made securities in which all public officers and bodies of this state and all political subdivisions; all insurance companies and associations and other persons carrying on an insurance business; all banks, bankers, trust companies, savings banks and savings associations, including savings and loan associations, building and loan associations, investment companies, and other persons carrying on a banking business; all administrators, guardians, executors, trustees and other fiduciaries; and all other persons whatsoever who are now or may hereafter be authorized to invest in bonds or other obligations of the state may properly and legally invest funds, including capital, in their control or belonging to them. The bonds are also made securities which may be deposited with and shall be received by all public officers and bodies of this state and all political subdivisions thereof for any purpose for which the deposit of the bonds or other obligations of this state is now or may hereafter be authorized. (Ga. L. 1988, p. 3799, § 7) 
Sec. 8. - Contracts for use of projects.     The authority may contract with one or more political subdivisions of this state for the payment of rents, fees, and charges for the use of the projects or projects and facilities of the authority by the political subdivisions or the residents thereof or for the payment by the authority for the use of any public property of the political subdivision. The rentals contracted to be paid by the lessees or tenants to the authority under the contract entered into pursuant to the provisions of this Act shall constitute general obligations of the political subdivision, and the full faith and credit of the political subdivision may be pledged to provide the funds required to fulfill all obligations arising under any such contract. Any political subdivision which shall have entered into a contract pursuant to the provisions of this Act shall annually in each and every fiscal year during the term of the contract include in the general revenue or appropriation measure sums sufficient to satisfy the payments required to be made in each year by such contract until all payments required under such contract have been paid in full. In the event that for any reason any such provision or appropriation is not made, then the fiscal officers of such political subdivision are authorized and directed to set up as an appropriation on their accounts in each fiscal year the amounts required to pay the obligations of such contract as authorized and required, which amounts shall be due and payable and shall be expended for the purpose of paying and meeting the obligations provided under the terms and conditions of such contract, and such appropriation shall have the same legal status as if the contracting political subdivision had included the amount of the appropriation in its general revenue or appropriation measure. The fiscal officers of the political subdivision shall make such payment to the authority if for any reason such appropriation is not otherwise made, and any such political subdivision may obligate itself and its successors to use only such structure, building, or facilities constituting such project and none other. (Ga. L. 1988, p. 3799, § 8) 
Sec. 9. - Revenue bonds.     Subject to the limitations contained in this Act, the authority shall have power and is authorized to provide by resolution for the issuance of revenue bonds of the authority for the purpose of paying all or any part of the cost of any one or a combination of its projects. The principal of and interest on such revenue bonds shall be payable from and may be secured by a pledge of rents, fees, charges, and other revenues of, and by the mortgage of, all or any part of the project or projects financed in whole or in part with the proceeds of such bonds or with the proceeds of bonds called and refunded or to be called and refunded by such issue. The bonds of each issue shall be dated, shall mature, and shall be payable as to both principal and interest as may be determined by the authority within the terms of Article 3, Chapter 82, Title 36 of the O.C.G.A., known as the "Revenue Bond Law," except as to any limitation as to interest which may be contained therein, and the bonds may be made redeemable before maturity, at the option of the authority, at such price or prices and under such terms and conditions as may be fixed by the authority in the resolution providing for the issuance of the bonds. If the proceeds of the bonds of any issue shall exceed the amount required for the purpose for which such bonds are issued, the surplus shall be deposited as may be directed in the resolution or trust instrument providing for the issuance of and security for such bonds. (Ga. L. 1988, p. 3799, § 9) 
Sec. 10. - Rental revenue. (a)  For the purpose of earning sufficient revenue to make possible the financing of the construction of the project or projects of the authority with revenue bonds, the cost of which shall include all elements of costs authorized by Article 3, Chapter 82, of Title 36 of the O.C.G.A., known as the "Revenue Bond Law," the authority is authorized and empowered to fix, revise, and collect rents, fees, and charges on each project which it shall cause to be acquired or constructed. Such rentals, fees, or charges to be paid for the use of such project or projects shall be so fixed and adjusted as to provide a fund sufficient with other revenue, if any, of such project or projects to: (1)  Pay the cost of operating, maintaining, and repairing the project or projects, including reserves for insurance and extraordinary repairs and other reserves required by the resolution or trust agreement or indenture pertaining to such bonds and the issuance thereof, unless such cost shall be otherwise provided for; (2)  Pay the principal and interest on such revenue bonds as the same shall become due, including premiums, if any, the proceeds of which shall have been or will be used to pay the cost of such project or projects, including all elements of cost authorized by Article 3, Chapter 82, Title 36 of the O.C.G.A., known as the "Revenue Bond Law"; (3)  Comply with any sinking fund requirements contained in the resolution or trust agreement or indenture pertaining to the issuance of and security for such bonds; (4)  Perform fully all provisions of such resolution or trust agreement or indenture relating to the issuance of or security for such bonds to the payment of which such rental is pledged; (5)  Accumulate any excess income which may be required by the purchasers of such bonds or which may be dictated by the requirements of such resolution or trust agreement or indenture or by the need to achieve ready marketability of and low interest rates on such bonds; and (6)  Pay any expenses in connection with such bond issue or such project or projects including, but not limited to, trustees, counsel, and fiscal fees. (b)  The rentals shall be payable at such intervals as may be agreed upon and set forth in the rental contract or lease providing therefor and any such contract or lease may provide for the commencement of rental payments to the authority prior to the completion of the undertaking by the authority of any such project, and the rental may provide for the payment of rental charges during such times as the project or projects may be partially or wholly untenable. (c)  The rental contract or lease may obligate the tenants or lessees to operate, maintain, and keep in good repair, including complete reconstruction, if necessary, the rented or leased premises and projects, regardless of the cause of the necessity of such maintenance, repair, or reconstruction. (d)  Such rental contract or lease may obligate the tenants or lessees to indemnify and save harmless the authority from any and all damage to persons and property occurring on or by reason of the leased property or improvements thereon and to undertake, at the expense of the tenants or lessees, the defense of any action brought against the authority by reason of injury or damages to persons or property occurring on or by reason of the leased premises. (e)  In the event of any failure or refusal on the part of the tenants or lessees to perform punctually any covenant or obligation contained in any such rental contract or lease, the authority may enforce performance by any legal or equitable process against the tenants or lessees, and consent may be given for the institution of any such action. (f)  The authority shall be permitted to assign any rental payments due or to become due to the authority, pursuant to any such rental contract or lease, to a trustee or paying agent as may be required by the terms of the resolution or trust agreement or indenture relating to the issuance of and security for such bonds. (g)  The use and disposition of the authority's revenue shall be subject to the provisions of the resolution authorizing the issuance of such bonds or of the trust agreement or indenture, if any, securing the same. (Ga. L. 1988, p. 3799, § 10) 
Sec. 11. - Sinking fund. (a)  The revenues, rents, and earnings derived from any particular project or projects and any and all revenues, rents, and earnings received by the authority, regardless of whether or not such revenues, rents, and earnings were produced by a particular project for which bonds were issued, may be pledged by the authority to the payment of the principal of and interest on revenue bonds of the authority as may be provided in any resolution authorizing the issuance of such bonds, and such funds so pledged from whatever source received may include funds received from one or more or all sources and may be set aside at regular intervals into a sinking fund for which provision may be made in any such resolution or trust instrument, which sinking fund may be pledged to and charged with the payment of: (1)  The interest upon such revenue bonds as such interest shall become due; (2)  The principal of the bonds as the same shall mature; (3)  The necessary charges of any trustee or paying agent or registrar for such bonds; and (4)  Any premium upon bonds retired upon call or purchase. (b)  The use and disposition of any sinking fund may be subject to such regulations as may be provided for in the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or in the trust instrument securing the payment of the same. Except as may otherwise be provided in the resolution or trust instrument, the sinking fund shall be maintained as a trust account for the benefit of all revenue bonds without distinction or priority of one over another. Subject to the provisions of the resolution or the trust instrument, any surplus moneys in the sinking fund may be applied to the purchase or redemption of bonds and any such bonds so purchased or redeemed shall forthwith be canceled and shall not be reissued, printed, and delivered. (Ga. L. 1988, p. 3799, § 11) 
Sec. 12. - Form of bonds.     The authority shall determine the form of the bonds, including any interest coupons to be attached thereto, and shall fix the denomination or denominations of the bonds and the place or places of payment of principal and interest thereof, which may be at any bank or trust company inside or outside the State of Georgia. (Ga. L. 1988, p. 3799, § 12) 
Sec. 13. - Trust agreement.     In the discretion of the authority, any issue of revenue bonds may be secured by a trust agreement or indenture made by the authority with a corporate trustee which may be any trust company or bank having the powers of a trust company inside or outside the State of Georgia. Such trust agreement or indenture may pledge or assign rents, fees, charges, revenues, and earnings to be received by the authority and any proceeds which may be derived from the disposition of any real or personal property of the authority or the proceeds of insurance carried thereon. The resolution providing for the issuance of revenue bonds and such trust agreement or indenture may contain provisions for protecting and enforcing the rights and remedies of the bondholders, including the right of foreclosure of any mortgage or encumbrance and the right of appointment of a receiver upon default in the payment of any principal or interest obligation and the right of any receiver or trustee to enforce collection of any rents, fees, charges, or revenues for the use of the project necessary to pay all costs of operation and all reserves provided for, the principal of and interest on all bonds in the issue, all costs of collection, and all other costs reasonably necessary to accomplish the collection of such sums in the event of any default of the authority. Such resolution or trust agreement or indenture may include covenants setting forth the duties of the authority in relation to the acquisition of property for and construction of the project and to the custody, safeguarding, and application of all funds of the authority, including any proceeds derived from the disposition of any real or personal property of the authority or the proceeds of insurance carried thereon; and covenants providing for the operation, maintenance, repair, and insurance of the project may contain provisions concerning the conditions, if any, upon which additional bonds may be issued. Such resolution or trust agreement or indenture may set forth the rights and remedies of the bondholders and of the trustee and may restrict the individual right of action of any bondholder as is customary in securing bonds and debentures of corporations and may contain such other provisions as the authority may deem reasonable and proper for the security of the bondholders. All expenses incurred in carrying out such trust may be treated as a part of the cost of maintenance, operation, and repair of the project affected by such trust. (Ga. L. 1988, p. 3799, § 13) 
Sec. 14. - Venue of actions; jurisdiction.     Any action to protect or enforce any rights under the provisions of this Act brought in the courts of the State of Georgia shall be brought in the Superior Court of Clarke County, Georgia, and any action pertaining to validation of the bonds issued under the provisions of this Act shall be brought in said court, which shall have exclusive, original jurisdiction of such action. (Ga. L. 1988, p. 3799, § 14) 
Sec. 15. - Validation of bonds.     All bonds of the authority shall be confirmed and validated in the Superior Court of Clarke County in accordance with the procedure of Article 3, Chapter 82, Title 36 of the O.C.G.A., known as the "Revenue Bond Law." The petition for validation shall be brought against said authority and, in the event the payments to be made by any political subdivision under a contract entered into between the authority and such political subdivision are pledged as security for the payment of the bonds sought to be validated, such political subdivision shall also be required to show cause, if any exists, why such contract or contracts and the terms and conditions thereof should not be adjudicated to be in all respects valid and binding upon such defendants. It shall be incumbent upon such defendants to defend against adjudication of the validity and binding effect of such contract or contracts or be forever bound thereby. Notice of such proceedings shall be included in the notice of validation hearing required to be issued and published by the Clerk of the Superior Court of Clarke County, in which court such validation proceeding shall be initiated. Any citizen of the State of Georgia may intervene in the validation proceeding in accordance with the procedure prescribed in Article 3, Chapter 82, Title 36 of the O.C.G.A., known as the "Revenue Bond Law," and appeal from the judgment in said proceeding may be taken in accordance with the appellate procedure prescribed in said law. In the event no such appeal is filed within the time prescribed by law, or if filed, the judgment of the Superior Court of Clarke County so confirming and validating the validity and binding effect of such contract or contracts and of such bonds and the security therefor shall be forever conclusive. (Ga. L. 1988, p. 3799, § 15) 
Sec. 16. - Irrevocable contract.     The authority shall have perpetual existence, and, while any of the bonds issued by the authority shall remain outstanding, the powers, duties, or existence of the authority or of its officers, employees, or agents shall not be diminished, impaired, or affected in any manner which will affect adversely the interests and rights of the holders of such bonds, and no other authority, instrumentality, or body will be created or empowered to compete with the authority so as to affect adversely the interests and rights of the holders of such bonds. The provisions of this Act shall be for the benefit of the state, the authority, and every holder of the authority's bonds and, upon and after the issuance of bonds under the provisions of this Act, shall constitute an irrevocable contract with the holders of such bonds. (Ga. L. 1988, p. 3799, § 16) 
Sec. 17. - Trust funds.     All funds received pursuant to the authority of this Act, whether as proceeds from the sale of revenue bonds or as revenues, rents, fees, charges, or other earnings or as gifts, grants, or other contributions, shall be deemed to be trust funds to be held and applied solely as provided in this Act, and bondholders entitled to receive the benefits of such funds shall have a lien on all such funds until applied as provided for in any such resolution, trust agreement, or indenture of the authority. (Ga. L. 1988, p. 3799, § 17) 
Sec. 18. - Construction.     This Act, being for the welfare of the state and its inhabitants, shall be liberally construed to effect the proposes [purposes] hereof. (Ga. L. 1988, p. 3799, § 18) 
Sec. 19. - Powers declared supplementary.     The provisions of this Act shall be regarded as supplementary and additional to powers conferred by other laws and shall not be regarded as being in derogation of any powers now existing. The provisions of Article 3, Chapter 82, Title 36 of the O.C.G.A., known as the "Revenue Bond Law," which are not in conflict herewith shall be applicable hereto and to the bonds issued hereunder and to any resolution or trust instrument adopted and entered into in order to provide for the payment of such bonds and the interest thereon. All bonds issued hereunder shall be signed in accordance with Code Section 50-17-1 of the O.C.G.A., relating to use of facsimile signatures on public securities. The General Assembly declares that it would have passed the remaining parts of this Act if it had known that such part or parts hereof would be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional. (Ga. L. 1988, p. 3799, § 19) 
Sec. 20. - Severability.     In the event any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this Act shall be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall in no manner affect the other sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, or phrases of this Act, which shall remain of full force and effect as if the section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase so declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional were not originally a part hereof. The General Assembly declares that it would have passed the remaining parts of this Act if it had known that such part or parts hereof would be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional. (Ga. L. 1988, p. 3799, § 20) 
Sec. 21. - Effective date.     This Act shall become effective immediately upon its approval by the Governor or upon its becoming law without such approval. (Ga. L. 1988, p. 3799, § 21) 
Sec. 22. - Repealer.     All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are repealed. (Ga. L. 1988, p. 3799, § 22) 