Title 1 - GENERAL GOVERNMENT[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Charter reference— Unification of county and city, § 1-101; status of unified government, § 1-103; powers of unified government, § 1-104; administration, § 4-101 et seq. State Law reference— Local government, O.C.G.A. Title 36; emergency interim successors to official, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-50. 
CHAPTER 1-1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS[2] Sec. 1-1-1. How Code designated and cited. Sec. 1-1-2. Rules of construction. Sec. 1-1-3. Catchlines of sections. Sec. 1-1-4. Severability of parts of Code. Sec. 1-1-5. General penalty; continuing violations; notice of ordinance violation. Sec. 1-1-6. Effect of repeal of ordinances. Sec. 1-1-7. Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. Sec. 1-1-8. Altering Code. Sec. 1-1-9. Supplementation of Code. Sec. 1-1-10. Certain ordinances not affected by Code. Footnotes: --- (2) --- Charter reference— General provisions, Art. VII. State Law reference— Ordinances generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-3. 
Sec. 1-1-1. - How Code designated and cited.     The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated as "The Code of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia," and may be so cited. Charter reference— Codification and printing of ordinances, § 2-207. State Law reference— Exemplification of municipal minutes and other records, O.C.G.A. § 24-7-21. 
Sec. 1-1-2. - Rules of construction.     In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the mayor and commission:     Chief elected officer or CEO. The chief elected officer of the Unified Government of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia.     Computation of time. Except as otherwise provided by time period computations specifically applying to other laws or ordinances, when a period of time measured in days, weeks, months, years, or other measurements of time except hours is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, the first day shall not be counted but the last day shall be counted; and, if the last day falls on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action falls on a public and legal holiday as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 1-4-1, the party having the privilege or duty shall have through the next business day to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation."     Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to associations, firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males.     Health department. The term "health department" shall mean the Athens-Clarke County Health Department.     Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirement adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of the Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the general provision imposed by the Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling.     Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three or more officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons.     Keeper, proprietor. The words "keeper" and "proprietor" shall mean natural persons, firms, associations, corporations, clubs and copartnerships, whether acting by themselves or as a servant, agent or employee.     Limits, corporation. The word "limits" or "corporation," shall mean the corporate limits (legal boundary) of Athens-Clarke County.     Mayor and chair or mayor. The chief elected officer of the Unified Government of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia.     Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month.     Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language; but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to that meaning.     Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons and things as well as to one person or thing, and the plural shall also include the singular.     Oath. The word "oath" includes an affirmation. When an oath is required or authorized by law, an affirmation in lieu thereof may be taken. An affirmation has the same force and effect as an oath.     O.C.G.A. The letters "O.C.G.A." shall mean the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as amended.     Or, and. The word "or" may be read "and," and the word "and" may be read "or," if the sense requires it.     Owner. The word "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership or joint tenant of the whole or of a part of such building or land.     Person. The word "person" shall extend and be applied to associations, firms, partnerships, joint-stock companies and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals.     Personal property. "Personal property" includes every species of property except real property, as herein defined.     Preceding, following. The words "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively.     Property. The word "property" includes real, personal and mixed estates and interests.     Public place. The term "public place" shall mean any place including, but not limited to, buildings or conveyances to which the public has, or is permitted to have, access, including restaurants, soda fountains, hotel dining rooms, lobbies and corridors of hotels, and any highway, street, lane, park or place of public resort or amusement.     Real property. The term "real property" shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments.     Shall, may. The word "shall" is mandatory; the word "may" is permissive.     Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean that portion of a street between the curb lines, or the lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines, intended for use by pedestrians.     Signature, subscription. The word "signature" or "subscription" shall include a mark when the person cannot write.     State. The words "the state" or "this state" shall mean the State of Georgia.     Street. The word "street" shall mean the entire width between boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel.     Tenant, occupant. The word "tenant" or "occupant," of a building or land, shall include any person holding a written or oral lease of, or who occupies the whole or a part of, such building or land, either alone or with others.     Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present.     Title of officer, department or other agency. Whenever the title of an officer (such as "mayor," "sheriff" or "chief building official") or the title of a department or other agency is given, it shall be construed as though the words "of the Athens-Clarke County," were added thereto.     Traffic engineer. The term "traffic engineer" shall mean the traffic engineer of Athens-Clarke County.     Unified government. The term "unified government" shall mean the county-wide government, a body politic and corporate, and a subdivision of the state, known herein in full as the "Unified Government of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia," having all the governmental and corporate powers, duties and functions heretofore held by and vested in the City of Athens and Clarke County, and also the powers, duties and functions provided for in the Charter adopted August 7, 1990.     Week. The word "week" shall mean seven days.     Written, in writing. The term "written" or "in writing" shall include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise.     Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year. (Ord. of 7-2-96, § 1; Ord. of 7-6-99, § 1; Ord. of 6-6-2006, § 1) Editor's note— An ordinance enacted June 4, 1996, amended the Charter of the Unified Government by deleting the terms "CEO" and "chief elected officer" whenever and wherever they appeared in the Charter and by substituting the term "mayor and chair" in their place. Likewise, an ordinance of July 2, 1996, amended the Code of Athens-Clarke County by deleting the terms "CEO" and "chief elected officer" whenever and wherever they appear in said Code and by substituting the "mayor and chair" in lieu thereof. Subsequently, an ordinance of July 6, 1999, amended the Code by deleting the term "mayor and chair" whenever and wherever it appears in the Code and substituting the term "mayor" in lieu thereof. In order to maximize printing costs, the terms "CEO", "chief elected officer", and "mayor and chair" will in the future be changed only when individual pages of the Code are affected by other changes requiring reprinting of those pages. State Law reference— Construction of statutes, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1 et seq.; computation of time under Civil Practice Act, O.C.G.A. § 9-11-6; "street" defined, O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1(58). 
Sec. 1-1-3. - Catchlines of sections.     The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or re-enacted. Charter reference— Similar provisions as to charter, § 8-118. 
Sec. 1-1-4. - Severability of parts of Code.     It is hereby declared to be the intention of the mayor and commission that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code, since the same would have been enacted by the mayor and commission without the incorporation in this Code of any such invalid phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. (Ord. of 7-2-96, § 1; Ord. of 7-6-99, § 1) Charter reference— Severability of charter provisions, § 7-104. 
Sec. 1-1-5. - General penalty; continuing violations; notice of ordinance violation. (a)  General penalty and continuing violations. Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of Athens-Clarke County any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in this Code or in any ordinance the doing of any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of that provision of this Code or that ordinance shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months, or any combination thereof, subject to all limitations contained in the Charter of Athens-Clarke County. Each day any violation of this Code or of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. (b)  Notice of ordinance violation. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Code, violations of Athens-Clarke County Code section 9-30-8 F., regarding parking on unimproved surfaces in single family districts, and violations of Athens-Clarke County Code section 5-2-14(a), regarding leaving trash receptacles out on a non-collection day, may be enforced by a notice of ordinance violation issued by any police officer, marshal, deputy marshal or code enforcement officer as provided below: (1)  Ordinance violations charged by means of a notice shall not be punishable by imprisonment but shall be punishable by a fine of $50.00. (2)  A notice of ordinance violation may be served by delivery into the hands of the suspected violator or by leaving the notice of ordinance violation at the suspected violator's residence with a person of suitable age and discretion residing therein, or by leaving the notice of ordinance violation at the suspected violator's place of business if the violation occurs at the business location, with a person of suitable age and discretion employed therein. (3)  Alternative to the provisions of subsection (2) above, a notice of ordinance violation may be served by substituted service as follows: a.  For violations of Athens-Clarke County Code section 9-30-8 F., the notice of ordinance violation may be placed on the front windshield of the illegally-parked vehicle in a fashion reasonably calculated to secure the notice of ordinance violation in place. Notices served according to this subsection shall be conspicuously marked and placed in a waterproof packet. b.  For violations of Athens-Clarke County Code section 5-2-14(a), the notice of ordinance violation may be served by securely attaching the notice of ordinance violation to the front door of the primary residential or business structure on the property served by the illegally-placed receptacle or to other door to said structure reasonably appearing to provide the primary point of egress to said residence or business. A notice of ordinance violation served according to this subsection shall be posted on the upper part of the door, shall be conspicuously marked and shall be placed in a waterproof packet. (4)  Violators may respond to a notice of ordinance violation either by signing the notice and returning the notice along with payment of the fine indicated thereon to the Municipal Court of Athens-Clarke County by the date indicated on the notice or by appearing in the Municipal Court to plead not guilty to the charged violation at the date and time provided on the notice. No proceedings for contempt or arrest shall be initiated for failure to appear on the return date on the notice. (5)  Violators who fail to respond to a notice of ordinance violation as provided for in subsection (4) above may thereafter be served personally with an ordinance violation citation or accusation, and criminally prosecuted pursuant to section 1-1-5(a) above. (c)  Section not exclusive. The infliction of a penalty under the provisions of this section shall not prevent the revocation of any permit or license or the taking of other punitive or remedial action where called for or permitted under the provisions of the Charter of the Unified Government of Athens-Clarke County or this Code. (Ord. of 8-8-91, § 1; Ord. of 12-2-2003, § 1) Charter reference— Judiciary generally, Art. V; municipal court, § 5-106. Cross reference— Municipal court, Ch. 1-4. State Law reference— Confinement of violators of ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-8. 
Sec. 1-1-6. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. (a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinance in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. (b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed or cause of action arising under the ordinance repealed. Charter reference— Existing ordinances, etc., § 9-109; general repealer for charter, § 8-121. State Law reference— Operation of laws, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-5. 
Sec. 1-1-7. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. (a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein. Chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof repealed by subsequent ordinances may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. Any and all additions and amendments to this Code, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the mayor and commission to make the same a part hereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated herein, so that reference to the Code shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments. (b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending these provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section _____ of The Code of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia, is hereby amended to read as follows:…" The new provisions may then be set out in full as desired. (c)  In the event a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That The Code of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section (or article or chapter) to be numbered _____, which section (or article or chapter) reads as follows:…" The new provisions may then be set out in full as desired. (d)  All sections, articles, chapters or other provisions desired to be repealed shall be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, as the case may be. (Ord. of 7-2-96, § 1; Ord. of 7-6-99, § 1) 
Sec. 1-1-8. - Altering Code.     It shall be unlawful for any person in Athens-Clarke County to change or amend by additions or deletions any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with this Code in any manner except by ordinance or other official act of the mayor and commission, which will cause the law of Athens-Clarke County to be misrepresented. (Ord. of 7-2-96, § 1; Ord. of 7-6-99, § 1) 
Sec. 1-1-9. - Supplementation of Code. (a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the mayor and commission. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive parts of permanent and general ordinances passed by the mayor and commission during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. (b)  In the preparation of a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. (c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the codifier may: (1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; (2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings, and titles; (3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; (4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be or to "sections _____ to _____" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated in the Code); and (5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of the ordinance sections inserted in the Code; but, in no case, shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. (Ord. of 7-2-96, § 1; Ord. of 7-6-99, § 1) 
Sec. 1-1-10. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code.     Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: (1)  Any offense or act committed or done, or any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contact or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code; (2)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the unified government, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the unified government, or any evidence of the unified government's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the unified government; (3)  Any ordinance or resolution fixing salaries of officers or employees of the unified government; (4)  Any appropriation ordinance or resolution; (5)  Any right or franchise granted by the unified government to any person; (6)  Any ordinance or resolution dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, closing, abandoning, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the unified government; (7)  Any ordinance or resolution establishing and prescribing the street grades of any streets in the unified government; (8)  Any ordinance or resolution providing for local improvements or assessing taxes therefor; (9)  Any ordinance or resolution dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the unified government or providing regulations therefor; (10)  Any ordinance annexing property to the unified government; (11)  Any ordinance or resolution prescribing traffic regulations for specific locations, parking limitations, parking prohibitions, one-way traffic, or limitations on loads of vehicles or loading zones, not inconsistent with this Code; (12)  Any temporary or special ordinance; and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length herein. 
CHAPTER 1-2. - ELECTIONS Sec. 1-2-1. Voting precincts and polling places. 
Sec. 1-2-1. - Voting precincts and polling places.     Each district of Athens-Clarke County shall constitute a voting precinct for any election, whether general, special, primary or other, and the polling place for each precinct shall be as follows: (1)  District 1: A - Winterville Train Depot, 101 Marigold Lane, Winterville B - East Athens Baptist Church, 4325 Lexington Road C - Barnett Shoals School on Barnett Shoals Road D - Whit Davis School, 1450 Whit Davis Road (2)  District 2: A - Judia J. Harris Elementary School, 2300 Danielsville Road B - Howard B. Stroud Elementary School, 715 Fourth Street (3)  District 3: A - Clarke Central High School, 350 South Milledge Avenue B - Thomas N. Lay Park, 297 Hoyt Street (4)  District 4: A - Athens Transit Multi-Modal Center, 775 East Broad Street B - Memorial Park on Gran Ellen Drive. (5)  District 5: A - Oglethorpe School on Oglethorpe Avenue B - Whitehead Road School, 500 Whitehead Road C - Chase Street School on North Chase Street D - ACC Fleet Management Building, 225 Newton Bridge Road (6)  District 6: A - Cleveland Road School on Cleveland Road B - Board of Education, 240 Mitchell Bridge Road C - Timothy Road School, 1900 Timothy Road D - Fire Station Number 4, Oglethorpe Avenue (7)  District 7: A - Timothy Baptist Church, 380 Timothy Road B - Alps Road Elementary School, 200 Alps Road C - Fire Station Number 3, 1198 South Milledge Avenue (8)  District 8: A - Gaines Elementary School, 900 Gaines School Road B - Cedar Shoals High School, 1300 Cedar Shoals Drive C - Fire Station Number 7, 2350 Barnett Shoals Road. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1; Ord. of 1-26-93, § 1; Ord. of 10-29-93, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 8-25-94, § 1; Ord. of 7-5-2000, § 1; Ord. of 11-4-2003, § 1; Ord. of 11-6-2007, § 1; Ord. of 4-6-2010, § 1) 
CHAPTER 1-3. - AUDITOR Sec. 1-3-1. Internal auditor; office of operational analysis. 
Sec. 1-3-1. - Internal auditor; office of operational analysis. (a)  Office of operational analysis established; general responsibilities. There is hereby established an office of operational analysis under the direction of the internal auditor. The position of internal auditor, operating by and through the office of operational analysis, shall be responsible for conducting a continuing internal audit of the fiscal affairs and programmatic operations of every department, office and agency of the Athens-Clarke County Government as affects the efficiency and effectiveness of departments and agencies. (b)  Specific duties and responsibilities. The duties and responsibilities of the internal auditor shall be as follows: (1)  Conducts reviews and analysis of operational and fiscal procedures and organizational structure and responsibilities as affects the efficiency and effectiveness of every department, office and agency of the Unified Government of Athens-Clarke County. (2)  Prepares reports to present findings and recommendations to the mayor and commission concerning government fiscal affairs and operations. (3)  Works in consultation with the mayor and commissioners and manager to develop objective and plan assignments. (4)  Prepares the budget for the office of operational analysis. (5)  Performs administrative duties such as scheduling meetings, interviews and travel. (6)  Assists the mayor and commission and manager in the work of the overview commission required by section 8-116 of the Charter. (7)  Performs such other related duties as may be required. (Ord. of 8-4-92, § 1; Ord. of 7-2-96, § 1; Ord. of 7-6-99, § 1; Ord. of 4-7-2015(3) , § 1) 
CHAPTER 1-4. - MUNICIPAL COURT[3] Secs. 1-4-1—1-4-15. Reserved. Sec. 1-4-16. Jurisdiction; powers. Sec. 1-4-17. Judge generally. Sec. 1-4-18. Standby associate judge. Sec. 1-4-19. Prosecution of cases. Sec. 1-4-20. Witness; subpoena. Sec. 1-4-21. Appellate review. Sec. 1-4-22. Administrative fee. Footnotes: --- (3) --- Charter reference— Judiciary provisions generally, Art. V; municipal court of the City of Athens, continuation of operations in the court of unified government, § 5-106. Cross reference— Duty of marshals to issue warnings and citations for court appearances and to appear and testify in court, § 1-12-1(d). 
Secs. 1-4-1—1-4-15. - Reserved. 
Sec. 1-4-16. - Jurisdiction; powers. (a)  There is hereby established for and in Athens-Clarke County a court to be known as the Municipal Court of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia. Except as provided in paragraph (b) below, all warrants, summons, citations, subpoenas or other process issued requiring appearance or attendance in such municipal court shall be issued by the clerk of the court, directed to any sworn policeman of Athens-Clarke County Police Department, and bear teste in the name of the municipal court judge. All sworn police officers of Athens-Clarke County Police Department or Deputy Sheriff's of the Clarke County Sheriff's Office shall be ex officio constables of the court. (b)  Citations or summons, including but not limited to summons on forms developed by the State Department of Public Safety under O.C.G.A. § 40-13-1, requiring appearance or attendance in municipal court may be issued by any Athens-Clarke County police officer, marshal or deputy marshal, code enforcement officer, animal control officer, fire marshal or deputy fire marshal, chief building official or building inspector, employee of the Department of Transportation and Public Works, the Athens-Clarke County Attorney or Assistant Attorney, the Solicitor General or Assistant Solicitor or by any other person specifically authorized to issue such citations or summons by this code or other law. (c)  The Athens-Clarke County Attorney or Assistant Attorneys and the Solicitor General or Assistant Solicitors are authorized at their election to issue and file accusations as charging instruments in municipal court. (d)  The judge of municipal court shall have jurisdiction of first instance over all Athens-Clarke County ordinances, such jurisdiction being otherwise concurrent with the magistrate's court of Athens-Clarke County. The municipal court shall have jurisdiction over such traffic offenses as authorized by O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-372—40-6-376 and such other state offenses as authorized presently, or in the future, by state law. (e)  Sessions of the court shall be on a regular basis as set by the judge. (f)  The municipal court shall be governed by such rules as established by the judge in accordance with Georgia law and a sound construction of the laws and ordinances of Athens-Clarke County. (g)  The municipal court shall have authority to provide for bails and recognizance and for surety therefor to ensure the presence of those charged with violations before the court, and the court shall have authority to provide for forfeitures of the same. (Ord. of 1-7-92, § 1; Ord. of 3-7-2000, § 1; Ord. of 4-4-2006, § 1) 
Sec. 1-4-17. - Judge generally. (a)  In presiding over the municipal court, the judge shall have full power and authority, as provided by state law, including, but not limited to, the full power and authority to compel the attendance of parties and witnesses in court. (b)  The judge shall have the power to enforce all the court's orders and judgments, to preserve order and to punish for contempt to the fullest extent authorized by law. (c)  Except as provided herein, the judge shall be nominated by the Mayor and confirmed or rejected by the Commission on or before the first voting meeting in June of the year the term expires with the appointment to be effective July 1 of said year. Beginning on July 1, 2009, all terms shall be for two years, except that the term of the judge due to expire on June 30, 2017, shall expire on January 31, 2017 at midnight. The next succeeding term shall begin on February 1, 2017 and shall extend through June 30, 2019. The judge for the term beginning February 1, 2017 shall be nominated by the Mayor and confirmed or rejected by the Commission at a special called meeting of the Mayor and Commission on January 17, 2017. Thereafter, all terms shall be for two years, such two-year terms resuming with the term beginning on July 1, 2019. The salary of the judge shall be as set by the Mayor and Commission. (d)  The judge shall be a member in good standing of the State Bar of Georgia. (e)  The judge shall be full time and is not permitted to maintain a private practice. (f)  In the event of any vacancy in the office of a municipal court judge for any cause, whether by death, resignation, sickness, vacancy or removal, one or more judges to fill the vacancy shall be nominated by the Mayor and confirmed or rejected by the Commission. A judge or judges appointed to fill the vacancy shall serve for a term as set by resolution of the Mayor and Commission at the time of appointment, shall be a member in good standing of the State Bar of Georgia, may be either full-time or part-time, and shall be permitted to maintain a private practice. The compensation of such judge or judges shall be set by the Mayor and Commission. The terms "judge of municipal court" or "municipal court judge" as used throughout this chapter and related law shall include any person authorized by this paragraph to hear cases in the municipal court. (Ord. of 1-7-92, § 1; Ord. of 7-2-96, § 1; Ord. of 7-2-96, § 1; Ord. of 7-6-99, § 1; Ord. of 10-5-2004, § 1; Ord. of 3-29-2005, § 1; Ord. of 5-6-2008; § 1; Ord. of 1-17-2017(1), § 1 ) 
Sec. 1-4-18. - Standby associate judge.     Whenever, from any cause, the judge of municipal court cannot be in attendance to hold municipal court, or if it should appear that he or she is disqualified in any case, then the judge shall appoint a judge pro hac vice to preside in the court in place and stead of the municipal court judge, and all actions of the appointee shall be binding as if performed by the municipal judge. A judge pro hac vice shall be a member in good standing of the State Bar of Georgia. (Ord. of 1-7-92, § 1) 
Sec. 1-4-19. - Prosecution of cases.     The solicitor of state court shall be the solicitor of municipal court. The Athens-Clarke County Attorney shall be entitled to appear in the court on behalf of Athens-Clarke County to prosecute violations of local ordinances and the district attorney shall be entitled to appear in such court on behalf of the state on any matter involving felonies. (Ord. of 1-7-92, § 1; Ord. of 2-4-92, § 1) 
Sec. 1-4-20. - Witness; subpoena.     Whenever the attendance of any witness may be required before the court, the clerk of court shall issue a subpoena, directed to the witness, stating the time and place of trial and the parties to the case, which subpoena shall be served by any Athens-Clarke County policeman, or as otherwise permitted by law. (Ord. of 1-7-92, § 1) 
Sec. 1-4-21. - Appellate review.     The orders, verdicts, judgements and sentences of the court shall be subject to appellate review in accordance with state law. (Ord. of 1-7-92, § 1) 
Sec. 1-4-22. - Administrative fee.     The Clerk of the Municipal Court of Athens-Clarke County shall be entitled to charge and collect an administrative fee to be set by the court in an amount not to exceed $5.00 as a surcharge to each fine imposed. (Ord. of 8-4-2009, § 1) 
CHAPTER 1-5. - ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING OFFICER Sec. 1-5-1. Administrative hearing officer. 
Sec. 1-5-1. - Administrative hearing officer.     There is hereby created the position of administrative hearing officer whose term and duties shall be as set out below: (1)  The administrative hearing officer shall be nominated by the mayor and confirmed or rejected by the commission. The initial appointment shall run until the first Tuesday in January 1993. Thereafter, the term of office of the administrative hearing officer shall run concurrently with the term of office of the municipal court judge as prescribed in section 1-4-17 of this Code. The salary of the hearing officer shall be as set by the mayor. The administrative hearing officer shall be an attorney who is a member in good standing of the State Bar of Georgia Association. (2)  The duties of the administrative hearing officer shall be the hearing of all issues under the ordinances of Athens-Clarke County which would determine the granting, denial, probating, suspending or revoking of any license or permit granted under Athens-Clarke County ordinances. (3)  The jurisdiction of the hearing officer over the licenses or permits shall be in addition to and concurrent with that of the municipal court of Athens-Clarke County, except that the hearing officer is specifically prohibited from awarding any punishment involving imprisonment. The administrative hearing officer may award civil fines where specifically provided for in other sections of this Code. (4)  Jurisdiction of and procedures for administrative hearing officer: a.  The administrative hearing officer shall have jurisdiction over: 1.  Any action against any licensee or permittee holding a license or permit issued by any department of Athens-Clarke County. Said action shall be brought by the Athens-Clarke County Attorney, the manager, police chief, or any department head with administrative responsibility for such permit or license; and 2.  Any claim by any citizen aggrieved by an administrative decision made by any Athens-Clarke County department authorized to make such decisions. b.  Any hearing before the administrative hearing officer shall be on a date and time certain which shall be reflected on the summons issued by the attorney or any other person specifically authorized by this Code or other law to issue such summons to appear in municipal court, or by the clerk of the municipal court on behalf of any aggrieved citizen. c.  The notice of administrative hearing shall contain a place, date and time certain and shall be served on responding party more than five days before any scheduled hearing. The notice of administrative hearing shall be served as follows: 1.  By certified mail return/receipt requested; or 2.  By leaving a copy thereof at the licensed business location with an employee working therein (and in the case of an alcohol licensee, said notice shall also be sent by regular mail to the agent set out on the license or listed on the license application); or 3.  By personal service on the responding party or on an agent authorized by law or by appointment to receive service of process. All service shall be by an authorized person in the Athens-Clarke County Marshal's office or by any sworn Athens-Clarke County police officer or any Athens-Clarke County Code Enforcement officer. d.  The administrative hearing officer shall have the authority to hear evidence and subpoena witnesses on behalf of Athens-Clarke County or the aggrieved citizen and shall generally conduct the hearings in accordance with the requirements of due process as required by the United States Constitution and the Constitution of the State of Georgia. The administrative hearing officer shall entertain any and all evidence relevant to the matter without regard to evidentiary rules regarding hearsay. e.  The standard of review for a citizen aggrieved by an administrative decision is arbitrary and capricious. f.  The standard for an action against a licensee or permittee is preponderance of the evidence. g.  The administrative hearing officer may promulgate any rules of procedure not in conflict with this ordinance or other law. (5)  Whenever, from any cause, the administrative hearing officer is unable to be in attendance, or it should appear that he or she is disqualified in any case, it shall be the duty of the administrative hearing officer to appoint a hearing officer pro hac vice to preside over the hearing in place and stead of the administrative hearing officer, and all actions of the appointee shall be binding as if performed by the administrative hearing officer. (6)  In the event of any vacancy in the office of administrative hearing officer for any cause, whether by death, resignation, sickness, vacancy or removal, one or more persons to fill the vacancy shall be nominated by the mayor and confirmed or rejected by the commission. The person or persons appointed to fill the vacancy shall serve for a term as set by resolution of the mayor and commission at the time of appointment and shall be a member in good standing of the State Bar of Georgia. The compensation of such administrative hearing officer shall be set by the mayor and commission. (Ord. of 1-7-92, § 1; Ord. of 7-2-96, § 1; Ord. of 7-1-97, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 7-6-99, § 1; Ord. of 3-5-2002, § 1; Ord. of 4-1-2003, § 1; Ord. of 3-29-2005, § 2; Ord. of 6-30-2005, § 1; Ord. of 4-4-2006, §§ 2, 3; Ord. of 1-17-2017(2), § 1 ) 
CHAPTER 1-6. - EXECUTIVE SESSIONS AND OTHER CLOSED MEETINGS Sec. 1-6-1. Procedures governing closed meetings. 
Sec. 1-6-1. - Procedures governing closed meetings.     Whenever the mayor and commission, any committee of the commission, or any other agency as defined by O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 hold a closed meeting to discuss matters excluded from application of the provisions of the O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1, as provided for by O.C.G.A. § 50-14-3, then the following procedures shall apply: (a)  At the conclusion of the meeting or closed portion thereof, every commissioner or agency member present at such meeting shall sign a notarized affidavit in substantially the form set forth in subsection (b) below, stating under oath that the subject matter of the meeting or the closed portion thereof was devoted to matters within the exceptions provided by law and identifying the specific relevant exception and stating that no other topics were presented or discussed other than those topics for which the closed meeting was called. If the mayor, any commissioner, or other agency member believes that another topic was presented or discussed, then the mayor, any commissioner, or other agency member shall make a notation of such belief beside his or her name on the form provided. (b)  The form required by subsection (a) shall be substantially as follows: AFFIDAVIT OF MAYOR AND COMMISSIONERS ATTENDING EXECUTIVE SESSION OF THE MAYOR AND COMMISSION OF ATHENS-CLARKE COUNTY, GEORGIA ON_______[DATE] [Or] AFFIDAVIT OF COMMITTEE CHAIR AND OTHER COMMISSIONERS ATTENDING EXECUTIVE SESSION OF A COMMITTEE MEETING OF THE COMMISSION OF ATHENS-CLARKE COUNTY, GEORGIA ON _______ [DATE] [Or] AFFIDAVIT OF AGENCY CHAIR AND AGENCY MEMBERS ATTENDING CLOSED MEETING OF AGENCY OF ATHENS-CLARKE COUNTY, GEORGIA ON _______ [DATE]     PERSONALLY APPEARED BEFORE ME, an officer duly authorized by law to administer oaths, the undersigned, who after first being duly sworn, do state that the subject matter of the meeting or the closed portion thereof held in the executive session of a meeting of the Mayor and Commission [or a Committee of the Commission] [or an Agency] of Athens-Clarke County, on the above-stated date, was devoted to matters within the specific relevant exception(s) to Open Meetings provided by O.C.G.A. Section(s)_______[list of relevant code sections] and that unless otherwise noted beside the signatures below, no other topics were discussed or presented by any persons present at such meeting other than the specific topic(s) listed below for which the closed session was called: _______ _______ [description of topic(s) as entered upon the official minutes]. SIGNATURE OF MAYOR [or Chair of Committee or Agency] _______ NOTATION (IF APPLICABLE) _______ Sworn to and subscribed before me this _______ day of _______, ___. _______ _______ Notary Public My Commission Expires: _______ Notarial Seal SIGNATURE OF COMMISSIONER [or Agency Member] _______ NOTATION (IF APPLICABLE) _______ Sworn to and subscribed before me this ________ day of _______, ___. _______ Notary Public My Commission Expires:_______ [Notarial Seal]  
CHAPTER 1-7. - PURCHASING[4] Sec. 1-7-1. Applicability. Sec. 1-7-2. Definitions. Sec. 1-7-3. Purchasing division and purchasing division administrator. Sec. 1-7-4. Duties of purchasing division administrator. Sec. 1-7-5. Committee on standards and specifications—Established; members; meetings; authority. Sec. 1-7-6. Same—Duties. Sec. 1-7-7. Applicability of standards. Sec. 1-7-8. Substitution for brand names. Sec. 1-7-9. Uniform purchasing manual. Sec. 1-7-10. Purchase orders. Sec. 1-7-11. Budget review prior to issuing purchase orders. Sec. 1-7-12. Sole-source purchases. Sec. 1-7-13. Award of contracts. Sec. 1-7-14. Competitive quotations for bids over $50,000.00. Sec. 1-7-15. Competitive quotations under $49,999.99. Sec. 1-7-16. Reserved. Sec. 1-7-17. Purchases of less than $1,000.00. Sec. 1-7-18. Selection of professional services. Sec. 1-7-19. Rejection of bids or quotations. Sec. 1-7-20. Federal and state contract purchases. Sec. 1-7-21. Price agreement contracts. Sec. 1-7-22. Cooperative purchasing agreements. Sec. 1-7-23. Emergency purchases. Sec. 1-7-24. Deposits; bid bonds. Sec. 1-7-25. Vendors in default. Sec. 1-7-26. Records to be maintained. Sec. 1-7-27. Local buying preference. Sec. 1-7-28. Vendors' appeals. Sec. 1-7-29. Conflict of interest. Sec. 1-7-30. Federally funded projects and programs. Sec. 1-7-31. Public construction projects governed by O.C.G.A. § 36-91-1 et seq. Footnotes: --- (4) --- Charter reference— Procurement and disposition of property, § 7-501 et seq. 
Sec. 1-7-1. - Applicability.     The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all primary departments and agencies receiving appropriations from the governing authority of Athens-Clarke County and to other agencies as the governing authority may deem appropriate. (Ord. of 3-3-92, § 1) 
Sec. 1-7-2. - Definitions.     The following definitions shall apply to this chapter:     Committee: Committee on standards and specifications.     Finance department: The department in which the purchasing division is assigned.     Goods and services: The tangible items and/or labor and materials provided by outside contractors and professionals necessary to provide an effective and economically responsible delivery of services by Athens-Clarke County and for which financial appropriations have been made by the governing authority. (1)  Supplies, materials or contractual services: All tangible equipment, commodities, repairs or nonprofessional services necessary to operate the government. (2)  Professional services: Services provided by the following licensed professionals need not be subject to competitive bidding: practitioners of law, medicine, podiatry, dentistry, optometry, psychology, veterinary medicine, physiotherapy, public accounting and civil, mechanical, hydraulic or electrical engineering, architecture or professional consultations.     Purchasing division administrator: The individual who is assigned the general duties and responsibilities of supervising and administering the provisions of this chapter.     Using agency: Any department, division, agency, bureau, commission, board, authority, or other unit of the Athens-Clarke County government using goods and services to carry out the duties and responsibilities of such functions and for which financial appropriations have been made by the governing authority. (Ord. of 3-3-92, § 1; Ord. of 11-3-2004, § 1) 
Sec. 1-7-3. - Purchasing division and purchasing division administrator.     The purchasing division administrator shall administer the policies, regulations, and procedures governing the purchase of all goods and services for Athens-Clarke County. The purchasing division administrator shall exercise general supervision of all functions pertaining to purchasing, subject to the review of the finance director. (Ord. of 3-3-92, § 1; Ord. of 11-3-2004, § 1) 
Sec. 1-7-4. - Duties of purchasing division administrator.     The purchasing division administrator shall have the following authority, responsibility and duties: (1)  To carry out the policies, regulations and procedures for purchasing all goods and services required by the using agencies of Athens-Clarke County pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, and other directives of the governing authority or the manager not in conflict with this chapter. (2)  To obtain the highest quality of goods and services for the most economical costs which will provide the most effective operations of Athens-Clarke County. (3)  To discourage restrictive bidding and specifications and to promote open competition. (4)  To maintain up-to-date files of all vendors known to the governing authority who are reputable and responsible vendors of goods and services, prices and discounts as may be available. (5)  To establish a standard uniform list of nomenclature of all goods and services regularly used by Athens-Clarke County, to be distributed to all using agencies and suppliers, in order to achieve uniformity of common purchases among the various using agencies. (6)  To take advantage of all exemptions, discounts and special offers to which Athens-Clarke County may be entitled, to ensure the most economical purchase without sacrificing quality, including the availability of "bulk" purchases. (7)  To coordinate with the finance department to ensure that all purchases are in compliance with Athens-Clarke County's budgeting and accounting policies and procedures. (8)  To be informed of the "state-of-the-art" developments and procedures in the field of governmental purchasing, current market conditions, new products and prices. (9)  To develop and prescribe such forms as may be necessary to effectively and efficiently carry out the purchasing procedures of Athens-Clarke County and to require that such forms be utilized by all using agencies. (10)  To ensure that all goods and services purchased by Athens-Clarke County are properly received and are representative of and in accordance with the prescribed terms and specifications of the purchase agreement. (11)  With the approval of the manager, to declare ineligible any vendor that misrepresents or defaults on any quotation, bid or purchase agreement with Athens-Clarke County and to disqualify such vendor from doing further business with Athens-Clarke County for a specified period of time. (12)  To promulgate policies and procedures, with the advice of the finance director and approval of the manager, to administer and carry out the provisions of this chapter or other policies established by Athens-Clarke County pertaining to governmental purchases, and to develop and maintain a uniform purchasing manual which shall include all such policies and procedures to be followed by all using agencies. (13)  To manage all affairs of the purchasing division. (14)  To prepare and submit reports on the purchasing activities of Athens-Clarke County in a manner to be prescribed by the manager. (Ord. of 3-3-92, § 1; Ord. of 11-3-2004, § 1) 
Sec. 1-7-5. - Committee on standards and specifications—Established; members; meetings; authority.     There is hereby established a committee on standards and specifications which shall include the manager, or designee, as chairman and other such government officers and department directors as determined and appointed by the manager. The purchasing division administrator shall serve as an ex officio member and secretary to the committee. The committee shall hold such meetings from time to time as deemed necessary by the manager and shall be authorized to enlist the advice and assistance of any other government officer, employee, specialist or technician as may be deemed appropriate to carry out the duties and responsibilities of the committee. (Ord. of 3-3-92, § 1; Ord. of 11-3-2004, § 1) 
Sec. 1-7-6. - Same—Duties.     The duties and responsibilities of the committee on standards and specifications shall be as follows: (1)  To review purchasing policies and procedures to ensure that the process of acquisition of goods and services is carried out effectively. (2)  To review the classification of all goods and services commonly used by each using agency. (3)  To review and approve standard minimum specifications for all like goods and services commonly used by all using agencies striving to meet the common needs of the majority of such agencies. (4)  To review and approve standard minimum qualities, quantities, sizes and varieties of goods and services to be purchased by Athens-Clarke County consistent with the desired efficiency of governmental operations, the particular needs of a using agency and the provisions of this chapter. (5)  To ensure that all standards and specifications are reasonable, nonrestrictive and certain to promote open competition among vendors. (6)  To review special needs of any using agency to identify noncompetitive types and kinds of goods and services and to exempt such items from the list of standard purchases. Any such exemption shall include documentation of the reasons for the exemption. (7)  To periodically review the standards and specifications, or exemptions, established by the committee and to promptly provide any additions, deletions or other changes and to avoid unnecessary delays in the purchasing process. (Ord. of 3-3-92, § 1) 
Sec. 1-7-7. - Applicability of standards.     Each standard specification, until revised or rescinded, shall apply alike in terms and effect to the purchase or contract for the item or service described in such specifications. However, if any item requested by a using agency is not on the standard list or listed as an exemption, the purchasing division administrator shall be authorized to exempt the item based on sufficient justification being provided by the requesting using agency. (Ord. of 3-3-92, § 1; Ord. of 11-3-2004, § 1) 
Sec. 1-7-8. - Substitution for brand names.     If a requisition is submitted for a "brand name" item or service, the purchasing division administrator shall notify the requesting agency of acceptable and approved comparable goods or services which meet the requirements of the specifications. The department director and the purchasing division administrator shall jointly decide on the items to be purchased. (Ord. of 3-3-92, § 1; Ord. of 11-3-2004, § 1) 
Sec. 1-7-9. - Uniform purchasing manual.     The uniform purchasing manual shall include a step-by-step description of the proper procedures for purchasing goods and services, samples of all forms used in the purchasing process, and a clearly defined explanation of the proper use of such forms and procedures. (Ord. of 3-3-92, § 1) 
Sec. 1-7-10. - Purchase orders.     Except as otherwise provided herein, all purchases for goods and services for Athens-Clarke County shall be on an official Athens-Clarke County purchase order. (Ord. of 3-3-92, § 1) 
Sec. 1-7-11. - Budget review prior to issuing purchase orders.     Except as otherwise provided for in emergencies, no purchase order shall be issued unless there is a sufficient unencumbered appropriation, in excess of all unpaid obligations, of the using agency to cover the amount of such purchase. (Ord. of 3-3-92, § 1) 
Sec. 1-7-12. - Sole-source purchases.     The manager shall be authorized to designate a sole source for any item or service, the purchase of which, due to special scientific, technology or extraordinary specifications and circumstances, is available from only one vendor. Any such purchase shall be documented as to the reasons for the sole source and shall be maintained in the office of the purchasing division. (Ord. of 3-3-92, § 1) 
Sec. 1-7-13. - Award of contracts.     The manager shall be authorized to award a contract for purchase of goods and services to the lowest, best and most responsible bidder or vendor when approved in the budget or approved project resolution up to $199,999.99. The manager shall be authorized to delegate authority to award contracts more than $49,999.99 and less than $100,000.00 to the purchasing division administrator. The approval of the mayor and commission shall be required before the award of a contract over $50,000.00 that is in excess of the budget or approved project resolution. The mayor and commission shall approve all contracts $200,000.00 or above. The manager shall report all contracts awarded above $10,000.00 to the mayor and commission for information. Should any question or discrepancy arise in any bid or contract, the disposition of such purchase shall be determined by the manager. (Ord. of 3-3-92, § 1; Ord. of 7-2-96, § 1; Ord. of 7-2-99, § 1; Ord. of 11-3-2004, §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 1-7-14. - Competitive quotations for bids over $50,000.00.     Any supply, material or contractual service to be purchased by Athens-Clarke County which has an estimated cost of more than $50,000.00 shall be purchased through formal sealed bids using formal advertising that may appear in the local newspaper in which the sheriff's sales appear or by other appropriate means to obtain competitive quotations. If advertised in the local newspaper, such notice shall be published once a week for two consecutive weeks prior to the time of the advertised bid opening. The manager shall be authorized to use the reverse auction procedure when appropriate. Reverse auctions may be used as a form of competitive bidding and as an alternative to sealed bidding. The reverse action process allows the vendors to see the lowest bid but not the identities of the bidders during the bidding process. Once the reverse auction is closed, the manager or the purchasing division administrator evaluates the bids and awards the contract to the lowest responsive and responsible vendor. (Ord. of 3-3-92, § 1; Ord. of 6-12-2001, § 1; Ord. of 11-3-2004, § 3) 
Sec. 1-7-15. - Competitive quotations under $49,999.99.     Any supply, material or contractual service to be purchased by Athens-Clarke County which has an estimated cost of not less than $1,000.00 and not more than $49,999.99 shall be purchased on the open market without regard for formal advertising. Upon the receipt of documented written price quotations from at least three reputable vendors, the purchasing division administrator shall award the contract. (Ord. of 3-3-92, § 1; Ord. of 11-3-2004, §§ 1, 4) 
Sec. 1-7-16. - Reserved. Editor's note— Section 5 of an ordinance adopted Nov. 3, 2004, deleted former § 1-7-16 of the Code, which pertained to competitive quotations under $4,999.00 and derived from Ord. No. 92-03-29, § 1, adopted March 3, 1992. 
Sec. 1-7-17. - Purchases of less than $1,000.00.     Any supply, materials or contractual service which has an estimated cost of less than $1,000.00 may be purchased from any approved vendor recommended by the using agency or, in the absence of such recommendation, from any approved vendor selected by the purchasing division administrator. Each such purchase shall be authorized by the head of the using agency. (Ord. of 3-3-92, § 1; Ord. of 11-3-2004, §§ 1, 6) 
Sec. 1-7-18. - Selection of professional services.     Professional services may be required on a project basis, for specific activities or for certain durations of time. Procurement of these services shall be the primary responsibility of the user agency with the assistance of the purchasing division administrator. A contract for professional services shall be awarded to the best qualified proposal based on the evaluation of the proposals and negotiation of reasonable and fair compensation for services. Such professional service needs must be approved by the manager and shall be limited to a maximum duration of five years without again requesting proposals for such general services from the professional community. The initial selection of such professional services shall be accomplished as outlined in subsection (1) below. Fees for such services may be negotiated at the time of such designation or on a project/activities basis: (1)  Professional services which have an estimated cost of more than $50,000.00 shall be purchased through request for proposals. When determined appropriate by the manager, solicitation may be made through formal advertising in the local newspaper in which the sheriff's sales appear or regional newspapers or any other similar means to notify the professional community. (2)  Professional services which have an estimated cost of less than $49,999.99 but more than $999.99 shall be purchased on the open market without regard for formal advertising. Upon the receipt of written proposals from at least three qualified professionals of the service, the user agency shall recommend and the purchasing division administrator shall award the contract. (3)  Professional services which have an estimated cost of less than $1,000.00 may be purchased from any approved list of professionals recommended by the using agency or, in the absence of such recommendation, from any approved professional selected by the purchasing division administrator. Each such purchase shall be authorized by the head of the using agency. (Ord. of 3-3-92, § 1; Ord. of 11-3-2004, §§ 1, 7) 
Sec. 1-7-19. - Rejection of bids or quotations.     The manager shall be authorized to reject any or all bids, in whole or in part, when in his or her judgement the terms, conditions or specifications received are not in compliance with those in the Athens-Clarke County bid solicitation. In such event, the manager shall document the circumstances of such rejection and reissue the solicitation as he or she deems appropriate. (Ord. of 3-3-92, § 1) 
Sec. 1-7-20. - Federal and state contract purchases.     Whenever any goods or services are available to Athens-Clarke County through a contract with the federal or state government, and when such items or services meet the requirements of a using agency, such item or service shall be deemed to have met all the requirements of competitive bidding and may be purchased under the federal or state contract without regard to further government requirements. The manager shall be authorized to award contracts for the acquisition of goods and services from a state or federal contract when the cost associated with the good or service is within the prescribed budget authorized by the mayor and commission. No additional commission approval shall be required. All such contracts shall be reported to the mayor and commission on a monthly basis. (Ord. of 3-3-92, § 1; Ord. of 11-3-2004, § 8) 
Sec. 1-7-21. - Price agreement contracts.     Goods or services used by one or more using agencies on a regular and continuing basis may be purchased under a contract covering a specified extended period of time, at an established price for such goods or services which shall be valid for the duration of the contract period. Purchase agreements under this provision shall be subject to applicable bidding or quotation requirements as any other purchase. (Ord. of 3-3-92, § 1) 
Sec. 1-7-22. - Cooperative purchasing agreements.     The manager shall be authorized to enter into cooperative purchasing agreements with other units of government when, in his judgement, it would be in the best interest of Athens-Clarke County. (Ord. of 3-3-92, § 1) 
Sec. 1-7-23. - Emergency purchases.     The manager shall be authorized to waive any or all bidding requirements for the purchase of necessary goods or services whenever an emergency condition exists which presents a threat to the safety, health and welfare of the citizens of Athens-Clarke County and whenever such requirements would cause undue delay in the delivery of essential services under such conditions. (Ord. of 3-3-92, § 1) 
Sec. 1-7-24. - Deposits; bid bonds.     The purchasing division administrator shall be authorized to require a bid bond or deposit, payable to Athens-Clarke County, for contracts up to $99,999.00 from vendors bidding on any goods or services when, and in such amounts, as in his or her judgement the nature of the goods or services to be purchased would warrant such bond or deposit or whenever such bond or deposit is required under state law. Notice of a bond or deposit shall be included in the public notice and bidding specifications. Contracts over $100,000.00 shall require a bid bond or deposit. Such bond or deposit shall not exceed 100 percent of the bid amount. (Ord. of 3-3-92, § 1; Ord. of 11-3-2004, § 1) 
Sec. 1-7-25. - Vendors in default.     The purchasing division administrator shall not accept any bid or quotation from nor issue any purchase order to any vendor or contractor that is in default on the payment of any taxes, license fees or other monies due Athens-Clarke County. (Ord. of 3-3-92, § 1; Ord. of 11-3-2004, § 1) 
Sec. 1-7-26. - Records to be maintained.     A record and description of all requisitions, competitive bids and quotations, purchase orders, receiving reports and other pertinent documentation of purchasing shall be maintained by the purchasing division administrator in accordance with regulations and procedures prescribed in the purchasing manual and shall be public record. (Ord. of 3-3-92, § 1; Ord. of 11-3-2004, § 1) 
Sec. 1-7-27. - Local buying preference.     It is the desire of Athens-Clarke County to purchase from local vendors whenever possible. Athens-Clarke County has a higher responsibility to its residents, however, to ensure that the maximum value is obtained for each public dollar spent. Assuming quality and service are equal, the vendor or supplier who wishes to do business with Athens-Clarke County must submit the lowest quote for the goods or services being purchased. (Ord. of 3-3-92, § 1) 
Sec. 1-7-28. - Vendors' appeals.     Any vendor or professional may appeal the award of a contract to the manager within five calendar days of the award of the contract. A vendor dissatisfied with the manager's decision shall have ten calendar days to appeal to the administrative hearing officer pursuant to section 1-5-1 of the Athens-Clarke County Code for final determination. (Ord. of 3-3-92, § 1; Ord. of 11-3-2004, § 9) 
Sec. 1-7-29. - Conflict of interest. (a)  In accordance with the provisions set forth in section 2-301 of the Charter of the Unified Government of Athens-Clarke County, no elected official, appointed officer or employee of Athens-Clarke County or any agency or political entity to which the Charter applies shall knowingly: (1)  Engage in any business or transaction in which the person has a financial interest, which is incompatible with the proper discharge of official duties; (2)  Disclose confidential information concerning the property, government or affairs of the governmental body by which such person is engaged or is a member of without proper legal authorization or use that information to advance the financial or other private interest of such person or others; (3)  Accept any gift that has a value of $100.00 or more from any person, firm or corporation which to his or her knowledge is interested, directly or indirectly, in business dealings with the governmental body he or she is a member of or by which such person is engaged; provided, however, that an elected official who is a candidate for public office may accept campaign contributions and services in connection with any campaign; (4)  Represent private interests other than his or her own in any action or proceeding against Athens-Clarke County, Georgia, or any portion of its government; or (5)  Vote or otherwise actively participate in the negotiation or the making of any contract between Athens-Clarke County, Georgia, and any business or entity in which he or she has a financial interest. (b)  To avoid the appearance of potential conflicts, no commissioner of Athens-Clarke County shall serve on the board of or on a committee of any agency or corporation that is funded wholly or in part by the Unified Government of Athens-Clarke County unless otherwise required by law. (Ord. of 3-3-92, § 1; Ord. of 11-4-2003, § 1) 
Sec. 1-7-30. - Federally funded projects and programs.     In accordance with the provisions of the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Circular A-102, entitled "Grants and Cooperative Agreements with State and Local Governments," and all related provisions and laws, all Athens-Clarke County departments shall comply with all federal procurement regulations when procuring goods and services funded in whole or in part with any federal grant. Further, such regulations shall supersede all local purchasing ordinance provisions.     All sub-recipient agencies receiving federal funds through Athens-Clarke County shall also comply with the federal granting agency procurement regulations which supersede all local purchasing ordinance provisions. (Ord. of 5-4-99, § 1) 
Sec. 1-7-31. - Public construction projects governed by O.C.G.A. § 36-91-1 et seq. (a)  The purchasing division administrator is hereby delegated the authority to administer a process for mandatory prequalification of prospective bidders or offerors for public construction projects pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-91-20(f).     Pursuant to this delegation of authority, the purchasing division administrator is authorized to implement a process for mandatory prequalification of bidders, subject to the following requirements: (1)  Criteria for prequalification shall be reasonably related to the project or the quality of the work. (2)  Criteria for prequalification shall be available to any prospective bidder or offeror requesting such information. (3)  There shall be a method of notifying prospective bidders or offerors of the criteria for prequalification. (4)  There shall be a procedure for a disqualified bidder or offeror to respond to his or her disqualification to the Athens-Clarke County Manager; however, such procedure shall not include a formal appeal. (b)  No bid or proposal shall be eligible for consideration by Athens-Clarke County from a prospective bidder who has not been prequalified on the procurement in question where the invitation for bids or request for proposals specified that prequalification would be mandatory, and any bid or proposal so received shall be returned to the prospective bidder or offeror unopened. (Ord. of 7-1-2003, § 1) 
CHAPTER 1-8. - FINANCE GENERALLY Sec. 1-8-1. Execution. Sec. 1-8-2. Collection of taxes. Sec. 1-8-3. Execution sales. Sec. 1-8-4. Surety bonds. Sec. 1-8-5. Settlement of claims—Authority. Sec. 1-8-6. Same—Report of accidents. Sec. 1-8-7. Fiscal year. 
Sec. 1-8-1. - Execution.     In addition to other penalties, when any tax or license fee imposed in this Code is not paid as required by this Code, the same may be collected by execution by the director of finance as in the case of taxes due to Athens-Clarke County. (Ord. of 1-12-93, § 1) 
Sec. 1-8-2. - Collection of taxes.     All tax fi. fas. issued by authority of the mayor and commission, including those for business taxes, professional taxes, assessment taxes and all other taxes, shall be directed to the Athens-Clarke County Marshal and the Athens-Clarke County Marshal shall have authority to levy and collect such fi. fas. and transfer the same and shall have the power to make all deeds when sales are made under fi. fas. (Ord. of 1-12-93, § 1) 
Sec. 1-8-3. - Execution sales.     The director of finance shall issue an execution for all fines, costs, unpaid taxes, assessments or other revenues due to Athens-Clarke County which shall be directed to the Athens-Clarke County Marshal. The Athens-Clarke County Marshal shall levy all executions, advertise sales and sell the property levied on as provided by the Charter of the Unified Government and this Code. (Ord. of 1-12-93, § 1) 
Sec. 1-8-4. - Surety bonds. (a)  In case of all contracts entered into by Athens-Clarke County in which any contract bond, performance bond or other form of surety bond, except bid bonds, or in which workers' compensation insurance, contractor's public liability and property damage insurance, builder's risk insurance, fire insurance, tornado insurance, or any other forms of insurance, are executed or required in connection with such contracts (including bonds or insurance of subcontractors), the bonds or the policies providing for such insurance shall be executed by the surety company or the insurer by a duly authorized agent or agency of the company; and no such bond or insurance policy otherwise executed shall be accepted by Athens-Clarke County. (b)  No person shall accept or execute any bond or policy of insurance contrary to the provisions of this section. (Ord. of 1-12-93, § 1) 
Sec. 1-8-5. - Settlement of claims—Authority.     Only the mayor shall have the authority to settle, offer to settle or make any commitment whatever regarding settlement of any claim for damages, arising from injuries to person or property filed against Athens-Clarke County. (Ord. of 1-12-93, § 1; Ord. of 7-2-96, § 1; Ord. of 7-6-99, § 1) 
Sec. 1-8-6. - Same—Report of accidents.     All employees of Athens-Clarke County engaged in any work of Athens-Clarke County from which accidents occur causing either personal injury or property damage shall immediately obtain the names and addresses of persons witnessing the same or the names of those who have any knowledge relating thereto and shall, at once, give a copy of the name of witnesses to the heads of their respective departments. (Ord. of 1-12-93, § 1) 
Sec. 1-8-7. - Fiscal year.     The fiscal year of the Unified Government of Athens-Clarke County shall commence on July first and end on June thirtieth of each year. (Ord. of 1-12-93, § 1) 
CHAPTER 1-9. - PERSONNEL SYSTEM[5] Sec. 1-9-1. General provisions. Sec. 1-9-2. Classification plan. Sec. 1-9-3. Compensation plan. Sec. 1-9-4. Employment. Sec. 1-9-5. Appointments. Sec. 1-9-6. Change of employment status. Sec. 1-9-7. Leaves of absence. Sec. 1-9-8. Separation and disciplinary action. Sec. 1-9-9. Appeal procedures. Sec. 1-9-10. Employee development. Sec. 1-9-11. Work schedules, attendance, hours of work other regulations. Sec. 1-9-12. Requirement of employees. Sec. 1-9-13. Nepotism. Sec. 1-9-14. Records and reporting. Sec. 1-9-15. Clearance procedure for separated employees. Sec. 1-9-16. Status of present employees. Sec. 1-9-17. Complaints by private citizens. Sec. 1-9-18. Employee benefits. Sec. 1-9-19. Health insurance benefits for employees and retirees. Sec. 1-9-20. Domestic partnership benefits. Footnotes: --- (5) --- Charter reference— Merit system of personnel administration, § 4-301. 
Sec. 1-9-1. - General provisions. (a)  Establishment of personnel system. The guidelines of the personnel system are herein established per section 4-301 of the Charter. (b)  Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to establish a system of personnel policies that will meet the needs of all employees. These policies will: (1)  Provide methods for recruiting, selecting, training and advancing employees based on their ability, knowledge, skill and experience; (2)  Provide equitable compensation and uniform benefits; (3)  Provide for impartial treatment of employees in situations involving disciplinary action and appeals procedures; and (4)  Ensure equal employment opportunities and comply with all state and federal regulations regarding fair employment practices. (c)  Positions covered by the personnel system. All employees shall be covered by the personnel system except the following: (1)  Elected and appointed officials; (2)  Employees of elected and appointed officials unless requested by the elected or appointed official and approved by the commission for personnel system coverage; (3)  Members of appointed boards and commissions; (4)  Manager; (5)  The Athens-Clarke County attorney; (6)  Auditor; (7)  Individuals employed by the commission in a professional position to carry out temporary or special assignments on behalf of the mayor and commission; (8)  Assistant managers; (9)  Department directors; (10)  Clerk of commission; (11)  Employees considered in the professional class; (12)  Employees of any department who have been exempted from the provisions of the personnel system by the commission to ensure compliance with regulations of any federal or other governmental agency; and (13)  Temporary, seasonal, part-time (no benefits), and contract employees and student interns. (d)  (1)  Personnel administration. The mayor and commission hereby establishes the personnel hearing officer ("PHO"). The PHO shall be an attorney who is a member in good standing of the State Bar of Georgia and is appointed by the mayor and commission after consultation with the manager and attorney regarding the PHO qualifications and duties. Employees who are subject to disciplinary action or who make a claim of illegal discrimination or harassment, as those terms are defined in Chapter 1-17 of this Code, shall have the right to due process through the managerial chain of command, with certain matters appealable to the PHO. The PHO shall have jurisdiction to hear the following matters: (1) appeals of dismissals due to disciplinary action; (2) appeals of demotions due to disciplinary action; (3) appeals of suspensions due to disciplinary action; and (4) appeals involving claims of illegal discrimination or harassment as described in Chapter 1-17 of this Code. The PHO shall exhibit mature reasoning, prudent stewardship of public funds, evidence of good judgment, and impartial and nonpolitical performance of these duties. a.  Personnel hearing officer. The PHO has final authority within the Unified Government to hear appeals within his or her jurisdiction. b.  Criteria for review. In an appeal to the PHO, the appellant shall have the burden to establish by a preponderance of the evidence that: 1.  The Unified Government imposed discipline upon the appellant that is not consistent with this Code, the policies, practices, or procedures of the Unified Government, or any applicable laws of the State of Georgia; 2.  The factual basis upon which the Unified Government imposed disciplinary action upon the appellant is not true and correct or was substantially inaccurate in all relevant and material aspects; or 3.  An incident of illegal discrimination or harassment, as described in Chapter 1-17, took place, and the Unified Government failed to address such illegal discrimination or harassment as required by applicable law. c.  Appeal hearings . In regard to appeals of disciplinary actions, the PHO shall have authority to confirm or rescind the disciplinary action in question, but shall not have authority to substitute an alternative form of discipline. The PHO may provide management with supplementary observations, comments, and recommendations regarding alternative levels of discipline for consideration by management. In regard to claims of illegal discrimination or harassment, the PHO shall have the authority to make factual and legal findings as to whether or not illegal discrimination or harassment occurred, and upon so finding, the PHO may recommend remedies or relief based upon applicable law. The PHO shall adopt procedures for the conduct of appeal hearings. The admissibility of documents or other information and the rules of evidence may be informal as compared to formal judicial proceedings. The PHO shall have the authority to compel attendance of witnesses, rule on motions, grant continuances, and rule on evidentiary matters. d.  Types of cases. The PHO shall hear those matters appealed in accordance with the applicable procedures and within the PHO's jurisdiction. The PHO shall not hear appeals involving temporary records such as corrective interview documentation, performance evaluations, and notices of reprimands or similar documentation temporarily held in the employee's personnel file, appeals involving promotion decisions, or appeals involving involuntary transfers, unless such appeals are directly related to a claim of illegal discrimination or harassment. Notices of reprimand shall be removed from an employee's file if two years have passed since the issue in question occurred and there have been no problems of a similar nature. e.  Appointment of personnel hearing officer. The mayor shall make a nomination to the commission for appointment of one attorney as the primary PHO and one or more alternate attorneys who shall be similarly appointed in case the primary PHO is not available when needed to conduct a hearing. The PHO shall be appointed by a majority vote of the entire commission and may be removed by majority vote of the entire commission. The initial appointment shall be for a two-year term and shall be subject to replacement or reappointment at the end of the term. f.  Conduct of hearings. The PHO shall conduct public hearings and render written decisions on the issues presented. All testimony before the PHO shall be rendered under oath or affirmation, by oral testimony or depositions and with the right of cross-examination. g.  Amendments to policies and procedures. The PHO shall be authorized to make recommendations to the manager as to amendments, additions to, and changes in the Unified Government's employment policy and procedures. h.  Appeal hearings and record keeping. The PHO shall hold appeal hearings as soon as necessary when properly petitioned by an Athens-Clarke County personnel system employee who has a qualified reason for requesting a hearing. All such hearings shall be open to the public. The personnel director shall set the date, time and place of the hearing, providing proper notification to the affected parties. The time and place of each appeal hearing; names of the persons present; and all official acts of the PHO shall be recorded in the minutes, or in the alternative, a licensed court reporter or stenographer shall be present to transcribe the hearing. An agenda, including all items to be presented to the PHO, shall be prepared by the personnel director prior to each appeal hearing, or in the alternative, the PHO may require the parties to submit written position statements setting forth the issues to be heard and their basic contentions. If no licensed court reporter or stenographer is present for the hearing, the minutes shall be transcribed and presented for approval or amendment by the PHO. The minutes, once approved by the PHO, or the hearing transcript shall be open to inspection by the public, employees, and department heads. Within a reasonable time after the hearing's conclusion, the PHO shall issue a written decision to the parties. (2)  Personnel director. The manager shall appoint the personnel director for Athens-Clarke County. The personnel director shall be responsible for administering the approved policies of the personnel system. The personnel director shall direct all activities of the personnel department and may delegate responsibilities to personnel department staff members. The personnel director shall serve as the secretary to the PHO and may be called upon to carry out various administrative duties assigned by the PHO. (3)  Department directors. Athens-Clarke County government shall have such department directors as may be necessary to meet the program needs of the government. Department directors shall be charged with the responsibility of operating their departments in conformity with the rules and regulations of the personnel system. A department director may establish standard operating procedures for an individual department not to conflict with the personnel system. Department rules and regulations must be approved in writing by the personnel director or a designee before they are implemented within a department. The personnel director or a designee will review the proposed departmental rules and regulations to verify their compliance with the personnel system. If there are any discrepancies, the department director must be notified of these in writing. Department rules and regulations, which have been approved by the personnel director or a designee, shall be posted in a public place in the department at least five (5) working days prior to their effective date. (e)  Amendment of personnel system. Any employee of the government may submit a proposed amendment to the personnel system. Amendments should be submitted to the department director who will make a recommendation to the personnel director. The personnel director shall review and make a recommendation to the manager. Department directors and assistant managers may submit proposed amendments through the personnel director to the manager. The manager shall submit his recommendation to the commission. The proposed amendment must be posted in a public place, located in each department of the government, at least five (5) working days before action is to be taken on the proposed amendment by the commission. (Ord. of 7-3-91, § 1; Ord. of 12-6-94, § 1; Ord. of 7-2-96, § 1; Ord. of 8-6-96, §§ 1—3; Ord. of 7-6-99, § 1; Ord. of 6-6-2006, §§ 1—3; Ord. of 12-4-2018(1), § 1 ) 
Sec. 1-9-2. - Classification plan. (a)  The personnel director or a designee shall be responsible for developing a classification plan for the Athens-Clarke County government. The classification plan shall provide the class titles and description of duties and responsibilities for all positions in the government. The plan shall be amended as the duties, responsibilities and employment conditions change. Periodic classification plan amendments shall not be construed to be a reclassification as provided for under subsection 1-9-2(b)(5). (b)  All positions that have similar responsibilities, the same relationships to other classes of positions and require the same level of skills, knowledge, abilities and experience shall be included in the same class. (1)  Composition of plan. The classification plan shall consist of: a.  A grouping of levels of positions that are approximately equal in difficulty and responsibility, calling for the same general qualifications and which are compensated fairly within the same range of pay, under similar working conditions; b.  Titles that identify the job; c.  Written job descriptions for each title; and d.  The system of classification level showing the title of each position included in the personnel system. (2)  Use of classification specifications. The classification specifications are descriptive only and are not restrictive. They are intended to show the kinds of positions that should be allocated to the respective levels as determined by their duties, responsibilities and qualification requirements. Positions will be assigned to the appropriate pay level utilizing the currently approved classification system. The use of a particular expression or illustration, as to the duties, qualifications or other attributes, shall not be held to exclude others not mentioned, if such others are similar in kind and degree. The department director, with approval of the personnel director, may assign different tasks to a position when such duties are not similar in rank to those specified in the class of the position. (3)  Administration of plan. The personnel director or a designee is responsible for administering the classification plan. The plan will be closely monitored to see that it reflects the duties performed by each employee in the classified service and the level to which each position is assigned. The personnel director or a designee shall examine the responsibilities of new positions as they are created and then assign them to an existing level within the classification system. If there is a need to do so, the personnel director may recommend to the manager any changes in the classification system that may be made necessary by changes in the responsibilities of existing or new positions. The personnel director or a designee shall periodically review the entire pay classification plan and make recommendations to the manager for changes as they are needed. (4)  Assignment of positions to classification grades. Positions shall be assigned to a classification grade based upon the current approved system for classifications/reclassifications. Department directors will be notified of the classification grade and the associated pay grade assigned to each position in their department. Employees will be notified of the classification grade, and associated pay grade, assigned to their individual positions. When a new position is established, department directors shall submit in writing a comprehensive job description that explains in detail the duties of the position. The personnel director or a designee shall investigate described duties and then assign the position an appropriate classification grade by using the currently approved classification system. The personnel director or a designee shall notify the department director or a designee of the classification that is to be assigned to the position to ensure that funds will be made available for the designated classification. The department director will then notify the respective employee of the classification assignment. The procedure for authorization of a new position should be as follows: a.  The request for a new position and the completion of the Comprehensive Position Questionnaire must be submitted to the personnel director or a designee by December 1 of each calendar year; b.  The personnel director or a designee shall evaluate the Comprehensive Position Questionnaire according to the approved classification system, and recommend a classification grade to the manager. Upon a decision by the manager of the classification grade, the personnel director shall notify the department director; c.  The personnel director and the department director shall submit the classification level with a budget request to the manager for the allocation of appropriate funds for the new position. The new position request upon approval by the manager will be submitted as a part of the budget process to the commission for action; and d.  All new positions will become effective at the beginning of the new budget year unless otherwise stated. (5)  Reclassification. Reclassification is the assignment of an existing position from one pay level to a different pay level due to a significant change in duties or responsibilities of that position. Reclassification shall result in the following: a.  Raise the level from one classification level to a higher classification level: 1.  An employee who is reclassified to a higher classification level shall receive a salary increase of five (5) percent of the midpoint in the new pay grade, not to exceed the maximum rate in the new pay grade. In the event the minimum pay grade for reclassification exceeds the salary which the employee would receive with a five (5) percent raise, then the employee's new salary shall be at the minimum pay grade level. 2.  No evaluation period; 3.  Does not affect pay other than noted in a.1. above; and 4.  Does not affect longevity. b.  Lower the level from one classification level to a lower classification level: 1.  An employee who is reclassified to a position having a lower pay level shall not be reduced in salary unless salary exceeds the maximum rate of the lower level; 2.  No evaluation period; 3.  Does not affect pay other than noted in b.1. above; and 4.  Does not affect longevity. c.  Remain within the same classification level but with different job responsibilities: 1.  No evaluation period; 2.  Does not affect pay; and 3.  Does not affect longevity. (6)  Procedures for reclassification. A request for reclassification may be initiated by employees through their department director or by the department director. Reclassification also may occur due to change in the organization. The procedure for reclassification should be as follows: a.  The request for reclassification and a completed Comprehensive Position Questionnaire must be submitted, along with a recommendation from the department director, to the personnel director or a designee by December 1 of each calendar year; b.  The personnel director or a designee shall evaluate the Comprehensive Position Questionnaire according to the approved classification system and recommend a classification grade to the manager. Upon a decision by the manager, the personnel director shall notify the department director; c.  All reclassifications will become effective at the beginning of the new budget year unless otherwise stated; d.  The reclassification of a position will occur without the posting of a job vacancy unless the position is vacant; and e.  The reclassification decision shall be made by the personnel director or a designee, the reclassification decision may be appealed to the manager. (Ord. of 7-3-91, § 1; Ord. of 8-1-95, §§ 1—4) 
Sec. 1-9-3. - Compensation plan. (a)  The purpose of the compensation plan is to develop and maintain a pay system for employees that is equitable and uniform. (b)  The following general provisions shall apply to pay established concerning appropriate pay levels: (1)  New appointment. The entrance pay, for all new personnel system employees, shall be at the minimum rate of the pay grade to which the applicant is appointed, unless in the training status. A department director may request an exception to starting a new hire at the minimum rate. Any such requests must be justified in writing to the personnel director for evaluation. The personnel director shall make a recommendation to the manager for approval, denial, or modification of such request. Upon the decision by the manager, the personnel director shall notify the department director. A successful probationary period must be completed by the employee; however, there will be no salary adjustment upon the completion of the probationary period. (2)  Extra remuneration: a.  Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA). All employees will be compensated for overtime according to the Fair Labor Standards Act, Wage-Hour Policy for nonexempt employees and the Compensatory Time Policy for exempt employees. b.  Uniform policy. Department rules and regulations will establish the requirements and financial responsibility for government uniforms required for the department. c.  Court compensation. Employees required to attend court will be compensated in accordance with the Fair Labor Standards Act, Wage-Hour Policy for nonexempt employees and the Compensatory Time Policy for exempt employees. d.  Interim appointment. An employee may be assigned the duties of a higher level position, for a temporary period, to substitute for an employee on leave of absence or during a period of vacancy. If it is anticipated that an employee shall serve in such an "acting" capacity for a continuous period of more than four (4) calendar weeks, he may be paid an "acting" differential of five (5) percent of the midpoint in the "acting" pay grade, not to exceed the maximum rate in the "acting" pay grade, over his regular rate of pay for the time so served. (Ord. of 7-3-91, § 1; Ord. of 8-1-95, §§ 5, 6) 
Sec. 1-9-4. - Employment. (a)  Notification of available positions. The personnel director or a designee shall release recruitment notices and adequate publicity to obtain the necessary number of qualified applicants for employment. Notice of all vacant positions should be posted at least five (5) working days in the personnel department and all other departments and other locations designated by the personnel director. (b)  Application procedures. All applicants for employment will be required to file a standard application form that is provided by the personnel department. The application shall require information concerning experience, training, residence and other necessary qualification data. (c)  Certification of eligible applicants. Upon receipt of a request for an employee, the personnel director or a designee shall certify the names of eligible applicants. The personnel director or a designee shall establish the necessary requirements for reference checks and background investigations that will verify all information provided on the application. The list of names of all qualified applicants shall be submitted to the department director for consideration. The personnel director or a designee shall submit to the department director an external list of qualified applicants and an internal list of qualified applicants from which the department director can make a selection. (d)  Examination of applicants. The personnel director or a designee may design and implement a test for any position with the assistance of the department director. The personnel director, members of the personnel department staff and the department director shall coordinate examinations and tests to measure the qualifications of applicants, including the interview process. Tests also may be conducted in cooperation with other government agencies if deemed appropriate. Special test accommodations will be made for a disabled applicant if the accommodations are consistent with the reasonable accommodations that may be made on the job. (e)  Disqualification of applicants. The personnel director or a designee may reject any application or exclude the name of any applicant from the eligibility list or deny certification of any eligible applicant who: (1)  Does not possess the minimum entry requirements for the position for which the application is made; (2)  Does not meet the physical and mental health requirements for the position to which they seek; (3)  Has made false statements during the hiring process; (4)  By reference check findings of unsatisfactory employment or personal conduct, which finds the applicant to be undesirable for employment; (5)  Does not reply to a mail inquiry within ten days; (6)  Fails to report to duty within the time prescribed in an employment offer; and (7)  Has been employed previously by the City of Athens or Clarke County and has been removed for cause or did not resign in good standing, and is not recommended for re-employment by the department director in which the applicant was previously employed. (f)  Eligibility list. Qualified applicants shall be placed on the eligibility list established by the personnel director. Names of those persons no longer available for employment, or those whose names have been on the list for over 90 days, shall be deleted and names of new applicants may be added to eligible lists by the personnel director or a designee as necessary. (g)  Move to a classified position. An individual employed by Athens-Clarke County outside the personnel system and excluded from these provisions may, at his request and with the written approval of the manager of Athens-Clarke County, be eligible to move to a vacant position covered by the provisions of the personnel system if he meets any of the following criteria: (1)  The individual held a position outside the personnel system at the time the personnel system was adopted and, therefore, was excluded from the protection of the personnel system afforded other employees at that time. (2)  The individual previously held a position with the City of Athens or Clarke County covered by the provisions of their respective merit systems and had been promoted from that position to a position outside the personnel system. (3)  The individual has been employed for a minimum of ten years and is approved by the manager as qualified to hold the personnel system position to which they desire appointment. The request to move to a personnel system position, if approved by the manager, shall give that employee precedent over any other applicant for that personnel system position. An employee who is not eligible to move to a personnel system position under the provisions of this section, or whose request to move is not approved by the manager but who desires to be considered for a personnel system position, must submit an application, and be considered as any other applicant for a personnel system position. (Ord. of 7-3-91, § 1) 
Sec. 1-9-5. - Appointments. (a)  Types of appointments. The following types of appointments may be made under the provisions of this plan in conformity with the rules established: (1)  Full-time regular. A full-time regular employee shall be one appointed to a position to work not less than 40 hours per week on a continuing (indefinite) basis and receiving full benefits. (2)  Full-time elected/appointed officers. Elected and/or appointed full-time officers and board members including judges. (3)  Part-time regular. A part-time regular employee shall be one appointed to a position to work at least 20 but less than 40 hours per week on a continuing (indefinite) basis and receiving prorated benefits. (4)  Temporary. An employee appointed to a position with no guaranteed employment continuation and receiving no benefits. Temporary appointments are not to exceed six (6) months. (5)  Supplemental. An employee who is a regular employee of a noncounty agency whose salary is supplemented by a county stipend. (6)  Part-time/no benefits. A part-time employee appointed to a position to work less than 20 hours per week on a continuing basis. This appointment shall receive no benefits. (7)  Seasonal full-time. An employee appointed to a position to work at least 40 hours a week, who will be laid off at the end of the season for which he has been appointed. This appointment shall receive no benefits. Appointment shall not exceed a nine-month period. (8)  Seasonal part-time. An employee appointed to a position to work less than 40 hours per week, who will be laid off at the end of the season for which he has been appointed. This appointment shall receive no benefits. Appointment shall not exceed a nine-month period. (9)  Trainee. An employee appointed for a period not to exceed two (2) months, whose continuing employment is contingent upon satisfactory completion of a training program. This appointment shall receive no benefits. (10)  Emergency. An employee appointed to prevent a stoppage of public business or loss or serious inconvenience to the public. Appointment on an emergency basis shall not be for more than three (3) months. This appointment may receive no benefits. (11)  Grant. An employee whose salary and benefits are paid for and specified by either an approved grant or contract. Length of appointment shall be contingent on the availability of funds. (12)  Part-time elected/appointed officers. Elected and/or appointed part-time officers and board members including judges. (b)  Probationary status of new employees: (1)  Purpose. The probationary or training period is an important part of the evaluation process. This period is used to observe the work of a new employee. This time observation can help a supervisor or department director in decisions that need to be made concerning the employee's adjustment to new responsibilities. It is also during this period that a supervisor or department director may become aware that an employee is incapable of handling the responsibilities of the new position. Each new employee who is appointed to a regular position will serve the designated probationary period prior to obtaining regular status as a personnel system employee. An employee on probationary status has no rights under the personnel system. An employee who is selected from a re-employment list will be required to serve the stated probationary period for that position as a new hire. If the employee does not successfully complete the probationary period, he will be separated without the right of appeal. (2)  Length of probationary period. The standard probationary period shall be for six (6) months following employment to a regular position. Any positions requiring longer probationary periods will be so stated in the job description. An employee who has not completed their designated probationary period and is either promoted, demoted or transferred must begin a new probationary period upon the change. (3)  Extension of probationary period. If a department director requests an extension of a probationary period at least ten working days prior to the end of the original probationary period, an extension may be granted by the personnel director. This extension of time will be a maximum of six (6) months beyond the normal probationary period. The extension may be suspended prior to the end of the extended six (6) months if the supervisor evaluates and submits in writing an evaluation of the incumbent that shows acceptable job performance. An employee who is to be held in a probationary status beyond the original probationary six-month period shall be notified in writing of this extension by the personnel director. An employee on a 12-month probationary period who is to be held in a probationary status beyond the original probationary 12-month period may be extended for three (3) months. (4)  Evaluation during probation period. During the probationary period, a six-month probationary employee shall be evaluated in the second and fifth month and a 12-month probationary period employee shall be evaluated in the third, seventh and eleventh month. The department director or other designated supervisory personnel shall prepare a written evaluation of the employee's performance. This evaluation shall include information concerning the employee's willingness and ability to perform their duties satisfactorily. During the probationary period, the employee's supervisor will be responsible for providing additional instruction to the employee about satisfactory performance and job expectations. (5)  Eligibility after dismissal during probationary period. If an employee is dismissed from a position during or at the end of a probationary period, the employee's name may be returned to the list from which it was certified if such employee has been recommended for re-employment. This may only occur if the personnel director decides that the employee is suitable for appointment to another position. (c)  Methods of filling vacancies. Vacancies in the personnel system may be filled by any of the following: re-employment, external list, internal list, promotion, transfer, and/or demotion. Whenever possible, vacancies shall be anticipated far enough in advance to allow the personnel director or a designee ample time to decide who may be eligible for appointment or, if necessary, develop an eligibility list. After interviewing qualified applicants from the external list, the department director may be requested by the personnel director to submit written justification for their selection. Vacancies are to be filled by appointment in the following order: (1)  Re-employment list; (2)  External and/or internal list. (Ord. of 7-3-91, § 1) 
Sec. 1-9-6. - Change of employment status. (a)  Promotion. A promotion is the moving of a regular employee to a position in a class having a higher classification level. (1)  Application for promotion. Employees who are seeking promotion must apply for announced vacancies according to specific application requirements for each position. The qualifications of each employee making application for promotion will be reviewed. The names of the employees found to meet the minimum requirements for the desired position will be placed on the internal list. (2)  Basis for awarding promotion; procedures for promotion review panel . When a vacancy exists, and the department director elects to fill the vacancy from the internal list, and there are two (2) or more qualified employees on the internal list, the personnel director shall convene a promotion review panel. The manager, in consultation with the personnel director, shall have the authority to issue policies and procedures for the promotion review panel. (3)  Promotion Review Panel. The promotion review panel shall generally consist of the following three (3) members: a.  The department director for the department in which the vacancy exists or his or her designee; b.  An assistant director, division administrator, or other supervisory employee from the department in which the vacancy exists; and c.  Either the assistant personnel director or the personnel director. In the event that any of the persons listed above are unable to attend a meeting of a promotion review panel or for another valid business reason, the personnel director, or in the absence of the personnel director, the assistant personnel director, shall have the authority to name a replacement. The personnel director or the department director may also request that other employees of the personnel department or the department in which the vacancy exists attend the meeting to provide information regarding the vacancy and the internal candidates for such vacancy. A meeting of a promotion review panel is intended to be a collaborative process in which all members of the panel concur as to the top candidate for promotion. If all members of the promotion review panel are unable to concur as to the top candidate, the department director or the personnel director shall have the authority to refer the matter to the manager for resolution. (4)  Salary increase and evaluation period for promotion. An employee who is promoted to a classification grade, which calls for a higher pay grade than their previous classification grade, shall receive a salary increase of five (5) percent of the midpoint in the new pay grade, not to exceed the maximum rate in the new pay grade, or advance to the entry level of the new pay grade, whichever is greater. A successful evaluation period must be completed by the employee; however, there will be no salary adjustment upon the completion of the evaluation period. An employee promoted to a higher classification shall serve a designated evaluation period. The length of the evaluation period will be included on the job description. An employee promoted from the internal list who does not successfully complete the evaluation period shall be returned to the position in the classification level that was occupied prior to the promotion if such position is available. If a position is not available, the employee will be placed on the re-employment list for up to one (1) year. A regular employee who has been promoted as a personnel system employee to another classification shall retain formal appeal procedure privileges. (b)  Transfer. A transfer is a lateral move from one position to another within the same classification. When an employee is transferred, the employee's pay shall remain at the same rate. (1)  Application for transfer. The transfer of an employee shall not change the status (probationary or regular) of that employee nor shall there be any loss of benefits. (2)  Voluntary transfer. An employee may request a transfer by submitting a request for transfer to another position to the personnel department. All transfer applicants must meet the minimum qualifications for the desired position and compete for the job vacancy along with all others on the eligibility list for the position. An evaluation period may be requested by the department director of the personnel director. (3)  Involuntary transfer. An employee may be transferred without consent upon the written recommendation of the department director(s) and the approval of the personnel director. An evaluation period may be requested by the department director of the personnel director. (c)  Demotion. A demotion is the movement of an employee to a lower classification level. (1)  Reasons for demotion. An employee may be demoted for any of the following reasons: a.  When an employee does not perform the duties and responsibilities of the position at an acceptable level of expectation as determined by the department director. b.  When an employee would otherwise be laid off because the position is being abolished due to lack of work or lack of funds. c.  When the employee's position has been reclassified to a higher level of responsibility for which the employee is not qualified. d.  When an employee requests a demotion, that employee must compete for the particular job vacancy, along with all others who may be on the eligibility list for the position. (2)  Demotion recommendations: a.  Demotion recommendation by department director. If the department director decides demotion of an employee is necessary, appropriate and in the best interest of the organization, the department director may prepare a written recommendation to the personnel director that an employee should be demoted. The recommendation should state detailed reasons for the demotion and the proposed effective date. The personnel director shall make a recommendation to the manager. With the approval of the manager, the personnel director will initiate the demotion process by notifying the department director. It is the responsibility of the department director to notify the employee of the demotion, in writing, stating the reasons for the demotion, the effective date and the employee's right of appeal under the personnel system. The demotion will become effective no sooner than five (5) working days after the date of its delivery to the employee. The employee may exercise appeal rights under the appeal provisions of the personnel system. b.  Results of demotion. An employee who is demoted shall be reduced in pay such that their salary, after demotion, shall have the same percentage relationship to the pay grade minimum of the new position (demoted position) as did their former salary to the pay grade minimum of their former (pre-demoted) position. Demotions do not require evaluations. However, requests for evaluations may be made by department directors to the personnel director. Demotions do not affect an employee's status (probationary or regular) nor shall there be any loss of benefits. (Ord. of 7-3-91, § 1; Ord. of 2-4-92, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 3-2-93, § 1; Ord. of 1-4-94, § 1; Ord. of 8-1-95, §§ 7, 8; Ord. of 12-4-2018(2), §§ 1, 2 ) 
Sec. 1-9-7. - Leaves of absence. (a)  Vacation leave: (1)  Definition of "vacation leave." Vacation leave is paid leave granted to each eligible employee for vacation and other personal uses. Such leave is to be taken on days that an employee would otherwise be scheduled to work and receive pay (exclusive of holidays and all nonwork days). (2)  Eligibility for vacation leave. All employees eligible to receive benefits under section 1-9-5 are eligible to earn vacation leave. (3)  Accrual of vacation leave. All regular full-time employees will accrue vacation leave at the following rate: Years of Service Full-Time (years) Accrual Rate Year (days)  0— 4.99 10  5— 9.99 12 10—14.99 15 15—19.99 18 20+ 24  Employees hired July 2, 1991, or after will accrue vacation leave at the following rate: Years of Service Full-Time (years) Accrual Rate Year (days)  0— 4.99 10  5— 9.99 12 10—14.99 15 15—19.99 18 20+ 20  Regular part-time employees working 20 hours or more per week are eligible to accrue vacation leave on a prorated basis. (4)  Requesting vacation leave. Each department shall establish a department policy designating the advance notice that must be given by an employee desiring to take vacation leave and any conditions under which the advance notice requirement may be waived. Such department policies are essential because of the different work schedules and operating procedures within different departments, and such policies shall be approved in accordance with the procedures set forth in this plan. Forms provided by the personnel department should be used by employees requesting vacation leave. (5)  Time for using vacation leave. Vacation leave assignments will be made according to the preference of the employee where practical. However, leave must be taken at the convenience of the department and the department director's decision when leave may or may not be taken shall be final. Employees shall accrue vacation leave from the date of employment. Employees are, however, not eligible to receive paid vacation or pay in lieu of vacation until the completion of six (6) months employment. Earned leave shall be accrued to a maximum accrual of twice the employee's annual accrual rate and if not used will be forfeited. Department policies shall establish the minimum leave that may be taken per leave request but under no circumstances may vacation leave be granted in less than one-hour increments. (6)  Payment in lieu of vacation leave. Pay in lieu of accrued vacation leave is authorized when an employee is separated from employment by resignation, dismissal, death, disability or retirement. The accrued vacation leave of employees who die in the service of the government shall be paid to the living spouse or estate of such employees or to whom the employee may have designated as beneficiary. (b)  Holiday leave: (1)  General holiday leave policy. It shall be the policy of the government to ensure that all employees enjoy the same number of holidays each year. For regular employees on a workweek other than Monday through Friday, a department policy shall be established to designate the procedure for observing an alternate day for holidays which do not fall on the scheduled work day and the time frame in which an employee has to observe such a holiday before the accrued holiday time is forfeited. Regular part-time employees will be eligible for holiday pay on a ratio of their percent of time worked to the full-time workweek. (2)  Designation of official holidays. Employees shall be granted the following holidays each year: a.  New Year's Day. b.  Martin Luther King Jr.'s Birthday. c.  Memorial Day. d.  July Fourth. e.  Labor Day. f.  Thanksgiving Day and the following Friday. g.  Christmas Eve and Christmas Day. h.  Any other day designated as an official holiday by the commission. (3)  Official holiday that falls on Saturday or Sunday. When an official holiday falls on a Saturday, the preceding Friday shall be designated as the official holiday. When a holiday falls on a Sunday, the following Monday shall be designated as the holiday. (4)  Time off for work performed on scheduled holiday. Employees who are required to work on any day officially designated as a holiday will be granted a compensatory day in lieu of the holiday at a future date that is acceptable to the employee's department director. Each department will establish a department regulation concerning the manner in which employees will be able to request and observe days off in lieu of worked holidays. Compensatory time in lieu of a holiday must be taken within 12 months or such time is forfeited. (5)  Holiday compensation on unpaid leave status. Any employee who is in an unpaid leave status on the work day immediately prior to or following an official holiday shall not receive compensation for that holiday. (c)  Sick leave: (1)  Definition of sick leave. Sick leave is paid leave that may be granted to each eligible employee who through sickness or injury becomes incapacitated to a degree that makes it impossible for the employee to perform the duties of the position; or who is quarantined because of exposure to a contagious disease; or who requires leave for medical, dental or optical examination or treatment; or whose immediate family member requires the employee's care for any of the above reasons. (2)  Eligibility for sick leave. All employees eligible to receive benefits under section 1-9-5 above are eligible to accrue sick leave. (3)  Accrual of sick leave. All regular full-time employees shall accrue sick leave at the rate of eight (8) hours per month. Regular employees working less than full-time shall accrue on a prorated basis. Sick leave time shall accrue from the date of employment, but no employee shall be entitled to receive sick leave time until the completion of one (1) month of service. A biweekly employee who has taken sick leave with or without pay for ten working days shall not earn sick leave credit for the following pay period. A weekly employee who has taken sick leave with or without pay for ten working days shall not earn sick leave credit for the following two (2) pay periods. Employees shall not accrue any sick leave while out on short-term disability. Sick leave is not required to be used within the year in which earned, but may be accumulated from month to month and year to year. (4)  Sick leave buy-back. To be eligible for the following sick leave buy-back plan an employee must have accrued a minimum of 192 sick leave hours. An eligible employee may be awarded pay for sick leave upon request as follows: An employee who uses no sick leave days during a fiscal year, the government shall buy back 24 hours; an employee who uses no more than eight (8) sick leave hours during a fiscal year, the government shall buy back 16 hours; and an employee who uses more than eight (8) but not more than 16 hours during a fiscal year, the government shall buy back eight (8) hours. Only those employees who are in an "active" (currently working and receiving a payroll check) status on the date the checks are issued are eligible for this benefit. Employees in an unpaid "leave-of-absence," layoff or short-term disability status are not eligible for this program. Employees out of work but receiving a payroll check for worker's compensation are eligible. The actual buy-back payment shall occur on or before July 31 immediately following the fiscal year during which the employee earned pay for sick leave under this paragraph. This paragraph shall remain inoperative unless it is affirmatively ratified and funded by the mayor and commission prior to any fiscal year in which it is intended to be effective. (5)  Use of sick leave: a.  Personal illness of employee. Sick leave is not to be considered a right that employees may use at their discretion, but a privilege not to be abused. Employees are to use sick leave for their personal or immediate family illnesses (i.e., father, mother, spouse, children or any other individual living in the same household). Sick leave is accumulated based on working days and will be charged against an employee only for those days an employee is scheduled to work and is unable to report to work because of illness. Absence for a fraction or a part of a day that is chargeable in accordance with these provisions shall be charged proportionally in amounts not smaller than one (1) hour. b.  Job-related accident or injury of employee. An employee who sustains a job-related injury arising out of and in the course of employment must at the time of the injury, or as soon as possible thereafter, notify his or her supervisor. The department director shall follow the prescribed policies for reporting job-related accidents or injuries. Employees who are otherwise eligible for sick leave accumulations and receive injury arising out of and in the course of employment shall be paid for lost time because of the job-related injury for up to a maximum of 120 working days for each new and separate injury in addition to and prior to the use of sick leave accumulation. To receive compensation provided by this section, the employee must submit a physician's statement to the effect that the injury will prevent the employee from working. The government shall reserve the right to have an independent medical examination performed at the government's expense. When lost time, because of a job-related injury, is covered by the state Workers' Compensation Act, the employee shall be paid the difference between the actual salary and those payments received as workers' compensation benefits, social security benefits and any disability benefits received under a government sponsored program for 120 days. In the event of extended absence in excess of 120 working days resulting from a job-related injury, the employee may use all accumulated sick leave and vacation leave prior to being placed on unpaid leave. The employee will continue to receive entitled workers' compensation benefits even if placed on unpaid leave. c.  A nonrelated accident or injury of employee. An employee who is unable to work because of an illness or accident that is not job-related shall be allowed to use accrued sick leave and/or vacation leave, or the employee may elect to receive benefits under the short-term disability insurance plan. In no event shall an employee use sick leave and vacation leave for any time for which short-term disability benefits are received. (6)  Reporting of sick leave. An employee who is absent from work because of illness is responsible for reporting to the appropriate supervisor or department director by telephone or personal message in the manner prescribed in each department's regulations for sick leave reporting. The employee will be expected to keep the supervisor or department director informed of progress on a daily basis when the illness extends beyond one (1) working day. (7)  Requirement of doctor's certificate. In order for an employee to be compensated under the provisions of the sick leave policy, a doctor's certificate must be provided by the employee for any period of absence of five (5) or more working days. Department directors, at their discretion, may require an employee to furnish a doctor's certificate for periods of less than five (5) working days if the department director feels that an employee is abusing the sick leave privilege. The government reserves the right to investigate any possible abuses of sick leave. (8)  Advance of sick leave. An employee who has no accumulated sick leave may not be advanced sick leave against future accumulations. However, in the event of illness, time off may be granted at the discretion of the department director under the provisions of other emergency leave section (subsection (g)(2) below). (9)  Sick leave upon termination of employment. Except as provided in this subparagraph and in section 1-14-2(6) regarding conversion of sick leave to credited service for eligible participants in the Athens-Clarke County Employees' Pension Plan, an employee, upon separation from service, shall not be eligible to receive payment or credit for any accumulated sick leave. Provided, however, that employees who at the time of retirement meet the following conditions: a.  Reach the minimum age of 55; and b.  Complete ten years of continuous creditable service, work up to retirement, and begin drawing deferred compensation distributions from the Management Defined Contribution Plan Program to which this government has made contributions on their behalf as a percentage of such employee's compensation and who have not been participants in the Athens-Clarke County Employees' Pension Plan, may request, in connection with an application for retirement benefits through the Management Defined Contribution Plan Program in which such employee participates, that the balance of that employee's unused, accrued sick leave be converted to a monetary value using the formula hereinafter described, and that such amount be paid as a one-time employer contribution to the employee's Management Defined Contribution Plan Program account upon the employee's retirement. In no event shall such contribution, together with other employer and/or employee contributions to such account within a calendar year, exceed the maximum contributions to such account allowed by federal or state law or regulation. The formula for determining such monetary value shall be as follows: accrued sick leave hours shall be multiplied by the retiring employee's hourly rate of pay, with that result being multiplied by the percentage amount (either eight percent or ten percent) that had been used to determine contributions to that employee's Management Defined Contribution Plan Program account. The sick leave benefits described in this paragraph are not pension benefits; said employees do not receive them as vested rights; and such benefits are subject to change by the Mayor and Commission at any time during said employee's service or after separation from employment. (d)  Military leave. All matters regarding military leave for employees covered by the personnel system shall be governed by the provisions of state law; particularly O.C.G.A. § 38-2-279 entitled, "Rights of Public Officers and Employees Absent on Military Duty as Members of Organized Militia or Reserve Forces." (e)  Civil leave. An employee shall be given necessary time off, without loss of pay, when performing jury duty or when required by proper authority to be a witness in legal proceedings, provided such call to duty is reported in advance to the employee's department director. At the discretion of the department director, an employee also may be granted civil leave when performing emergency civil defense duty in connection with a disaster, or for voting when the polls are not open at least two (2) hours before and after the employee's scheduled hours of work. (f)  Maternity leave. Leave of absence requested due to pregnancy, childbirth, adoption or related conditions may be granted under the existing provisions of the personnel system relating to leave of absence. Such leaves of absence may include, but are not limited to, sick leave, vacation, short-term disability or leave of absence without pay. Maternity-related conditions shall be treated the same as any other illness. (g)  Emergency leave: (1)  Funeral leave. Upon the death of a member of the immediate family, an employee may be granted up to three (3) working days of leave, charged to accumulated leave (sick or vacation). Immediate family for funeral leave shall be defined as spouse, mother, father, step-parent, son, daughter, mother-in-law, father-in-law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, stepson, stepdaughter, brother, brother-in-law, sister, sister-in-law, half-brother, half-sister, grandchild, grandparent, grandparent of spouse. On an individual basis the department director, with the concurrence of the personnel director, may authorize funeral leave for death of nonrelatives. Upon request of the employee, the personnel director may extend the three (3) days maximum limit on funeral leave. (2)  Other emergency leave. In the event that any employee has an emergency which creates an extreme hardship for the employee and prevents attendance at work, the employee's department director may recommend that the employee be placed on emergency leave without pay and the time not charged to any accrued leave. Such emergency leave may be granted by the personnel director with the approval of the manager. The decision of the manager to approve or disapprove such recommendations will be final. (h)  Leave without pay. A regular employee who has completed the probationary period and is covered by the personnel system may be granted leave without pay for personal or other reasons, provided such leave is recommended by the department director and approved by the personnel director. Such leave shall be considered a privilege and not a right, and the employee's request for leave of absence without pay shall be considered when the employee has shown by the records to be a valuable employee to the government. Such leaves may be granted up to one (1) year. Upon request, an employee on leave without pay may return to their former position if available (within one (1) year). If the position is not available, the employee may apply for other job vacancies in the government and compete with all other candidates and is subject to the provisions of section 1-9-5(b) above. (i)  Short-term disability. An employee may elect to receive benefits under the short-term disability insurance plan. An employee may leave active employment for a disability when he or she cannot perform the required duties of the position because of a physical or mental impairment. This action may be initiated by the employee or his or her legal representative. The department director will make a recommendation to the personnel director for approval of such leave. An employee on short-term disability may return to his or her former position if available (within six (6) months). If the position is not available, the employee may apply for other job vacancies in the government and compete with all other candidates. Employees hired in this manner are subject to section 1-9-5(b) above. (j)  Family and medical leave: (1)  Occasions for which leave is authorized. Eligible employees, both male and female, may take up to 12 weeks of unpaid leave during any 12-month period when any of the following events occur: a.  The birth or adoption of a child or placement of a foster child with the employee. b.  The serious health condition of a child, spouse or parent of the employee. c.  A serious health condition of the employee that prevents the employee from performing the functions of his or her position. Where spouses are employed in the same department, both are eligible for leave but leave periods greater than 12 weeks must be coordinated with the approval of the department director. (2)  Definitions: a.  Serious health condition of a child, spouse or parent of the employee is an illness, injury, impairment or physical or mental condition that involves inpatient care and/or continuing medical treatment. b.  Serious health condition of an employee is an illness, injury, impairment or physical or mental condition that involves inpatient care and/or continuing medical treatment. c.  Eligible employee means one who has been an employee at least one year and has worked at least 1,250 hours within the previous 12-month period. d.  Child shall mean a biological child, a legally adopted ward, foster child or a stepchild. Additionally, "child" shall include any person under 18 years of age to whom the employee stands in "loco parentis" or a person 18 years or older who is incapable of self-care because of a mental or physical disability to whom the employee stands in "loco parentis." e.  Spouse means a husband or wife. f.  Parent includes only a biological parent or an individual who stands in "loco parentis" to the employee. (3)  Certification: a.  Prior to granting leave involving birth or adoption of a child or placement of a foster child with the employee, certification from the health care provider, agency or court as to the date of birth, adoption or placement shall be required. b.  Prior to granting leave involving a serious health condition, certification shall be required from the health care provider. A second opinion by a health care provider designated or approved and paid for by the government may be required. (4)  Continuation of health, life and disability benefits. The employee's health, life and disability benefits shall continue during the period of leave, not to exceed 12 weeks, under the same conditions applicable to active employees (e.g., dependent or contributory coverage paid by the employee). If the employee fails to return to work after the leave period, the employee shall reimburse the government for the premiums paid in his/her behalf during this absence unless return to work is prevented by continued serious health condition of the employee or family member. (5)  Return to work: a.  Upon expiration of leave, the employee shall be returned to his/her former position if available, or equivalent position with equivalent benefits, pay, and terms and conditions of employment as were in force at the time leave commenced. b.  If the employee is unable to return to work, he/she may apply for other types of leave under this section. c.  If the employee does not qualify for additional leave under other provisions of this section and will not be returning to work, the employee may be terminated. (6)  Relationship to other leave: a.  An employee is required to apply accrued paid vacation, sick, compensatory and/or holiday leave toward the 12 weeks of family leave under subsections 1-9-7(j)(1)b. and c. herein. Following the exhaustion of paid leave, the employee will be placed on unpaid leave of absence for the remainder of the 12-week period. b.  An employee is required to apply accrued leave, vacation, compensatory and/or holiday leave toward the 12 weeks of family leave under subsection 1-9-7(j)(1)a. Following the exhaustion of paid leave, the employee will be placed on unpaid leave of absence for the remainder of the 12-week period. (7)  Application for family and medical leave: a.  An employee shall request family and medical leave on a prescribed form. b.  An employee shall request leave at least 30 days before a leave is to begin. If 30 days' notice is not possible, then as much prior notice as is practicable must be provided. (Ord. of 7-3-91, § 1; Ord. of 7-6-93, § 1; Ord. of 11-2-93, § 1; Ord. of 4-5-94, § 1; Ord. of 7-2-96, § 1; Ord. of 7-6-99, § 1; Ord. of 6-3-2014, § 18) 
Sec. 1-9-8. - Separation and disciplinary action. (a)  Separations: (1)  Types of separation: a.  Resignation. An employee wishing to leave the government in good standing shall file with their department director a written resignation. The employee should give at least a two-week notice of his or her intention to resign unless the department director consents to their leaving sooner. The written resignation shall be forwarded to the personnel department. b.  Abandonment of job. An employee who is absent from work for three (3) working days or more without notifying their department director of the reasons for the absence and obtaining permission to remain absent from work shall be considered as having resigned without notice and not in good standing. When an employee fails to return to work within three (3) working days of the expiration of authorized leave without notifying their department director of the reasons for the absence and obtaining permission to remain absent from work, the employee shall be considered as having resigned without notice and not in good standing. However, under justified circumstances, exceptions will be reviewed by the department director, and a recommendation made to the manager through the personnel director. Employees who do not resign in good standing may be denied future employment with the government. c.  Reduction in force (RIF). The manager may authorize a reduction in force including, but not limited to, the following reasons: 1.  Shortage of work; 2.  Shortage of funds; 3.  Abolishment of a position; 4.  Changes in duty; 5.  Changes in the organization; or 6.  Other related reasons that are outside the control of an employee that do not reflect discredit upon the service of an employee. The duties performed by an employee laid off may be reassigned to other employees already working who hold positions in appropriate classifications. No regular employee covered by the personnel system shall be laid off while another person in a similar classification is employed as a seasonal, emergency, temporary or provisional appointment. The manager will decide when a reduction in force is required. The layoff of employees shall be in inverse order determined by length of service with the government and the employee's classification. Alternatives to a reduction in force, including reduction of work hours for employees, may be considered by the manager. d.  Long-term disability. An eligible (two (2) years from date of employment) employee may leave active employment for a disability when he or she cannot perform the required duties of his or her position because of a physical or mental impairment. This action may be initiated by the employee or his or her legal representative. In all cases, this action must be supported by medical evidence. In disability or potential disability cases, the government may require the employee to have an examination by a government-approved physician at the expense of the government. The department director shall notify the personnel director for approval of such leave. If an employee accepts long-term disability, he or she will forfeit his or her re-employment rights. Employees who meet the eligibility requirement may apply for benefits under any type of disability plan offered as a part of the government's benefit package. e.  Retirement. When an employee meets the conditions, set forth in the retirement plan regulations for the government, the employee may elect to retire and receive all benefits under the retirement plan. f.  Death. Separation shall be effective as of the date of death of any employee covered by the personnel system. All monies due shall be paid to the designated beneficiary or beneficiaries, or estate of the employee, except such compensation that by law must be paid to the surviving spouse. Compensation payment may include: 1.  Payment for time worked; 2.  Payment for any accrued vacation; and 3.  Payment for accrued holiday leave. g.  Progressive disciplinary action. When circumstances allow, supervisors are encouraged to pursue a philosophy of "progressive discipline" by administering gradually increasing disciplinary actions for each successive instance of employee misconduct. Thus, whenever an employee's performance, work habits or personal conduct at any time falls below an acceptable level, supervisors are encouraged to use progressive disciplinary action. If improvements are not evident after a specified period, more progressive disciplinary action may be justified. A specific incident may justify immediate suspension and/or dismissal. The following are acceptable steps in the progressive disciplinary action process: 1.  Additional instruction and a verbal reminder regarding the standards and expectations of the job. 2.  Written reminder regarding a specific plan and steps toward improvement. 3.  In situations where additional instructions and written plans have not resulted in agreed upon expectations and improvements, a written reprimand shall be initiated as disciplinary action. Copies of any written reprimands or written reminders must be provided to the employee. Written reprimands shall be forwarded to the personnel department for placement in the employee's personnel file and shall remain in the file for two (2) years from the date of issue. After this time the written reprimand will be removed from the file and will no longer be used in determining personnel actions. In the event that additional disciplinary actions have been taken during the two-year period, the retention period for the initial reprimand will be extended for two (2) years after the effective date of the next disciplinary action. 4.  An employee may be suspended without pay by the department director as a form of progressive disciplinary action. The department director may suspend an employee for up to five (5) working days, which shall be reviewed by the personnel director for compliance with procedural requirements. A written notice by the department director will advise the employee of the suspension and the reasons for the suspension. When an employee has acted in a way that may require severe disciplinary action, the department director may recommend to the personnel director for an extension of the five (5) working day suspension without pay (not to exceed 15 calendar days). Upon recommendation by the department director to the personnel director and with the concurrence of the manager, the suspension may be extended to 30 calendar days. An employee who is suspended for five (5) working days or more shall not accrue any leave time, including vacation and/or sick leave, nor shall an employee use leave time while on suspension. Suspension notices shall remain in an employee's personnel file for five (5) years. h.  Immediate suspension. In situations where an employee's actions or physical or mental condition is such that his or her actions present a serious danger to life or property of citizens, or fellow employees, an employee shall be suspended immediately without prior notice. A written notice of the suspension and the reason for the suspension shall be given to the employee at the time the employee is suspended. When an employee has acted, or is alleged to have acted, in a way that would subject the employee to severe disciplinary action, including possible dismissal, a department director may suspend the employee on an indefinite basis while the charges are being investigated. Employees may be suspended under these circumstances, without prior written notice, if, in the opinion of the department director, the employee should be removed from the position while the charges are being investigated. For an indefinite suspension of this nature to extend beyond five (5) working days, it must be approved by the personnel director. Under no circumstances shall a suspension, while investigative action is taking place, be extended beyond 30 calendar days unless court action is pending. An employee who has been suspended during the investigation of charges who is cleared of the charges following the investigation shall be reinstated without loss of pay, privileges, benefits or status. An employee who is suspended shall turn in all keys to the workplace, ID cards, pertinent documents, department equipment, any assigned vehicle, assigned badge, and/or gun in his or her possession belonging to the government. Such employee shall not be allowed into his or her workplace area without prior notice and approval of his or her supervisor and the department director. The employee shall clearly state the reason for wanting to return to his or her workplace prior to approval being granted or denied. i.  Dismissal. Disciplinary action need not precede dismissal. However, all dismissals will be preceded by an automatic three (3) working day suspension with pay, pending the completion of an investigation by the personnel director. If the personnel director decides that the dismissal is appropriate, such dismissal shall be effective at the end of the three (3) working day suspension. If the dismissal is made at the end of the three-day suspension period, a written summary shall be prepared by the personnel director, giving the circumstances and facts leading to the dismissal. A copy of the written summary and the appeal procedure shall be delivered to the employee by certified mail. A copy of the dismissal and written summary shall be filed in the employee's personnel file and a copy of each shall be forwarded to the department director. The following causes, relating to failure in performance of duties, represent those actions considered adequate grounds for reprimand, suspension, demotion or dismissal. The following cases are meant to be representative and not exhaustive reasons for discipline: 1.  Inefficiency, negligence or incompetence in the performance of duties. This may be evidenced by an employee not responding favorably to progressive disciplinary action. 2.  Willful abuse of or negligent use of government property or equipment. 3.  Physical or mental incapacity to perform duties. 4.  Absence without approved leave. 5.  Failure to report for duty at the assigned time and place. 6.  Fraud or misrepresentation in securing employment. 7.  Conviction of a crime of moral turpitude, conviction of a felony or a misdemeanor that would adversely affect the performance of duties or any entry of a plea of no contest to either. 8.  Excessive and/or consecutive unauthorized absences. 9.  Acceptance of money or other things of value in consideration for work-related favors. 10.  Fighting on the job. 11.  Gambling on the job. 12.  Violation of any lawful or official regulation or order, or failure to obey any lawful direction given him by superior personnel. 13.  Illegal activities directed against the government. 14.  Loss of certification required to perform duties. 15.  Falsification of records. 16.  Violation of the Drug Free Workplace Policy. 17.  Violation of the Sexual Harassment Policy as defined by government and federal regulations. 18.  Violation of the government Nonsmoking Policy. 19.  Unauthorized political activity as specified herein. j.  Rights of employees. An employee separated for any reason is entitled to receive notice in writing of his or her separation and the reasons therefor. All separated employees shall receive payment for any accrued vacation leave for which they are entitled. Any employee whose separation was not in good standing may not be considered for re-employment in the government, unless this provision is waived by the department director of the department in which the employee was previously employed. k.  Re-employment rights of employees. Employees who are separated involuntarily, or whose jobs are terminated through no fault of their own, and who desire to be considered for re-employment with the government will be placed on the re-employment list. Employees may remain on the re-employment list for a period not to exceed one (1) year. The employees will be listed by seniority in terms of service and will be offered re-employment for the first vacancy that becomes available in the same classification level for which they are qualified. All employees appointed to a position in this manner will serve the stated probationary period for that position as a new hire; if such employees do not successfully complete the probationary period they will be separated without the right of appeal. An employee may voluntarily accept a position at a lower classification level than their former position, in so doing all provisions of the re-employment rights section apply, as well as being removed from the re-employment list. An employee who is placed on the re-employment list, who does not accept the first offer for re-employment in a position having the same classification as the one held by the employee at the time of separation, will be removed from the re-employment list. Such employees will no longer have guarantee of re-employment rights when a vacancy occurs but may be considered for re-employment on the same basis as any other applicant. (Ord. of 7-3-91, § 1; Ord. of 1-7-92, § 3; Ord. of 6-7-94, § 1) 
Sec. 1-9-9. - Appeal procedures. (a)  The manager shall prepare and issue employee appeal procedures including procedures for use of the personnel hearing officer within ten days of the adoption of this ordinance. Said policies shall be printed in booklet form for distribution to new employees at the time of their employment. (b)  The employee shall be entitled to be assisted by or represented by any person of his or her choosing in preparing and presenting an appeal at any level of the process. (c)  The employee shall be assured freedom from retaliation for using the appeal procedure. A regular employee may use the appeals process for any act or action that affects his or her employment unless such an appeal is specifically prohibited. (d)  An employee's job status shall not be threatened or changed because of the initiation of a grievance or the appeal process. (Ord. of 7-3-91, § 1; Ord. of 8-6-96, § 4) 
Sec. 1-9-10. - Employee development. (a)  In-service training and education. The personnel department may establish standards for training and education programs; see that programs are carried out as approved; prepare certificates or other forms of recognition to persons who satisfactorily complete approved courses and programs; provide assistance to department directors and any full-time or part-time training officer employed in a department in developing and conducting training to meet the specific needs of their departments; develop and coordinate supervision and management training and provide other types of programs common to all departments. In departments that have a training officer, that individual will be responsible for the training functions in that department in coordination with the personnel department. (b)  Educational opportunities. The government encourages employees to take advantage of educational opportunities during off-duty hours. Such educational courses may be specifically approved by the department director to be taken during work hours if they are considered necessary and required by the government for the position that the employee holds. For necessary training that involves travel, the department director may approve travel reimbursement for the employee in accordance with the provisions of the government regarding travel and expense reimbursements. (Ord. of 7-3-91, § 1) 
Sec. 1-9-11. - Work schedules, attendance, hours of work other regulations. (a)  Work schedules. Work schedules for all employees shall be determined by the department director. The schedule showing the beginning and ending time for the normal workday, or the beginning and ending time for specified shifts in departments where shift scheduling is required, must be posted in a central location in each department. Where work schedules vary for specific employees within a department due to activities or operations of that department, employees will be appropriately notified in writing of their individual work schedule. (b)  Workweek. Employees on a regular full-time appointment shall work 40 hours per week except in those departments where regulations have established a different workweek for the department. (c)  Attendance of employees. Regular and punctual attendance at work shall be required of all employees. All departments shall establish and post specific regulations concerning attendance, and employees shall notify the appropriate persons when they will be unable to attend at the designated time and place. (Ord. of 7-3-91, § 1) 
Sec. 1-9-12. - Requirement of employees. (a)  Dress standards. Employees who are required by department regulations to wear a uniform will always, when on duty, wear the uniform or portions of the uniform that are specified by department regulations, and exceptions to the department regulations shall be authorized by the department director. All employees are expected to dress appropriately for performing duties as government employees. (b)  Safety dress standards. Safety measures for protection will be followed when an employee's responsibilities require such protection. (c)  Outside employment. Employees shall not engage in any other employment or in any private business or profession during the hours for which they are employed and scheduled to work for the government or outside of such hours in a manner or to an extent that affects or is deemed likely to affect the employee's performance. (d)  Financial interest. Employees shall not knowingly have a financial interest in the profits of any contract, service or other work performed by the government. Nor shall employees profit directly or indirectly from any contract, purchase sale and/or service between the government and any person or company. (e)  Waiver of work product. As a condition of employment, any work product developed by an employee during their employment shall be the sole property of the Athens-Clarke County Government and they shall have no individual rights therein. (f)  Political activity. No person holding a position with Athens-Clarke County Government, except elected officials, shall be active in political affairs or campaigns in any election for office in the Athens-Clarke County Government other than to vote and privately express opinions. (Ord. of 7-3-91, § 1) 
Sec. 1-9-13. - Nepotism. (a)  Employment of relatives. The employment of relatives is not prohibited by the government as long as none of the related persons are employed in a supervisory role in which they might have an affect on a relative's progress, performance or welfare as an employee. Individual departments may establish department regulations that prohibit the employment of relatives within a specific department where this is in the best interest of the department. (b)  Supervision of relatives. An employee may not be promoted into a position in which they would have supervisory responsibility over a relative, unless the relative can be transferred to another position that would not be under the supervision of the relative that is being promoted. (c)  Definition of relatives. For this nepotism policy, "relatives" are defined as spouse, mother, father, step-parents, son, daughter, mother-in-law, father-in-law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, stepson, stepdaughter, brother, brother-in-law, sister, sister-in-law, half-brother, half-sister, grandchild, grandparent, grandparent of spouse. (Ord. of 7-3-91, § 1) 
Sec. 1-9-14. - Records and reporting. (a)  Types of records maintained. The personnel director shall be charged with the responsibility of maintaining a complete personnel record file on each government employee as prescribed in the Georgia Records Retention Act.     Any employee or his or her designee shall be entitled to review the employee's complete personnel file during the normal operating hours of the personnel department. Personnel files may not be removed from the personnel department and must be reviewed in the presence of an employee of the personnel department. This provision will not prohibit the employee's supervisor, department director, the personnel hearing officer, or any member of the personnel department staff from having access to those records concerning the normal discharge of duties; nor shall it prohibit a promotion board or the personnel hearing officer from having access to the personnel file of any employee under review by such group. Each employee's personnel file shall contain a log that will show the purpose of any review or examination, the signature of the persons making the entry, and also the date and time of entry, except routine administrative entries made by the personnel department staff. Any file removed from the personnel department for administrative action must remain under the custody of the personnel director or a designee. (b)  Location and retention of records. Official employee records will be kept in the personnel department; and only those actions and records in the personnel department file shall be used as official records. Each department director shall be responsible for ensuring that all required documents pertaining to an employee are forwarded to the personnel department for inclusion in the employee's personnel file. (c)  Employee performance evaluation. The personnel director or a designee shall be charged with the maintenance of the performance evaluation program for all employees covered herein. The performance evaluation program shall establish goals, objectives and a performance improvement plan for each employee. The supervisor shall inform the employee of progress and strengths and weaknesses in carrying out the assigned duties and responsibilities. (d)  Release of employee information. The personnel department is the only department officially authorized to release, in the name of the government, any personnel information that relates to a specific employee. Information released by the personnel department shall be limited to verification of employment, salary, length of service and the name of the immediate supervisor. The release of other confidential information must be specifically authorized by the employee. The personnel department will not volunteer or supply any of the above information, only verify it. Individual departments shall not release employee personnel information. (Ord. of 7-3-91, § 1; Ord. of 8-6-96, § 5) 
Sec. 1-9-15. - Clearance procedure for separated employees. (a)  Exit interview. An exit interview will be conducted by the personnel director or a designee. The exit interview should include the following: (1)  Disbursement of employee's last paycheck, showing all deductions that may be required. (2)  Discussion of the employee's insurance program, their choice to drop or convert the insurance plan and the related cost. (3)  Discussion of the reasons for the employee's separation. The personnel department shall provide the department director with information about the employee's reason(s) for resigning. (b)  Turn-in of property and equipment. At the time of separation, and prior to final payment of monies, all records, assets and other items of property in the employee's custody shall be transferred to the department director or a designee. Certification of these transfers shall be forwarded to the personnel department for inclusion in the employee's personnel file. Any funds due because of the shortage in accounting for property shall be withheld from the employee's final paycheck or collected through other appropriate action. (Ord. of 7-3-91, § 1) 
Sec. 1-9-16. - Status of present employees.     In accordance with the Charter of the Unified Government of Athens-Clarke County and the personnel system, employees holding positions in the career service of the City of Athens or Clarke County Government on January 14, 1991, shall be continued in their respective positions without further examination until separated from such positions in accordance with this chapter. (Ord. of 7-3-91, § 1) 
Sec. 1-9-17. - Complaints by private citizens.     Complaints made by private citizens against any employee shall be dealt with in the following manner: (1)  Any private citizen who wishes to make a complaint against an employee must do so by submitting the complaint in writing to the department director that employs the particular employee. (2)  The complaint must be submitted within ten days of the date of the incident. (3)  The department director shall notify the employee upon receipt of the complaint. (4)  The department director will be responsible for investigating the complaint and taking appropriate action. (5)  The department director will be responsible for notifying the citizen in writing the results of the investigation and action taken. (6)  If the citizen who submitted the complaint is not satisfied with the action taken by the department director, the citizen may request in writing that the manager review the complaint. (7)  The manager may review the complaint and recommend that the department director take appropriate action. (8)  Citizens shall be notified within 30 days of receipt of the complaint concerning the settlement of the complaint. (Ord. of 7-3-91, § 1) 
Sec. 1-9-18. - Employee benefits.     The government makes available to employees the following benefits subject to the availability of an insurer and policies, which are adopted by the commission upon the recommendation of the personnel department: (1)  Reserved. (2)  Life insurance. (3)  Disability insurance (short- and long-term). (4)  Retirement benefits. (5)  Workers' compensation insurance. (6)  Unemployment compensation. (Ord. of 7-3-91, § 1; Ord. of 6-4-2002, § 1) 
Sec. 1-9-19. - Health insurance benefits for employees and retirees. (a)  Health insurance benefits for employees. The nature and structure of all health insurance benefits to be provided to employees, including without limitation the premiums to be paid, as described below, shall be determined by the Mayor and Commission and shall be subject to change in all respects from time to time by the Mayor and Commission. (1)  The government shall offer to provide at least one plan of health insurance coverage as designated by the Mayor and Commission, and such employees shall be charged a premium for such insurance or coverage based on a percentage of the cost of said insurance or coverage as set out in the annual budget ordinance. During the employee's first annual open enrollment period the employee may select any other insurance or coverage offered by the government and pay the same premium for such program offered to other employees. The following categories of employees are eligible to participate in such insurance or coverage: a.  Active, full-time employees. b.  Active, full-time employees age 65 or older enrolled in Medicare Parts A and/or B. The government's health insurance will only cover costs that would have been paid as secondary to Medicare Parts A and B. c.  Employees who are not yet 65 years of age, but who are eligible for Medicare Parts A and B by virtue of disability. Whether or not such an employee elects Medicare coverage, any costs which would have been covered by Medicare if the employee had Medicare coverage will not be covered by the government's health insurance. The government's health insurance will only cover costs that would have been paid as secondary to Medicare Parts A and B. d.  Employees under age 65 either (1) receiving payments from the Government's Long Term Disability Provider by virtue of disability and not receiving Medicare, or (2) who otherwise would be qualified to receive long term disability benefits by reason of disability using the standards of disability as set forth in Athens-Clarke County's Long Term Disability policy in existence at the time, as determined by a disability review provider selected by Athens-Clarke County, including without limitation the provider of long-term disability plan sponsored by Athens-Clarke County and who are not receiving Medicare and who have had 24 months of continuous, active full-time employment. (2)  Employees shall be responsible for enrolling in and all costs associated with Medicare Parts A and B. (3)  Notwithstanding any other provisions within this paragraph (a), the Manager or his designee is authorized to establish programs related to tobacco use by employees and/or their dependents, including but not limited to, providing a non-tobacco use discount to employee health insurance premium rates. (b)  Health insurance benefits for retirees who are under the age of 65. Retirees are eligible for health insurance benefits according to the table below: Definitions for Plan Descriptions in Table below:     Designated Plan: Athens-Clarke County pays 100% of the calculated premium for single coverage of at least one plan of health insurance or coverage as designated by the Mayor and Commission.     Plan Option: Any health insurance coverage plan offered by Athens-Clarke County to its employees, other than the Designated Plan, with retirees paying the same premiums for such programs as paid by current active employees.     Designated Dependent Plan: Athens-Clarke County pays 100% of the calculated premium for dependent coverage of at least one plan of health insurance or coverage as designated by the Mayor and Commission as long as dependent was covered for at least one year prior to retirement.     Plan Option Dependent Coverage: Retirees electing dependent coverage pay the same premiums as paid by current active employees for all health insurance dependent coverage offered by Athens-Clarke County. Table of Health Insurance Benefits for Retirees not yet eligible for Medicare A and/or B Plan Description Hired prior to 1/1/94 * footnote 1 Hired after 1/1/94 but before 7/1/02 * footnote 3 Hired 7/1/02 or after * footnote 4 Designated Plan - no premiums X X Plan Options - premiums X X X Designated Dependent Plan - no premiums *footnote 2 X Plan Options - Dependent coverage - premiums *footnote 2 X X X  *Footnote 1: Except that PPO or comparable coverage will be offered for a group of eligible retirees (under age 65) who retired between 7/1/95 up to and including 7/1/02. Health insurance premium rates for this group will not be dependent upon tobacco use status. *Footnote 2: Employees electing dependent health insurance coverage shall have had their dependent on their health insurance coverage for a minimum of one year prior to retirement. *Footnote 3: Health insurance premium rates for this group will not be dependent upon tobacco use status. *Footnote 4: Notwithstanding any other provisions within this paragraph (b), the Manager or his designee is authorized to establish programs related to tobacco use by retirees and/or their dependents, including but not limited to, providing a non-tobacco use discount to retiree health insurance premium rates. (c)  Health benefits for retirees age 65 or older. (1)  Retirees (regardless of hire date) who are eligible for or who become eligible for Medicare Parts A and B shall be required to elect Medicare Parts A and B in order to receive the benefits described in this paragraph. Retirees shall be responsible for all premiums associated with Medicare Parts A and B and all costs associated with Medicare Parts A and B not otherwise covered by secondary insurance plans that may be selected by retirees. (2)  Beginning September 1, 2013, retirees who are age 65 and older and who at the time of retirement have opted into health insurance coverage or the benefits described in this paragraph, as applicable, shall receive the benefits described in this paragraph. From and after the time that a retiree turns 65 and during the lifetime of the retiree, Athens-Clarke County shall make monthly contributions to a Health Reimbursement Arrangement (HRA) (within the meaning of Internal Revenue Service Notice 2002-45) established on behalf of the retiree. For retirees who had spouse coverage provided by Athens-Clarke County at no cost to them, based on a hire date before 1/1/1994, Athens-Clarke County shall make an equivalent contribution to an HRA established for the spouse, and held jointly with the retiree, until the death of the retiree. Except for members of the Settlement Class (as defined below), the amount of contributions will be determined by the Mayor and Commission as set out in the annual budget ordinance and may change from time to time. Athens-Clarke County will select and make available to retirees and eligible spouses a marketplace through which individuals may purchase health insurance such as Medigap, Medicare Advantage, and/or Medicare Part D, including one or more plans comparable to the Designated Plan. The marketplace selected by Athens-Clarke County shall consist of multiple carriers offering a variety of plan options (i.e., Medigap, Medicare Advantage, Medicare Part D) available in every United States zip code to meet the needs of retirees. For retirees hired on or after July 1, 2002, the amount to be contributed by Athens-Clarke County shall be an amount no less than the monthly premium amount charged, by a provider of Medicare Advantage plans in the marketplace, for one or more plans comparable to the Designated Plan that collaborates with Medicare Parts A and B, described in paragraph (b) and made available to retirees through a marketplace. For retirees who are members of a settlement class defined by the United States District Court for the Middle District of Georgia, Athens Division, in a final approval order entered by the court in the case of David Wood, et al. v. Unified Government of Athens-Clarke County, Civil Action No. 3:14-cv-00043-CDL, hereinafter referred to as the "Settlement Class," said order creating the Settlement Class and directing relief to members of the Settlement Class, the amount to be contributed by Athens-Clarke County to the HRAs of members of the Settlement Class (and eligible spouses) shall be no less than $228.00 per month, beginning with Fiscal Year 2020 (July 1, 2019—June 30, 2020), during the lifetime of each Settlement Class member and eligible dependent, hereinafter referred to as the "Class Settlement HRA Base Amount." Beginning in Fiscal Year 2021, Athens-Clarke County shall adjust the Class Settlement HRA Base Amount in an amount equal to 50% of the percentage increase or decrease in the federal CPI-U, for the preceding calendar year, published by the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (or any successor agency), up to a maximum HRA increase of 5.0% in any one year, provided that such amount shall never be less than the Class Settlement HRA Base Amount (the "Adjusted Class Settlement HRA Amount"). For each successive fiscal year, ACC will modify the then-current Adjusted Class Settlement HRA Amount by applying 50% of the percentage increase or decrease in the federal CPI-U, for the preceding calendar year, published by the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (or any successor agency), up to a maximum HRA increase of 5.0% in any one year. For all retirees (and eligible spouses) receiving a contribution by ACC to an HRA, if the federal or any state government implements some form of universal, premium-free health insurance for which retirees, or certain retirees, are eligible, ACC reserves the right to determine whether its contributions to an HRA—in whole or in part—for each such retiree eligible to receive universal, premium-free health insurance from the federal or a state government should continue, provided that ACC will not reduce, suspend, or terminate contributions to a Settlement Class member's HRA unless the sum of the actuarial value of the universal premium-free health insurance plus the actuarial value of a reduced HRA contribution by ACC, if any, equals or exceeds the actuarial value of the health insurance obtainable with the then-current Adjusted Class Settlement HRA Amount. If a retiree chooses to enroll in a plan with premiums higher than the contributions made by Athens-Clarke County, the retiree assumes any additional cost of such coverage. Funds in an HRA may be used for any eligible out-of-pocket medical expenses that a retiree may incur, including, but not limited to payment by the retiree of any plan premiums based on the retiree's plan election. Nothing in this paragraph shall require a retiree to purchase an insurance plan supplemental to Medicare Parts A and B from a marketplace or otherwise, and retirees shall have the ability to use funds in an HRA for any purpose allowed by applicable law. Any existing health insurance coverage provided by Athens-Clarke County to those retirees described in this paragraph (c) terminated on August 31, 2013. (d)  As to retirees who were hired on or after July 1, 2002 and as to dependents of retirees who were hired after December 31, 1993, health insurance or health benefits as described above shall be subject to termination or modification in any respect by the Mayor and Commission. (e)  Employee eligibility for health benefits upon retirement. (1)  Employees hired before July 1, 2002. Employees who are employed in a full-time capacity, and who have completed a minimum of ten years of continuous creditable service, may terminate employment with the government, and thereafter receive retiree health benefits from the government upon the following conditions. a.  Initiate retirement immediately or at a later date; and b.  Reached minimum age of 55; and c.  Begin drawing defined-benefit pension benefits from this government, from the State of Georgia's pension plan to which this government has made contributions on their behalf, or deferred compensation distributions from a deferred compensation or defined contribution plan to which this government has made contributions on their behalf in lieu of contributions to the defined-benefit pension system. d.  Retirees after retirement may not add additional dependents to receive health benefits. Opting out of or dropping dependents from the health benefits permanently ends such benefits with Athens-Clarke County. (2)  Employees hired on or after July 1, 2002 and who are employed in a full-time capacity shall be eligible to receive health benefits from the government at the time of retirement (Upon retirement and provided that the retiree has had continuous health insurance coverage provided through the government for at least 12 months prior to retirement commencement date, a retiree may elect health benefits) Retirees may not add additional dependents to their health insurance plans after retirement. a.  Reach the minimum age of 55; and b.  Complete ten years of continuous creditable service and work up to retirement or have 30 years of service and begin drawing defined-benefit pension benefits from this government, from the State of Georgia's pension plan to which this government has made contributions on their behalf, or deferred compensation distributions from a deferred compensation or defined contribution plan to which this government has made contributions on their behalf in lieu of contributions to the defined-benefit pension system on the following terms and conditions described in paragraph (3) below; (3)  The health benefits described in this paragraph are not pension benefits; said employees do not receive them as vested rights; and such benefits are subject to change by the Mayor and Commission at any time during said employee's service or after separation while receiving said benefits. (Ord. of 6-4-2002, § 2; Ord. of 3-3-2009, § 1; Ord. of 6-1-10, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 6-7-2011, § 1; Ord. of 6-4-2013; Ord. of 6-3-2014, § 16; Ord. of 6-2-2015(1), § 16 ; Ord. of 6-7-2016(5), § 16 ; Ord. of 11-6-2018(1), §§ 1, 2 ) Editor's note— Ord. of 4-7-2009, changed the title of § 1-9-19 from Health insurance benefits for employees to Health insurance benefits for employees and retirees. Ord. of 11-6-2018(1), § 3 provides: "Effective Date: This ordinance shall become effective only upon the last of the following dates: (i) if no appeal is taken from the final approval order in the case of David Wood, et al. v. Unified Government of Athens-Clarke County, Civil Action No. 3:14-cv-00043-CDL, the day after the 30-day deadline for taking an appeal has passed, or (ii) if any appeal is taken from the final approval order, the date on which all such appeals have been finally disposed and can no longer be appealed or reviewed. In the event that neither (i) nor (ii) occurs before December 31, 2020, then this ordinance shall be void and shall have no force or effect." 
Sec. 1-9-20. - Domestic partnership benefits.     An Athens-Clarke County employee may apply for and obtain health insurance benefits as provided below for a person registered as his or her domestic partner under Chapter 1-23, "Domestic Partnerships," upon the following terms and conditions: (a)  Definitions: (1)  "Dependent" and "dependency" defined. a.  As used with regard to domestic partnership benefits, the term "dependent" shall mean one who relies on another for financial support. Dependency does not depend on whether the dependent could support himself/herself without the supporter's earnings or whether the dependent could so reduce his/her expenses such that he/she could live independently of the supporter's earnings. Dependency does not depend on whether the dependent is employed and/or earns a substantial part of his/her own support. Dependency depends on whether the dependent was and is supported, in whole or in part, by the supporter's earnings. b.  An employee's domestic partner shall be deemed a "dependent" of the employee if: i.  The employee makes contributions to the domestic partner of cash and supplies, and the domestic partner relies upon and uses those contributions to support himself/herself in order to maintain his or her standard of living. The contributions may be at irregular intervals and of irregular amounts, but must have existed for at least six months, and must be continuing. ii.  The employee is obligated, based upon his/her commitment set forth in the declaration of domestic partnership, to continue the financial support of the domestic partner for so long as the domestic partnership shall be in effect. iii.  The domestic partner is supported, in whole or in part, by the employee's earnings, and has been for at least the last six months. (2)  "Affidavit of financial reliance" defined. An "affidavit of financial reliance" is a form, provided by the Athens-Clarke County Human Resources Department, upon request, to any Athens-Clarke County employee who has a domestic partner and who has received a certificate of domestic partnership, as is set forth under chapter 1-23 hereof. The form shall state the definition of "dependent," as is set forth in subsection (a)(1)a. above. The form shall require the employee and his/her domestic partner to attest that the domestic partner is a dependent of the employee. The form shall require the employee and his/her domestic partner to attest that each of the requirements set forth in subsection (a)(1)b. above are met when the affidavit of financial reliance is signed. The form shall also require the employee and his/her domestic partner to agree to notify the compensation and benefits division of the Human Resources Department, in writing, within 30 days, if the domestic partners no longer meet all of the requirements set forth in subsection (a)(1)b. above. The form must be signed by the employee and his/her domestic partner, under penalty of perjury, and must be witnessed and notarized. The Human Resources Department shall, within 30 days of the effective date of this section, make such forms available. (3)  "Dependency tax questionnaire" defined. A "dependency tax questionnaire" is a form, provided by the Human Resources Department to each employee who requests an affidavit of financial reliance form. The dependency tax questionnaire shall state that the value of Athens-Clarke County's contributions toward the payment of the domestic partner's health insurance premiums are taxable income to the employee if the employee's domestic partner does not receive more than 50 percent of his/her "support" (as defined by the Internal Revenue Service) from the employee. The questionnaire shall require the employee and the employee's domestic partner to check one of two statements which applies to them, either that the domestic partner receives more than 50 percent of his/her support from the employee or the domestic partner does not receive more than 50 percent of his/her support from the employee. The questionnaire shall be signed by the employee and his/her domestic partner. The human resources department shall, within 30 days of the effective date of this section, make such questionnaires available. (b)  Filing of affidavit of financial reliance. An employee eligible to receive Athens-Clarke County health insurance benefits, who has filed a copy of his/her certificate of domestic partnership with the compensation and benefits division of the Human Resources Department may also file an affidavit of financial reliance with the Human Resources Department, for the purpose of obtaining Athens-Clarke County health insurance coverage for the employee's domestic partner. The affidavit of financial reliance must be filed within 31 days of the domestic partners' receipt of their certificate of domestic partnership, or during an open enrollment period. (c)  Entitlement to insurance benefits; effective date. Any Athens-Clarke County employee who requests health insurance benefits for his/her domestic partner pursuant to paragraph (b) above shall receive such benefits, provided that the employee shall pay the same percentage of the domestic partner's insurance premiums as required of active employees. However, if the employee is required to pay 100 percent of his/her health insurance premiums, the employee shall pay 100 percent of the health insurance premiums of his or her domestic partner. Health insurance benefits shall be extended to domestic partners effective July 1, 2007. (d)  Filing of dependency tax questionnaire. Every employee who files an affidavit of financial reliance with the Compensation and Benefits Division of the Human Resources Department shall also file his or her original dependency tax questionnaire with the Compensation and Benefits Division of the Human Resources Department. If the questionnaire states that the employee's domestic partner does not receive more than 50 percent of his/her support from the employee, the value of Athens-Clarke County's contributions toward the domestic partner's insurance premiums shall be added to the employee's income for taxation purposes only. The employee and his/her domestic partner shall file a new dependency tax questionnaire, with the Compensation and Benefits Division of the Human Resources Department, within 30 days of a change of financial status which would change the answer provided on their current dependency tax questionnaire. (e)  Notice of change of conditions. Any employee who receives insurance coverage for a domestic partner shall notify the Compensation and Benefits Division of the Human Resources Department within 30 days of any change in or termination of the domestic partnership, or if the employee's domestic partner is no longer a dependent of the employee, as is set forth in their affidavit of financial reliance. (f)  Termination by Athens-Clarke County. Athens-Clarke County shall terminate domestic partnership benefits if Athens-Clarke County finds that the partners no longer meet one or more of the qualifications or conditions for domestic partnership. The effective date of such termination will be retroactive to the date that such qualifications or conditions were no longer met. Athens-Clarke County may terminate the domestic partnership benefits upon recommendation by the Human Resources Director and approval by the manager without prior notice or hearing to the employee or the domestic partner. Nothing in this Code shall create any right of pre-termination notice or hearing concerning termination of a domestic partnership. (g)  Penalties. Any employee who fraudulently obtains coverage for a person who is in fact not a domestic partner, as defined under chapter 1-23 hereof, or for a domestic partner who is not in fact a dependent of the employee, as is set forth in subsection (a)(1) above, shall reimburse Athens-Clarke County for any costs involved in providing such coverage and be subject to criminal penalties as provided by the laws of the State of Georgia and ordinances of Athens-Clarke County. (h)  The domestic partnership benefits described in this section are not pension benefits; employees do not receive domestic partnership benefits as vested rights; and such domestic partnership benefits are subject to change by the Mayor and Commission at any time during said employee's service or after separation while receiving said benefits. (Ord. of 12-6-2006, § 2) 
CHAPTER 1-10. - PARKS[6] Footnotes: --- (6) --- Editor's note— Ord. of 11-5-2013, § 1, amended Ch. 1-10 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 1-10, §§ 1-10-1—1-10-40, pertained to similar subject matter. For prior history, see Code Comparative Table. 
Sec. 1-10-1. - Purpose.     The purpose of this Chapter is to help ensure the safety and security of the Athens-Clarke County Unified Government parks and their patrons, to help provide an enjoyable park experience, and to provide consistent guidelines and levels of service throughout the park system. (Ord. of 11-5-2013, § 1) 
Sec. 1-10-2. - Definitions.     For purposes of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply: (a)  Athens-Clarke County: The Unified Government of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia. (b)  Department: The Leisure Services Department of Athens-Clarke County. (c)  Director: The Director of the Athens-Clarke County Leisure Services Department, or his/her designee. (d)  Manager: The Athens-Clarke County Manager, or his/her designee. (e)  Motor vehicle: Any wheeled conveyance (except a wheelchair) for transportation of persons or materials whether powered or drawn by motor such as an automobile, truck, golf cart, recreational vehicle, motorcycle or scooter. "Vehicle" does not include any Athens-Clarke County fleet or emergency vehicles operating in the course of public safety or official Athens-Clarke County business. (f)  Park/park property: May include, but is not limited to parks, open space, greenspace, natural areas, cultural and historic sites, playgrounds, ball fields, pools, pavilions, greenways, wetlands, floodplains, lakes, rivers, beaches or water areas, and buildings and structures which are under the control of or assigned for inspection, upkeep, maintenance or operation by the Department. (g)  Permit: A document provided by the Department granting permission for use of reserved park property and which sets forth terms and conditions applicable thereto. (h)  Person: Any person, firm, association, joint venture, partnership, company, corporation, entity or organization of any kind. (i)  Pet: Any domesticated animal kept for pleasure rather than utility. (j)  Plant: Any tree, vine, shrub, flower, fungi or related living organism. (k)  Special event: Any organized activity open to the public, taking place on park property and having as its purpose entertainment, recreation and/or education, such as a festival or celebration, foot or vehicle race, parade or concert. (Ord. of 11-5-2013, § 1) 
Sec. 1-10-3. - Park hours and closures. (a)  All parks shall be open to the public during designated hours. The opening and closing hours shall be posted at each park in order to give notice to the public. (b)  No person shall enter or remain on park property during hours when the park is closed. Vehicle owners locked in parks after hours must contact the Athens-Clarke County Police Department for assistance. The provisions of this section shall not apply to emergency personnel or department employees while in the discharge of their duties, or to any person having permission by the Director to be or remain in any part of the parks between such hours. (c)  In the interest of public safety, the Manager may close parks or areas within parks to public entry or otherwise restrict use until such time as the area can be made available for safe public use. Except in emergency circumstances, notice of closure shall be posted, and only authorized persons shall enter closed or restricted areas. (Ord. of 11-5-2013, § 1) 
Sec. 1-10-4. - Buildings and other property. (a)  No person shall willfully mark, destroy, deface, vandalize or otherwise damage any building or other property belonging to or used by Athens-Clarke County in any park. (b)  No person shall construct or erect on park property any building or structure of whatever kind, whether permanent or temporary in character, except as part of a Department program or permitted event. (Ord. of 11-5-2013, § 1) 
Sec. 1-10-5. - Park usage. (a)  No person shall enter or use any park for which an entrance or use fee has been established unless each person has first paid the fee or is otherwise authorized to enter. Entrance permits or passes shall be displayed to department staff upon request. (b)  The Director may establish rules for the proper use of park amenities such as playgrounds, splash pads, swimming pools, dog parks, skateparks, etc. which shall be enforceable by park personnel. (Ord. of 11-5-2013, § 1) 
Sec. 1-10-6. - Use of cameras and recording devices.     No person shall use any type of camera or similar device to record or produce a visual image in any park restroom, locker room, bath house, shower facility or other area used for dressing or changing clothes. (Ord. of 11-5-2013, § 1) 
Sec. 1-10-7. - Authority to rent or lease parks and equipment.     The Director is authorized to rent or lease the use of park equipment and to charge a fee for the use of park facilities to individuals and private or public organizations. (Ord. of 11-5-2013, § 1) 
Sec. 1-10-8. - Fees. (a)  All Department fees, to include those for entrance, admission, rental, program/activity, sales revenues, non-county residents and special service/recovery, shall be set by resolution of the Athens-Clarke County Mayor and Commission, as from time to time amended. (b)  The Manager may approve new fees for a period not to exceed six months prior to the submission of a resolution to be adopted by the Mayor and Commission. (Ord. of 11-5-2013, § 1) 
Sec. 1-10-9. - Exemptions from entrance fees—Sandy Creek Park. (a)  The following shall be exempt from Sandy Creek Park entrance fees: (1)  Athens Clarke County-based organizations serving minors under 18; (2)  Athens-Clarke County-based organizations serving the handicapped; (3)  Departments of Athens-Clarke County for official functions of such departments only; (4)  Individuals aged three and under, and aged 65 and older; (5)  Current and retired employees of Athens-Clarke County. (b)  The following are considerations for the exceptions listed in subsection (a) above: (1)  Fifty percent or more of the members of Athens Clarke County-based organizations serving minors under 18 and/or the handicapped, as referred to in subsections (a)(1) and (2) above must be residents of Athens-Clarke County; (2)  Proof of organization's eligibility may be required, e.g., membership roster, charter, etc.; (3)  One adult supervisor per every five youths shall be admitted free with a group. An adult supervisor shall include those in support, supervision or direction of the activity; (4)  Eligible organizations must arrive as a group. Unless otherwise prearranged with park management, individual members arriving apart from the main group may be charged the regular entrance fees; (5)  The fee exemption for current and retired employees of Athens-Clarke County shall apply only to currently employed full-time Athens-Clarke County employees or retirees thereof, who present a valid Athens-Clarke County photo identification card. The fee exemption shall not apply to family members of such employees or retirees. (Ord. of 11-5-2013, § 1) 
Sec. 1-10-10. - Reserved areas. (a)  Parks and park property shall be reserved only by permit made in accordance with the Department's reservation policy. Said reserved park areas may include athletic fields, group picnic shelters and associated amenities, recreation facility spaces, and those areas requested for the use of special events. (b)  No person shall use or occupy a reserved space except the person or party for whom the space is reserved. (c)  Any person having a permit issued by the Department must comply with all applicable rules and regulations. Upon request, confirmation of the reservation must be displayed to department employees charged with supervision or patrolling of parks. Violations of permit requirements may result in immediate suspension or revocation of the permit. (d)  Department employees, in the course of authorized business, shall have the right to enter the premises of any building, structure or enclosure on park property, including those rented or set aside for the private or exclusive use of any individual or group. (Ord. of 11-5-2013, § 1) 
Sec. 1-10-11. - Picketing or demonstrations.     Any person, group or organization engaged in any picketing, demonstrations, assembly, gathering, procession or other activity protected by the U.S. Constitution shall be prohibited from blocking the ingress and egress of any park or park property, from disrupting or interfering with scheduled events, or preventing or being inconsistent with the intended use of the park at the proposed site of assembly. (Ord. of 11-5-2013, § 1) 
Sec. 1-10-12. - Commercial activities. (a)  No person shall conduct the commercial sale of, or offer to sell, any goods, wares, drinks, food or similar items nor render or offer to render any service for hire, at any park except as authorized by contract or permit issued by the Director. (b)  No person shall place any stand, cart or vehicle for the transportation, sale, trade or display of any article, material or service within any park area unless approved by the Director in conjunction with a permitted use of a reserved park area. (Ord. of 11-5-2013, § 1) 
Sec. 1-10-13. - Noise and amplified sound.     Patrons shall preserve the peace and quiet enjoyment of the parks by observing all local ordinances and state laws governing noise and amplified sound while on park property. (Ord. of 11-5-2013, § 1) 
Sec. 1-10-14. - Fireworks and explosives.     No person shall possess or use any kind of firework or other explosive material or system, except by permit, in any park. (Ord. of 11-5-2013, § 1) 
Sec. 1-10-15. - Litter.     No person shall dump, deposit, place or throw any garbage, glass, coals, ashes, paper, boxes, cans, dirt, waste or other trash in any park except in proper receptacles where provided. Where receptacles are not provided, same shall be carried away from park property by the person or persons responsible for its presence. (Ord. of 11-5-2013, § 1) 
Sec. 1-10-16. - Distribution of printed material.     No person shall hand out, distribute, post, display or affix any printed material or advertisement within any park property or on any vehicle that is calculated to attract the attention of the public. Exceptions to this rule include the direct distribution, without charge to the receiver thereof, of non-commercial handbills to any person willing to accept it; announcements of department-sponsored or sanctioned events; authorized signs located entirely within concession structures; and signs or distribution of printed materials approved by the Director in conjunction with a permitted use of a reserved park area. (Ord. of 11-5-2013, § 1) 
Sec. 1-10-17. - Motor vehicles and bicycles. (a)  All applicable state and local motor vehicle laws are enforceable within parks. (b)  Law enforcement officers may enforce all applicable state and local motor vehicle, traffic and parking laws, and enforce all rules and regulations set forth by the Director within park property. Department personnel, authorized and designated by the Director, may direct traffic and enforce the rules and regulations set forth by the Director within park property. (c)  All vehicles operated on park roads must be street legal by state and local vehicle laws. (d)  No motorized vehicles shall be driven on the designated greenway, or the trails or paths located within parks, except those vehicles designated for the expressed use of facilitating mobility for people with disabilities, or for emergency personnel or department employees while in the discharge of their duties. (e)  Bicycles are allowed on concrete or asphalt paths within parks but are prohibited on natural surface trails unless expressly designated as bicycle trails. (Ord. of 11-5-2013, § 1) 
Sec. 1-10-18. - Parking. (a)  No person shall park a vehicle on park property at any place other than in the expressly designated space provided for that particular type of vehicle, or in any location other than that expressly allowed under the conditions of a permit as defined in this chapter, unless directed otherwise by a law enforcement officer or department employee, or by official signs or markings. (b)  The following meanings shall be given to designate curb marking and parking lot requirements, and prohibitions governing parking and stopping: (1)  White shall indicate the areas within which vehicles shall be parked. (2)  Yellow shall indicate places where vehicles shall not be parked. (c)  No driver or operator of any vehicle shall leave a vehicle parked on park property after posted closing hours without permission of the Director. Such permission shall be posted in a conspicuous location while the vehicle is parked after hours. (d)  Vehicles parked in unauthorized areas that pose a threat to patron safety may be towed at the owner's expense. (e)  No vehicle shall be parked on park property when the parked vehicle is for the purposes of sale or repair. (Ord. of 11-5-2013, § 1; Ord. of 9-6-2016(1), § 1 ) 
Sec. 1-10-19. - Aircraft and radio-controlled devices. (a)  No person shall operate, direct or be responsible for any aircraft, helicopter, glider, balloon, parachute or other aerial apparatus that shall take off from, operate within, or land within park property except in emergency law enforcement situations or when permission has been obtained from the Director. (b)  No person shall launch or operate any radio-controlled model rocket, airplane, glider, boat, car or similar vehicle without permission from the Director. (Ord. of 11-5-2013, § 1) 
Sec. 1-10-20. - Firearms and other weapons. (a)  Having or carrying firearms or other weapons in parks shall be enforced as defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-11-126. (b)  No person shall shoot or otherwise discharge a firearm, weapon, bow, arrow or similar device from within the park, or into any park from beyond the boundaries of such park. (c)  Subject to the requirements of applicable state law, the Director may permit the possession and use of weapons in a park for recreational, educational, wildlife or natural resource management purposes, or other departmental functions under supervision, written guidelines or agreements. (Ord. of 11-5-2013, § 1) 
Sec. 1-10-21. - Metal detectors.     No person shall use a metal detector in any park except for official activities authorized by the Director. (Ord. of 11-5-2013, § 1) 
Sec. 1-10-22. - Abandoned property.     No person shall abandon a vehicle or other personal property in any park. Abandoned property shall be removed, impounded and sold in conformance to Athens-Clarke County ordinances, or as may be determined by the Unified Government. (Ord. of 11-5-2013, § 1) 
Sec. 1-10-23. - Pets. (a)  Any persons bringing a pet into parks shall keep the pet on a leash and under his or her immediate personal supervision and control. Leashes used to control pets shall not be more than six feet long. Dogs are allowed to be without a leash in park areas specifically designated as off-leash areas, provided that each dog therein remains under immediate personal supervision and control of a responsible person. (b)  No person shall bring a pet into an enclosed park building except those qualified as service animals under the Americans with Disabilities Act, or as part of an authorized program or event. (c)  Any pet not under the immediate personal supervision and control of a responsible person, or any pet creating a disturbance or nuisance, may be restrained, confiscated or removed from the park by authorized personnel. (d)  No person shall permit a pet for which he or she is responsible to be in the water of a swimming pool or designated water play area, and no such person shall permit a pet except for those qualified as service animals under the Americans with Disabilities Act, to be within the land area or beach area adjacent to the water of a swimming pool or designated water play area. Pets are not permitted to enter any natural or constructed body of water except in areas dedicated for such purpose. (e)  Persons bringing pets onto park property are required to carry appropriate material to remove any fecal waste left by their pets except waste left by horses on designated horse trails. (f)  Current rabies and appropriate inoculation tags must be displayed on pets at all times. All horseback riders must carry proof of their horse's negative Coggins' test and display it to park personnel upon request. (g)  No person shall place, abandon or leave any pet or animal in a park. (Ord. of 11-5-2013, § 1) 
Sec. 1-10-24. - Swimming and wading.     No person shall swim, wade or play in any natural or built water area within a park except where specifically designated, and in compliance with such rules and regulations set by the Director. (Ord. of 11-5-2013, § 1) 
Sec. 1-10-25. - Boating and fishing. (a)  No person shall launch or operate a vessel on park property except in areas designated for such use by the Director. (b)  No person shall rent, hire, or operate any vessel within park property for a commercial purpose unless so permitted by the Director. (c)  Vessels must be human powered or use electric motors only. Vessels equipped with internal combustion motors are allowed provided the motor is not used at any time, including launching, loading and unloading. This provision does not apply to vessels used for official functions or activities permitted by the Director. (d)  All boats, including rafts, canoes and kayaks, must be equipped with one United States Coast Guard-approved personal flotation device per person. (e)  All applicable state laws pertaining to boating, fishing and licensing may be enforced within park property, including possession of a current vessel registration and a valid State of Georgia fishing license. (f)  No person shall fish with any device other than a pole and line or rod and reel in any park except with permission of the Director. (Ord. of 11-5-2013, § 1) 
Sec. 1-10-26. - Camping and overnight use.     No person may erect a tent or related shelter at any time to camp, sleep or park a vehicle overnight at any park or open space, except as authorized by permit, and only in areas designated or marked for such purpose. (Ord. of 11-5-2013, § 1) 
Sec. 1-10-27. - Fires and firewood. (a)  No person may light, build or maintain a fire in any park except in a device provided, maintained or designated for such purposes, or as authorized by the Director. (b)  Grills are provided throughout the parks for patron use; use of any other grill or cooking equipment is prohibited unless otherwise authorized by the Director. (c)  No person may cut, gather or collect wood or other combustible material at any park for use as firewood or fuel, unless authorized by the Director. (d)  Fires or lighted grills shall not be left unattended, and any person starting a fire shall not leave the area without extinguishing said fire. (e)  During periods when a fire hazard has been declared "high" or greater by the Georgia Forestry Commission or similar agency, the Director may prohibit or restrict fires in park areas. (Ord. of 11-5-2013, § 1) 
Sec. 1-10-28. - Personal risk in natural areas.     Personal risks associated with the natural environment are inherent in parks. Native wild animals, poisonous plants, rough terrain and other natural conditions are considered a part of the visitor's experience. Park staff will make reasonable efforts to forewarn users of natural areas where assumed risks might exist; however, park users are responsible for their own health and welfare regarding natural elements and other environmental conditions when they elect to enter such areas. (Ord. of 11-5-2013, § 1) 
Sec. 1-10-29. - Natural resource protection and preservation. (a)  No person shall dig, cut, break, move, excavate, disturb, remove, destroy, harm or tamper with, nor carry within, any soil, rocks, trees, shrubs, plants, mushrooms, down-timber or other wood or materials without authorization from the Director. (b)  No person shall harm, harass, disturb the breeding grounds or habitat of, hunt, trap or remove any animal, including mammals, fish, insects, birds, reptiles, amphibians or any other living creature, including eggs and nests, from any park except upon authorization of the Director. This subsection shall not apply to fish caught by an individual in possession of a valid Georgia fishing license fishing in an area designated for this activity, in accordance with state fishing regulations. (c)  No person shall feed any non-domesticated animal in any park unless authorized by the Director. (d)  Park properties that are primarily in their natural state, yet provide some means of access for visitors, shall be maintained to protect the environment as well as the user. (Ord. of 11-5-2013, § 1) 
Sec. 1-10-30. - Pollution of waters. (a)  No person shall throw, discharge, disturb or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the waters of any fountain, pond, lake, river, stream, or other body of water within park property any substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid, which will or may result in the pollution of said waters. (b)  No person shall bury, discharge or intentionally dispose of a toxic or hazardous substance in parks or on park property, or the State waters found therein. (Ord. of 11-5-2013, § 1) 
Sec. 1-10-31. - Smoking.     No person shall smoke in parks per section 4-3-2 of the Code of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia. (Ord. of 11-5-2013, § 1) 
Sec. 1-10-32. - Alcoholic beverages. (a)  For purposes of this Section, alcoholic beverages are limited solely to beer and wine. Liquor is prohibited. (b)  Possessing, dispensing, distributing or consuming alcoholic beverages in parks is prohibited unless done so 1) in conjunction with an approved facility rental or special event permit from the Department; and 2) with an approved Department alcohol usage permit. The permit shall be approved in form by the Manager and signed by the Director. (c)  Alcohol shall be dispensed, distributed or consumed only in areas designated by the Manager. (d)  Any event open to the public in which alcohol will be dispensed, distributed or consumed requires the use of either a licensed alcoholic beverage caterer pursuant to provisions of section 6-3-1 et seq. of the Code of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia, and O.C.G.A. § 3-11-1 et seq. or a bona-fide non-profit, tax-exempt civic organization holding a temporary alcoholic beverage permit pursuant to section 6-3-6(b)(2) of the Code of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia. (Ord. of 11-5-2013, § 1; Ord. of 10-6-2015(2), § 1 ) 
Sec. 1-10-33. - Penalties.     Any violation of this chapter shall be subject to penalties pursuant to section 1-1-5 of the Code of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia. Additionally, any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject to suspension of access to parks or being removed or ejected from parks without refund, as determined by the director. Vehicles parked in violation of this chapter may be towed and impounded pursuant to the provisions of chapter 3-3 of this Code. (Ord. of 11-5-2013, § 1; Ord. of 9-6-2016(1), § 2 ) 
CHAPTER 1-11. - OCONEE RIVERS GREENWAY COMMISSION[7] Sec. 1-11-1. Oconee Rivers Greenway Commission. Footnotes: --- (7) --- Charter reference— Athens-Clarke County Commission, § 2-101; certain boards, commissions and authorities continued, § 4-101. 
Sec. 1-11-1. - Oconee Rivers Greenway Commission. (a)  Establishment, membership, terms. There shall be an Oconee Rivers Greenway Commission which shall consist of 15 members appointed for five-year terms of office. (1)  Ten members shall be appointed initially by the Commission of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia. Whenever a vacancy exists thereafter, the Oconee Rivers Greenway Commission shall make nominations to the commission and the commission shall confirm or reject such nominations. (2)  Five members shall be appointed initially by the president of the University of Georgia. Whenever a vacancy exists thereafter, the Oconee Rivers Greenway Commission shall make nominations to the president of the University of Georgia and the president shall confirm or reject such nominations. (3)  There may be up to ten ex officio members of the Oconee Rivers Greenway Commission, one representative from each of the following: Athens-Clarke County Arts and Environmental Education Department. Athens-Clarke County Recreation and Parks Department. Athens-Clarke County Planning Department. Athens-Clarke County Public Utilities Department. University of Georgia. Athens Downtown Development Authority. Northeast Georgia Regional Development Center. Civic Center Authority. Chamber of Commerce.     Other appropriate organizations may be asked to send representatives but the total number of ex officio members shall not exceed ten members. The manager of Athens-Clarke County shall appoint the ex officio members for Athens-Clarke County. (b)  Rules and regulations. The Oconee Rivers Greenway Commission is hereby authorized to adopt bylaws for its own administration and to recommend rules and regulations for the proper protection and management of the North Oconee and Middle Oconee rivers, their major tributaries and their floodplains within the borders of Athens-Clarke County. (c)  Responsibility generally. The Oconee Rivers Greenway Commission shall be responsible for developing the plan for a river-oriented greenway system within Athens-Clarke County, Georgia. The primary purpose of this system shall be the protection of the natural resources of the North Oconee and Middle Oconee rivers, their major tributaries and their floodplains for the benefit and enjoyment of the citizens of Athens-Clarke County. Such plan shall also include guidelines for the implementation of the plan. (d)  Advisory nature of commission; responsibility with regards to purchases of land. Such commission shall be advisory in nature and is charged with the responsibility of recommending to the mayor and commission parcels of land to be purchased or acquired by the Unified Government of Athens-Clarke County for inclusion in the Greenway system. (e)  Authority generally. The Oconee Rivers Greenway Commission shall be authorized to: (1)  Solicit private donations of land, easements and supplemental funds which shall be used for the establishment of the greenway system; (2)  Seek federal, state and private foundation funds for the preservation and enhancement of the greenway system, or to further the purposes of such commission; to conduct education programs on the greenway system and its resources; (3)  Recommend to the mayor and commission financial and/or other incentives to preserve, enhance or further the purposes of the Oconee Rivers Greenway Commission; and (4)  Attend and take advantage of training available through state, federal or private agencies to further the education of the Oconee Rivers Greenway Commission members in accordance with established budget constraints. (f)  Budgetary authority and accountability. The Oconee Rivers Greenway Commission is hereby authorized to develop and maintain an annual budget to cover costs of operation which shall be submitted to the mayor and commission for approval. The Oconee Rivers Greenway Commission shall account to the mayor and commission for the expenditure of such funds. (g)  Assistance from other departments authorized. The Athens-Clarke County Arts and Environmental Education Department and other appropriate unified government departments are hereby authorized to offer assistance from time to time to the Oconee Rivers Greenway Commission. (h)  Power to hire given. The Oconee Rivers Greenway Commission shall have the power to hire personnel as they deem proper. (i)  Annual reports. The Oconee Rivers Greenway Commission shall make an annual report to the mayor and commission and such other reports as may be requested. (Ord. of 1-7-92, § 1; Ord. of 7-2-96, § 1; Ord. of 7-6-99, § 1) 
CHAPTER 1-12. - ATHENS-CLARKE COUNTY MARSHAL AND CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS[8] Sec. 1-12-1. Athens-Clarke County Marshal. Sec. 1-12-2. Athens-Clarke County Code Enforcement Officer. Footnotes: --- (8) --- Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Dec. 2, 2003, deleted former Ch. 1-12 of the Code in its entirety and added new provisions as Ch. 1-12 as herein set out. Former Ch. 1-12, § 1-12-1, pertained to the Athens-Clarke County Marshal and derived from ordinances adopted Jan. 5, 1993, § 1; July 2, 1996, § 1; July 1, 1997, § 1; and July 6, 1999, § 1. Charter reference— Sheriff, § 4-105; judiciary generally, § 5-101 et seq. State Law reference— Obstructing or hindering law enforcement officers, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-24; arrest, O.C.G.A. § 17-4-1 et seq.; law enforcement officers and agencies, O.C.G.A. Title 35. 
Sec. 1-12-1. - Athens-Clarke County Marshal. (a)  Established. There is hereby created the position of Athens-Clarke County Marshal. (b)  Recognition and certification. The Athens-Clarke County Marshal shall do all things necessary in order to be recognized as a law enforcement officer of the state and certified within the standards of the Georgia Peace Officer Standards and Training Act (POST Act), as provided in O.C.G.A. § 35-8-1 et seq. In the event the Athens-Clarke County Marshal is not POST certified, then he shall have 12 months from his hiring date in which to become POST certified. (c)  Power of arrest. The Athens-Clarke County Marshal shall have the power of arrest in the enforcement of all ordinances of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia, and the laws of the state. (d)  Duties and responsibilities. The primary duties and responsibilities of the Athens-Clarke County Marshal shall be as follows: (1)  To enforce all ordinances enacted by the mayor and commission of Athens-Clarke County; (2)  To issue warnings, notices of ordinance violation, and citations for court appearances for the violation of ordinances; (3)  To investigate and collect evidence of these ordinance violations; (4)  To respond to complaints of alleged ordinance violations; (5)  To appear and testify in court; (6)  To do any follow-up work that may be necessary; (7)  To ensure proper collection of fines; (8)  To coordinate enforcement efforts with the building inspection office, planning department office, public works department and any other department or division of Athens-Clarke County as may be deemed necessary. (e)  Placement of position. All employees in the Athens-Clarke County Marshal's Service shall be under the supervision of the Manager. (Ord. of 12-2-2003, § 1) 
Sec. 1-12-2. - Athens-Clarke County Code Enforcement Officer. (a)  Established. There is hereby created the position of Athens-Clarke County Code Enforcement Officer, to be designated by the Manager. (b)  Duties and responsibilities. The primary duties and responsibilities of the Athens-Clarke County Code Enforcement Officer shall be as follows: (1)  To enforce all ordinances enacted by the mayor and commission of Athens-Clarke County; (2)  To issue warnings, notices of ordinance violations, and citations for court appearances for the violation of ordinances; (3)  To investigate and collect evidence of these ordinance violations; (4)  To respond to complaints of alleged ordinance violations; (5)  To appear and testify in court; (6)  To do any follow-up work that may be necessary; (7)  To ensure proper collection of fines; (8)  To coordinate enforcement efforts with the building inspection office, planning department office, public works department and any other department or division of Athens-Clarke County as may be deemed necessary. (c)  Placement of position. Except as otherwise designated in other departments by the manager at his discretion, all code enforcement officers shall be in the Athens-Clarke County Code Enforcement Division under the supervision of the department of building inspection. (d)  In addition to all of the duties and responsibilities set forth above, where any provisions of this Code specifically authorize the Athens-Clarke County Marshal to issue summons or citations, the code enforcement officer shall also specifically be authorized to issue said summons or citation. (Ord. of 12-2-2003, § 1; Ord. of 12-2-2016(1), § 1 ) 
CHAPTER 1-13. - DRUG AND ALCOHOL TESTING[9] Sec. 1-13-1. Drug and alcohol use prohibited. Sec. 1-13-2. Employees subject to testing. Sec. 1-13-3. Pre-employment drug and alcohol testing. Sec. 1-13-4. Employees subject to random drug and alcohol testing. Sec. 1-13-5. Drug and/or alcohol screening test based on reasonable suspicion. Sec. 1-13-6. Testing after accidents or injury. Sec. 1-13-7. Prescription drug use. Sec. 1-13-8. List of medications. Sec. 1-13-9. Acknowledgement; notification. Sec. 1-13-10. Consent. Sec. 1-13-11. Refusal to consent. Sec. 1-13-12. Testing procedures. Sec. 1-13-13. Confidentiality of test results. Sec. 1-13-14. Disciplinary and termination policy. Sec. 1-13-15. Employee assessment. Sec. 1-13-16. Voluntary employee assistance program. Sec. 1-13-17. Drug and alcohol criminal charges and dispositions. Footnotes: --- (9) --- Editor's note— Ord. of 4-5-2016 , § 1, amended Ch. 1-13 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 1-13, §§ 1-13-1—1-13-19, pertained to similar subject matter. For prior history, see Code Comparative Table. Cross reference— Personnel system, § 1-9-1 et seq.; public safety, Title 3; alcoholic beverages, § 6-3-1 et seq. 
Sec. 1-13-1. - Drug and alcohol use prohibited.     Athens-Clarke County employees are a most valuable resource, and it is Athens-Clarke County's goal to provide a healthy, satisfying work environment which promotes personal opportunities for growth. Athens-Clarke County's policy is to: (1) assure that employees are not impaired in their ability to perform assigned duties in a safe, productive, and healthy manner; (2) create a workplace environment free from the adverse effects of drug abuse and alcohol misuse; (3) prohibit the unlawful manufacture, distribution, dispensing, possession or use of controlled substances; and (4) encourage employees to seek professional assistance any time personal problems, including alcohol or drug dependency, adversely affect their ability to perform their assigned duties.     Drug and alcohol use by Athens-Clarke County employees during assigned working hours, in government buildings or on government grounds, or otherwise while on government business, is prohibited. This shall include the use of illegal substances, the abuse of prescription medications and the use of alcohol. ( Ord. of 4-5-2016 , § 1) 
Sec. 1-13-2. - Employees subject to testing.     For the purposes of this chapter, employees shall be divided into the following categories:     Category I. Safety-Sensitive Employees. The following employees are considered to be in safety-sensitive positions: 1.  Mechanics, commercial driver's license holders, and other operators of assigned motorized equipment needed to perform daily job duties. 2.  Employees who transport children. 3.  Lifeguards, pool managers, assistant pool managers, and lakefront safety supervisors. 4.  Ben Epps Airport: All employees whose job duties include any responsibility for maintenance or operation of aircraft, maintenance or operation of flight or ground control communications, handling fuel, or maintenance or operation of fire safety equipment. 5.  Water and wastewater treatment: Athens-Clarke County Water Treatment Plant and Water Reclamation Plant personnel who are responsible for the operation and maintenance of water filtration or pollution control equipment. 6.  Public safety: a.  Athens-Clarke County Police Department: All sworn personnel, communications officers, and school crossing guards; b.  Athens-Clarke County Fire Department: All certified employees; c.  Clarke County Sheriff's Office: All sworn personnel; d.  Athens-Clarke County Probation Office: All sworn personnel; e.  Athens-Clarke County Department of Corrections: All sworn personnel and all personnel having direct contact with inmates or Diversion Center residents.     Category II. For the purposes of this chapter, Category II employees are all employees of Athens-Clarke County to include those in Category I, above. Employees in Category II shall be subject to alcohol and drug testing due to reasonable suspicion and after accidents and/or work related injury requiring medical treatment. Employees in Category II shall be subject to all provisions of this chapter.     Category III. Athens Transit System Employees. For purposes of this chapter, Category III employees are all employees of the Athens Transit System subject to the Athens-Clarke County Transit System Substance Abuse Policy as adopted by resolution of the Commission. ( Ord. of 4-5-2016 , § 1) 
Sec. 1-13-3. - Pre-employment drug and alcohol testing. A.  All job applicants being considered for employment in Category I and Category III positions shall be required to pass a drug and alcohol screening test as the final step prior to being hired. All job applicants shall be informed in advance that said testing shall be required. B.  For purposes of administering drug and alcohol testing for Category I and Category III positions, pre-employment testing may be required not only for new hires but also for the employment actions of promotion, demotion, and re-employment to a safety sensitive position, unless the requirement is waived by the Human Resources Director because the employee has passed a drug and alcohol test within the last 30 days. ( Ord. of 4-5-2016 , § 1) 
Sec. 1-13-4. - Employees subject to random drug and alcohol testing. A.  Only those employees set forth in section 1-13-2, Category I and Category III, shall be subject to random testing for drugs and alcohol. A statistically valid computer-based random selection method will be used to select employees for random drug and alcohol testing, thus allowing each employee in a Category I and Category III position to have an equal chance of being tested. B.  Random testing shall be done just before, during, or just after scheduled duty hours. The testing dates and times shall be with unpredictable frequency throughout the year. Category I and Category III employees hired during the year shall be added to the selection pool during the month following their hire. Some Category I and Category III employees may be tested more than once a year; some may not be tested at all depending upon the random selection. All Category I and Category III employees remain in the random selection pool at all times, regardless of whether they have been previously selected randomly for testing. Employees are to receive no prior notification of the random testing. Employees shall report to the designated testing facility for testing within two hours of receipt of the notification form from their supervisor. ( Ord. of 4-5-2016 , § 1) 
Sec. 1-13-5. - Drug and/or alcohol screening test based on reasonable suspicion. A.  Reasonable suspicion. Reasonable suspicion testing shall be conducted when there are reasonable and specific grounds to believe that an employee's poor performance or unsafe acts are due to drug or alcohol use by the employee. Specific observations shall be made of appearance, speech, behavior, and/or body odor.     Situations that may give rise to a conclusion that an employee is under the influence of drugs and/or alcohol include, but are not limited to, the following: 1.  An employee is involved in a physical or verbal altercation on the job. 2.  An employee has an accident on the job, or he or she does not exercise reasonable care which causes potential for, or actual damage to a person or property. 3.  An employee exhibits unusual behavior such as slurred speech or unsteady walking or movement on the job. 4.  An employee has an odor of alcohol on his or her person on the job. 5.  An employee is in possession of alcohol or drugs on the job that indicate recent use. B.  An employee shall be required to submit to alcohol and/or drug testing when there is reasonable suspicion he or she is under the influence of alcohol and/or drugs during assigned working hours or while otherwise on government duty or in control of government property. If testing cannot be done within a two-hour window, the supervisor must document the reason. C.  Supervisors who suspect that an employee is under the influence of drugs and/or alcohol shall immediately report the incident to their division manager and department director. D.  The determination of whether reasonable suspicion exists shall be made by the department director or by the highest ranking supervisory staff on duty at the time. The facts underlying the determination of reasonable suspicion shall be disclosed to the employee at the time the demand to submit to testing is made, and written confirmation of behaviors shall be provided to the employee. E.  Following the determination that reasonable suspicion exists, the employee shall immediately be transported to and from the testing site by the employee's supervisor or a designee. If an employee is found to be in violation of these regulations, then following the testing procedure, the person transporting the employee shall make appropriate arrangements to transport the employee home. F.  Supervisors shall be required to document in writing, within the next 24 hours, the specific facts, symptoms or observations that formed the basis for their determination that reasonable suspicion existed to warrant the testing of an employee. All documents created in connection with the determination of reasonable suspicion shall be forwarded to the ACCUG Safety and Risk Manager. G.  Athens-Clarke County shall conduct a training program to assist supervisory personnel in identifying drug and alcohol use by employees. Such training shall be directed toward helping supervisors to recognize the conduct and behavior giving rise to a reasonable suspicion of drug or alcohol use. ( Ord. of 4-5-2016 , § 1) 
Sec. 1-13-6. - Testing after accidents or injury.     Whenever any employee of Athens-Clarke County has been involved in a work-related accident, or receives a work-related injury, alcohol and drug testing shall be conducted within two hours of the accident or incident when: A.  There is vehicle/equipment damage or bodily injury; or B.  There is a fatality; or C.  Driver is cited with a traffic violation; or D.  There is reasonable suspicion to believe that the employee's behavior or appearance may indicate alcohol or drug use; or E.  When an employee sustains a work-related injury requiring medical treatment; or F.  If an employee, within the scope of his or her employment, is engaged in the use of force and causes serious bodily injury or death to another person. ( Ord. of 4-5-2016 , § 1) 
Sec. 1-13-7. - Prescription drug use. A.  While on the job, employees shall adhere strictly to the medical directions as listed on their prescription medication. It is the employee's responsibility to notify the prescribing physician of the duties required by the employee's position and to ensure that the physician approves the use of the prescription medication(s) while the employee is performing his or her duties. The employee shall be responsible for notifying his or her supervisor of any restrictions that may affect or prevent the safe performance of the required duties. B.  An employee who tests positive for a prescription medication that was not prescribed to him or her shall be suspended for three days with pay pending termination. C.  The abuse of legally prescribed drugs is prohibited. Any employee whose job performance or attendance deficiencies result from such abuse shall be suspended for three days with pay pending termination. If an employee's behavior and/or job performance gives rise to a reasonable suspicion as determined under the standards set forth in section 1-13-5 that the employee is abusing prescription drugs, the employee may be required to submit to drug testing and must not be permitted to return to duty in accordance with section 1-13-5. ( Ord. of 4-5-2016 , § 1) 
Sec. 1-13-8. - List of medications.     Employees and job applicants shall at the time of testing provide a list of those prescriptions and over-the-counter medications that he or she has recently used. The list of medications shall be kept confidential until test results are available. The list of medications shall be disclosed only to the medical review officer who will determine whether the positive result was due to the lawful use of any of the listed medications. ( Ord. of 4-5-2016 , § 1) 
Sec. 1-13-9. - Acknowledgement; notification.     Every employee subject to alcohol and drug testing shall be required to sign a form issued by the employee's supervisor acknowledging the date, time and location of his or her test. ( Ord. of 4-5-2016 , § 1) 
Sec. 1-13-10. - Consent.     Before a drug and/or alcohol test is administered, employees and job applicants shall be asked to sign a consent form authorizing the test and permitting release of test results to the employer and the medical review officer. The consent form shall provide a space for employees and job applicants to acknowledge that they have been notified of the requirements of this chapter. ( Ord. of 4-5-2016 , § 1) 
Sec. 1-13-11. - Refusal to consent. A.  Job applicants. Any applicant for a Category I job with the Athens-Clarke County Government who refuses to consent to a drug and alcohol test shall be denied employment. B.  Employees . Any employee who refuses to sign the consent form referenced in section 1-13-10, or to submit to a drug and alcohol test as required herein shall be suspended for three days with pay pending termination. C.  Failure to appear. Employees who fail to appear without justification (absent emergency circumstances) at the designated collection site within the designated time to be tested when so directed shall be considered to have refused testing and shall be suspended for three days with pay pending termination. D.  Additional employee actions that are considered as refusals for which the employee shall be suspended for three days with pay pending termination include: 1.  Failure to provide sufficient quantities of breath or urine to be tested without a valid medical explanation and after sufficient time has been allowed to provide such samples; or 2.  Tampering with or attempting to adulterate a testing specimen or the collection procedure; or 3.  Leaving the scene of an accident without a valid reason before the tests have been conducted. ( Ord. of 4-5-2016 , § 1) 
Sec. 1-13-12. - Testing procedures. A.  All testing procedures shall be administered and accounted for by an approved Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) laboratory and/or medical facility that is operated in compliance with the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA) guidelines in accordance with 49 CFR Part 40. These procedures and guidelines shall be available for inspection by contacting the Athens-Clarke County Safety and Risk Manager. B.  In accordance with HHS and SAMHSA guidelines, all urine drug testing specimens must be collected as "split" specimens. The term "split" specimen means that one urine specimen will be divided into two separately sealed specimen bottles for submission to the laboratory—one bottle (primary to be split with one half used for initial screening and the other half for the confirmation screening) and a secondary bottle for split sample testing if it is requested. C.  Whenever an initial test is found to be positive, an automatic confirmation test will be performed. If result is positive, then that employee has 72 hours to request from the medical review officer that the secondary bottle for split sample testing be sent to a second lab. D.  If the employee does not contest the results, or if the secondary bottle of the split sample also tests positive, then the employee shall be suspended for three days with pay pending termination. If the secondary bottle produces a negative result, or for any reason the secondary bottle is not available, then the test shall be considered negative, and no sanctions shall be imposed on the employee. E.  Breath Alcohol Test (BAT). If results of BAT are positive, then a confirmation test must be conducted at least 15 minutes, but not more than 20 minutes, after the completion of the initial test. F.  Following administration of a drug test as prescribed in this chapter, the analysis of samples shall be performed by a laboratory and/or medical facility that is certified by the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) and the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA) to determine the presence of drugs described hereinafter. A DOT or Non-DOT test will be administered as applicable based upon the safety-sensitive category of the employee, and/or if the test is required by current FTA/DOT standards.     Following are the list of drugs tested for in the non-DOT and DOT screenings: A.  NON-DOT/11—Panel drug screen testing/checks specific gravity and creatinine • Amphetamines (speed, uppers—to include MDMA—ecstasy) • Methamphetamines • Barbiturates • Benzodiazepine (Valium, Xanax) • Cocaine • Methadone • Opiates (Lortab, codeine, morphine—to include 6-Acetylmorphine—heroin-specific metabolite) • Oxycodone (Percocet) • Phencyclidine (PCP) • Propoxyphene (Darvocet) • THC (marijuana) B.  DOT/5 panel drug screen testing • Amphetamines (speed, uppers—to include MDMA—ecstasy) • Cocaine • Opiates (Lortab, codeine, morphine—to include 6-Acetylmorphine—heroin-specific metabolite) • Phencyclidine (PCP) • THC (marijuana)     DOT testing shall be performed for drivers holding a Georgia Commercial Driver's License (CDL) when: a)  An accident involves a human fatality, whether or not the CDL driver receives a citation. b)  An accident involves bodily injury with immediate medical treatment away from the scene (to any party), when the CDL driver has been issued a citation. c)  There is disabling damage to any motor vehicle requiring tow away, when the CDL driver has been issued a citation. ( Ord. of 4-5-2016 , § 1) 
Sec. 1-13-13. - Confidentiality of test results.     All information from an employee's or job applicant's drug and alcohol test shall be confidential and only available to the department director, human resources director, safety and risk manager and those with a need to know, as determined by the human resources director, for compliance with state and federal law concerning confidentiality of medical records. Disclosure of test results to any other person, agency, or organization is prohibited unless written authorization is obtained from the employee or job applicant, or pursuant to a legally-sufficient court order or subpoena. ( Ord. of 4-5-2016 , § 1) 
Sec. 1-13-14. - Disciplinary and termination policy.     Immediate termination. Any of the following actions shall be grounds for termination of an employee: 1.  Being in possession of or distributing controlled substances while on the job. 2.  Operating a government vehicle or motorized equipment while under the influence of drugs and/or alcohol. 3.  Felony conviction for violation of drug laws. 4.  Testing positive for drugs or alcohol during assigned working hours.     Employees who test positive for use of an illegal drug, use of a prescription drug for which they do not have a current prescription, or for abuse of a legally prescribed drug (section 1-13-7) shall be suspended for three days with pay pending termination.     Any employee who has been terminated for violation of this chapter may be reconsidered for rehire after two years from termination date. ( Ord. of 4-5-2016 , § 1) 
Sec. 1-13-15. - Employee assessment.     Employees who have been terminated under the provisions of this chapter shall be provided with the names, addresses and telephone numbers of substance abuse professionals, counseling, and treatment programs that can determine what assistance, if any, the employee may need to help him or her resolve any problems associated with substance abuse. Athens-Clarke County shall not be responsible to pay for such evaluation, treatment, rehabilitation, or counseling for said employee. ( Ord. of 4-5-2016 , § 1) 
Sec. 1-13-16. - Voluntary employee assistance program.     Voluntary participation in an employee assistance program prior to an employee being requested to submit to a test is encouraged and such participation shall be kept confidential. No disciplinary action shall be implemented because an employee volunteers to participate in such a program. Employees who, prior to being requested to take a drug and/or alcohol test, voluntarily identify themselves as a drug user or alcohol abuser and obtain counseling and rehabilitation as recommended by the Athens-Clarke County employee assistance program shall not be disciplined for their drug use and/or alcohol abuse if they thereafter refrain from violating the prohibitions of this chapter. Except as described above in this section, all employees can be disciplined for violation of this chapter. ( Ord. of 4-5-2016 , § 1) 
Sec. 1-13-17. - Drug and alcohol criminal charges and dispositions.     Any employee in Category I or Category III shall be required to report to his or her department director any arrest or citation for alleged violation of a drug or alcohol statute or ordinance. Such report shall be made within five working days of such arrest or citation. Any employee in Category I or Category III shall be required to report any conviction, judicial disposition or entry into a pretrial diversion program related to a criminal drug or alcohol statute or ordinance. Such report shall be made within five working days of such action. The department director shall then investigate and make appropriate recommendation to the human resources director. ( Ord. of 4-5-2016 , § 1) 
CHAPTER 1-14. - PENSION PLAN[10] Sec. 1-14-1. Article I—Definitions. Sec. 1-14-2. Article II—Types of service. Sec. 1-14-3. Article III—Participation. Sec. 1-14-4. Article IV—Retirement dates. Sec. 1-14-5. Article V—Accrued benefits and retirement benefits. Sec. 1-14-6. Article VI—Form and payment of benefits. Sec. 1-14-7. Article VII—Vesting and transfer of employment. Sec. 1-14-8. Article VIII—Funding. Sec. 1-14-9. Article IX—Administration. Sec. 1-14-10. Article X—Discontinuance of employer contributions, plan amendments and mergers. Sec. 1-14-11. Article XI—Plan termination procedures. Sec. 1-14-12. Article XII—[Reserved]. Sec. 1-14-13. Article XIII—Miscellaneous. Sec. 1-14-14. Article XIV—Permanent and total disability. Sec. 1-14-15. Pension board. Footnotes: --- (10) --- Editor's note— Sections 1-14-1 through 1-14-14 of this chapter contain the municipality's pension plan as written by The Travelers Asset Management & Pension Services. Because of the complexity in converting references, this document does not reflect the usual numbering style followed by the rest of the Code of Ordinances, with the exception that each article of this document has been assigned a section number in order to facilitate indexing. The editor has also added in some places wording in brackets for the sake of clarity and to facilitate the general use of this document. Ord. of 9-18-2014 , § 1 (Exh. A), amended Ch. 1-14 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 1-14, §§ 1-14-1—1-14-15, pertained to similar subject matter. For prior history, see Code Comparative Table. 
Sec. 1-14-1. - Article I—Definitions.     The following defined terms and phrases shall apply to this chapter: 1.  Administrator means the body which is to perform the administrative functions of this plan, as established in accordance with the section of this plan entitled "Administration." 2.  Charter officer means the manager, attorney or internal auditor as those positions are defined in the Charter. 3.  Effective date means July 1, 1992. 4.  Employee means, effective for plan years after December 31, 1996, any person enrolled on the active employment rolls of the employer on or after the effective date of this plan and shall include leased employees within the meaning of section 414(n) of the Internal Revenue Code, except as the code permits exclusion of leased employees as employees as set forth in section 414(n). The term "leased employee" means a person who is not an employee of the recipient (i.e., the county) and who provides services to the recipient if such services are provided pursuant to an agreement between the recipient and the leasing organization, such person has performed services for the recipient (or for the recipient and related persons) on a substantially full-time basis for at least one year, and such services are under the primary direction or control of the recipient. A leased employee shall not be considered an employee of the recipient if: (i) such person is covered by a money purchase plan providing (1) a nonintegrated employer contribution rate for each participant of a least ten percent of compensation (including amounts contributed pursuant to a salary reduction agreement, (2) immediate participation, and (3) full and immediate vesting; and (ii) leased employees do not constitute more than 20 percent of the employer's nonhighly compensated workforce. 5.  Employer means Athens-Clarke County, Georgia. 6.  Participant means an employee or former employee who has, on or after the effective date of this plan, met the requirements of article III hereof. 7.  Plan means Athens-Clarke County Employees' Pension Plan, as it may from time to time be amended, which is established by the employer for the purpose of providing retirement benefits for employees of the employer who are eligible to participate herein in accordance with the provisions of this plan. 8.  Plan year means the period of 12 consecutive months beginning each October 1. The first plan Year shall be from July 1, 1992, to September 30, 1992. All subsequent plan years shall begin on October 1. 9.  Retirement benefit means the monthly payments to which a participant shall become entitled hereunder. 10.  Retired participant means a former participant who is retired under this plan and who is receiving retirement benefits provided for hereunder. 11.  Average monthly earnings means a participant's gross monthly salary or wage paid or accrued, which is reported by the employer to the Internal Revenue Service for income tax withholding purposes under section 3401(a) of the Code (determined without regard to any rules that limit the remuneration included in wages based on the nature or location of the employment or the services performed) and which shall also include any amounts that would be paid to the employee during the year but for furlough, the employee's election under a program of deferred compensation under section 457 of the Code, any amounts deducted from employee pay under a cafeteria plan described in section 125 of the Code, and any pre-tax insurance premiums, and, effective January 1, 1998, a qualified transportation fringe benefit plan under section 132(f) of the Code, and exclude any car allowance, reimbursements, and imputed income on life insurance, averaged over the 36 consecutive months during the last 120 months (or the longest consecutive period of months, if less than 36) of his or her employment with the employer which produces the highest average salary or wage. Any period of employment for which the participant is not eligible to participate in the plan—other than a period of furlough or short-term or long-term disability—shall be ignored for purposes of average monthly earnings, and such period of ineligible employment, and any period of non-employment with the employer, shall interrupt or break a period of consecutive months of employment for purposes of determining a participant's average monthly earnings. The maximum amount of annual compensation taken into account for a particular calendar year shall be as follows: (a)  For calendar years beginning on or after January 1, 2002; (b)  $200,000.00 (unless adjusted in such manner as permitted under section 401(a)(17)(B) of the Code) ($245,000 for 2009). For calendar years 2000 and 2001 (as adjusted for cost-of-living under section 401(a)(17) of the Code), $170,000; (c)  For calendar years 1997, 1998, and 1999 (as adjusted for cost-of-living under section 401(a)(17) of the Code), $160,000; and (d)  For calendar years 1994, 1995, and 1996 (as adjusted under section 401(a)(17) of the Code for cost-of-living), $150,000. For calendar years prior to 1994, the annual compensation limits shall be as prescribed by section 401(a)(17) of the Code and Internal Revenue Service guidance issued thereunder. The cost-of-living adjustment in effect for a calendar year applies to any period, not exceeding 12 months, over which compensation is determined ("determination period"), beginning in such calendar year. If a determination period consists of fewer than 12 months, the annual compensation limit will be multiplied by a fraction, the numerator of which is the number of months in the determination period and the denominator of which is 12. 12.  Credited interest means interest on participant contributions at the rate of four (4) percent per annum (or at such other rate as may be established from time to time in writing by the administrator) compounded annually from October 1 next succeeding the date when the contribution is made to the first day of the calendar month which coincides with or next precedes the date of his or her death before retirement, his or her termination of employment, or his or her actual retirement date whichever is applicable. 13.  Gender and numbers. Wherever used herein, a pronoun in the masculine gender shall be considered as including the feminine gender unless the context clearly indicates otherwise; and wherever used herein, a pronoun in the singular form shall be considered as being in the plural form unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. 14.  Governing authority means the Mayor and Commission of the Unified Government of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia. 15.  Code means the United States Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended. 16.  ERISA means the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, as amended. ( Ord. of 9-18-2014 , § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. of 6-7-2016(4), § 1 ) 
Sec. 1-14-2. - Article II—Types of service.     For purposes of this plan, an employee's years of service with the employer shall be determined and reported by the administrator in accordance with the following: 1.  Continuous service. Continuous service shall be the period of uninterrupted employment of a participant with the employer. 2.  Credited service. A participant shall accrue credited service on the basis of the number of full years and fractions thereof to the nearest full month of service with the employer completed from his or her date of employment to his or her date of termination of employment. Participants who were employees of the employer on January 14, 1991, and who were active employees of the City of Athens on January 13, 1991, will receive credit for the years of credited service earned under the City of Athens Employees' Pension Plan. If these participants were former employees of the Commissioners of the Unified Government of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia, and are vested in the Clarke County Pension Plan, they will also receive credit for years of credited service earned under the Clarke County Pension Plan. Participants who were employees of the employer on January 14, 1991, and who were active employees of the Board of Commissioners of Clarke County, Georgia, on January 13, 1991, will receive credit for the years of credited service earned under the Clarke County Employees' Pension Plan. If these participants were former employees of the City of Athens and are vested in the City of Athens Employees' Pension Plan, they will also receive credit for years of credited service earned under the City of Athens Employees' Pension Plan. For the purpose of determining the number of whole years in accordance with this section, all portions of nonsuccessive periods of service that are less than whole years will be aggregated on the basis that 12 months of service equal a whole year of service. 3.  Leave of absence. A leave of absence shall consist of one of the following: (a)  Absence, for reasons other than those specified in subsections 3(b) and 3(c) of this article II, with the consent of the administrator during a period not in excess of one year, except that the administrator may consent to extend the period of leave. (b)  Absence from work for a period not to exceed one year because of furlough, or occupational injury or disease incurred as a result of employment with the employer for which absence a participant shall be entitled to Workers' Compensation payments. (c)  Notwithstanding any provision of this plan to the contrary, effective December 12, 1994, vesting and benefit credit service shall be provided for periods of qualified military service in accordance with, and to the extent required by, section 414(u) of the code. In interpreting this subsection 3, the administrator will apply uniform rules in a like manner to all participants under similar circumstances. 4.  A participant shall not receive credited service in the case of any of the periods of absence set forth in subsection 3(a) above, but shall retain credited service accrued prior to such absence. Upon return to employment after an approved absence, the participant will again accrue credited service. A participant shall receive credited service for any period of absence set forth in subsections 3(b) and 3(c) above. 5.  Credited service granted under article XIV, section 3 will be used for benefit calculation purposes upon return to active employment from permanent and total disability status. 6.  Conversion of sick leave to credited service. Effective for pensions commencing on or after July 1, 2005, at the request, and in accordance with the election, of a participant in connection with his or her application for retirement benefits, unused accrued sick leave shall be converted to credited service solely for purposes of determining the participant's benefit in one of the following ways: (a)  Converted into an equivalent number of months and added to the total credited service; or (b)  Converted into an equivalent number of months and added to the age of the participant. For this purpose, the participant will be credited with one month of credited service or age for every 20 days of unused accrued sick leave. Unused sick leave accruals may not be used for increasing a participant's credited service for purposes of vesting in a benefit or increasing a participant's age or credited service for purposes of qualifying for an early retirement. Once unused accrued sick leave is applied toward credited service or age, any unused sick leave balance will not be eligible for monetary compensation. No other leave, accrued holiday, or compensatory time may be applied toward credited service or age for retirement purposes. ( Ord. of 9-18-2014 , § 1 (Exh. A)) 
Sec. 1-14-3. - Article III—Participation. 1.  Conditions for participation. (a)  Each employee who was included in the City of Athens Employees' Pension Plan or the Clarke County Pension Plan as of June 30, 1992, may elect to become a participant in this plan on the effective date. An employee who was included in the City of Athens Employees' Pension Plan or the Clarke County Pension Plan may elect to retain rights which accrued to them under their existing plan and continue to retain only rights or benefits which accrued to them under that plan. Payment for employees who elect to be covered under the old plan shall be calculated as provided in the old plan, but shall be made out of funds designated by the governing authority. (b)  Each eligible employee, as provided in section 2 of this Article III, who was not a participant in the City of Athens Employees' Pension Plan or the Clarke County Pension Plan as of June 30, 1992, will be included in the plan as a participant on the first day of the month coincident with or next following the completion of one year of continuous service but in no event prior to July 1, 1992. (c)  The governing authority may direct that payments made by Athens-Clarke County on behalf of designated employees into the Athens-Clarke County Employees' Pension Plan be made instead to any other established IRS-approved pension plan of their choice. Payments for the above-named individuals shall not be required to go to this plan. Contribution rates shall be determined by the governing authority. (d)  If a participant terminates employment after such participant is vested in his or her monthly accrued benefit and such participant is re-employed, such participant shall be reinstated as a participant immediately upon his or her completion of an hour of service. Such participant shall retain all credited service accrued prior to his or her termination date. (e)  If an employee's employment terminates prior to such employee being vested in his or her monthly accrued benefit and such employee is re-employed, such employee will be treated as a new employee upon rehire. No credit will be given for credited service earned prior to his or her termination date. 2.  Employment classification. For employees hired on or after July 1, 1992, and subject to the one-year continuous service requirement of section 1(b) of Article III, all full-time regular employees are eligible for inclusion in this plan; however, coverage is not extended to officers of the government elected by the people except as designed by the governing authority. For purposes of this plan, a full-time regular employee is an individual as specified in the Code of Athens-Clarke County, Part III—Code of Ordinances, section 1-9-5(a)(1), who on or after the effective date of the plan, is appointed pursuant to the county's Code of Ordinance and rules thereunder to work not less than 40 hours per week on a continuing (indefinite) basis. Any change to the criteria for becoming a full-time regular employee as set forth in section 1-9-5(a)(1), and thus a plan participant, shall be incorporated by reference, effective as of the date of such change, unless otherwise expressly provided. Except as indicated in this paragraph, and subject to the one-year continuous service requirement of section 1(b) of Article III, all regular employees hired on and after July 1, 1992 and before October 1, 2013, who are regularly scheduled to work at least 20 hours per week but less than full-time, are eligible for inclusion in this plan; however, coverage is not extended to officers of the government elected by the people except as designated by the governing authority. For the purpose of the preceding sentence, a "regular employee" is an individual who, on or after the effective date of the plan, is appointed pursuant to the county's Code of Ordinance and rules thereunder to work on a continuing (indefinite) basis for Athens-Clarke County. Part-time employees hired on or after October 1, 2013 are not eligible to participate in the plan. 3.  Participant contributions. Former employees of the Board of Commissioners of Clarke County, Georgia, who elect to be covered under this plan shall have their participant contributions plus credited interest transferred into this plan at the time of election. Such contributions shall be maintained under this plan and receive credited interest until death, termination of employment or actual retirement date, whichever is applicable. 4.  Employees from prior plans. Former employees of the City of Athens who are retired or terminated with a vested benefit as of June 30, 1992, under the City of Athens Employee Pension Plan and former employees of the Board of Commissioners of Clarke County, Georgia, who are retired or terminated with a vested benefit as of June 30, 1992, under the Clarke County Pension Plan will have their benefits paid from the plan in the same amount as provided under the prior plan. 5.  Charter officer election. An individual who becomes a charter officer shall, within 30 days of appointment to such position, elect to participate either in the County's defined contribution plan or the Athens-Clarke County Employees' Pension Plan. In the event such individual does not make a timely election, he or she shall become, as a default election, a participant in the County's defined contribution plan. The terms, conditions (including any default election), forms and timing of such election shall be established by the County or its designee. ( Ord. of 9-18-2014 , § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. of 6-7-2016(4), § 2 ) 
Sec. 1-14-4. - Article IV—Retirement dates. 1.  Normal retirement date. A participant's normal retirement date shall be the first day of the month coincident with or next following: (a)  The later of the sixtieth anniversary of his or her date of birth or the completion of 10 consecutive years of credited service, as defined in article VII, section 5, for those who, at the time of termination of employment with the employer, are actively working in a position that requires Peace Officer Standards and Training certification with arrest powers, regardless of the department they are in at the time of their retirement, or certified peace officers in the police department, certified firefighters in the fire department, certified peace officers in the sheriff's department or certified correctional officers in the department of corrections; or (b)  The later of the sixty-second anniversary of his or her date of birth or the completion of 10 consecutive years of credited service, as defined in article VII, section 5, or if applicable becoming partially vested as a charter officer in the case of all other participants. 2.  Early retirement date. A participant may make a written election to retire on an early retirement date which shall be the first day of any month (as specified by the participant) coincident with or next following the latest of: (a)  Completion of ten consecutive years of credited service, as defined in article VII, section 5 or if applicable becoming partially vested as a charter officer; or (b)  Attainment of age 55; or (c)  Termination of employment with the employer. 3.  Deferred retirement date. The deferred retirement date of any participant who is in employment beyond his or her normal retirement date shall be the first day of any month coincident with or next following the date the participant terminates employment with the employer.     The normal retirement age of any participant who terminates employment shall be determined in accordance with the provisions of the plan in effect as of the date of such participant's termination of employment. Furthermore, the early retirement or normal retirement date of any participant who terminates employment and retains a nonforfeitable right to a retirement benefit hereunder shall be determined in accordance with the provisions of the plan in effect as of the date of such participant's termination of employment. ( Ord. of 9-18-2014 , § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. of 6-7-2016(4), § 3 ) 
Sec. 1-14-5. - Article V—Accrued benefits and retirement benefits. 1.  Accrued benefits. (a)  (1)  Effective for participants employed by the employer on or after July 1, 2013, the retirement benefit, payable as a single life annuity, for a participant shall be determined as of any date by multiplying the participant's average monthly earnings times 1.85 percent for each year of credited service up to and including 32 years (a maximum of 32 x 1.85% = 59.20%). If such participant has more than 32 years of credited service, the retirement benefits shall be the product determined in the previous sentence plus the product determined by multiplying ¼ of one percent (0.25%) by each year of credited service in excess of 32 years by the participant's average monthly earnings. (2)  For participants who were last employed by the employer prior to July 1, 2013 but were active participants on or after July 1, 2007, the retirement benefit, payable as a single life annuity, for a participant shall be determined as of any date by multiplying the participant's average monthly earnings times 1.85 percent for each year of credited service up to and including 31 years (a maximum of 31 × 1.85% = 57.35%). If such participant has more than 31 years of credited service, the retirement benefits shall be the product determined in the previous sentence plus the product determined by multiplying ¼ of one percent (0.25%) by each year of credited service in excess of 31 years by the participant's average monthly earnings. (3)  For participants who were last employed by the employer prior to July 1, 2007 but were active participants on or after July 1, 2001, the retirement benefit, payable as a single life annuity, for a participant shall be determined as of any date by multiplying the participant's average monthly earnings times 1.85 percent for each year of credited service up to and including 30 years (a maximum of 30 x 1.85% = 55.50%). If such participant has more than 30 years of credited service, the retirement benefits shall be the product determined in the previous sentence plus the product determined by multiplying ¼ of one percent (.25%) by each year of credited service in excess of 30 years by the participant's average month earnings. (4)  For participants who were last employed by the employer prior to July 1, 2001 but were active participants on or after July 1, 1999, the retirement benefit, payable as a single life annuity, for a participant shall be determined as of any date by multiplying the participant's average monthly earnings times 1.80 percent for each year of credited service up to and including 30 years (a maximum of 30 x 1.80% = 54.00%). If such participant has more than 30 years of credited service, the retirement benefits shall be the product determined in the previous sentence plus the product determined by multiplying ¼ of one percent (.25%) by each year of credited service in excess of 30 years by the participant's average month earnings. (5)  For participants who were last employed by the employer prior to July 1, 1999, but were active participants on or after July 1, 1997, the retirement benefit, payable as a single life annuity, for a participant shall be determined as of any date by multiplying the participant's average monthly earnings times 1.60 percent for each year of credited service up to and including 30 years (a maximum of 30 x 1.60% = 48.00%). If such participant has more than 30 years of credited service, the retirement benefits shall be the product determined in the previous sentence plus the product determined by multiplying ¼ of one percent (.25%) by each year of credited service in excess of 30 years by the participant's average month earnings. (6)  For participants who were last employed by the employer prior to July 1, 1997, but were active participants on or after unification (i.e., the formation of the Athens-Clarke Unified Government), the retirement benefit, payable as a single life annuity, for a participant shall be determined as of any date by multiplying the participant's average monthly earnings times 1.60 percent for each year of credited service up to and including 25 years (a maximum of 25 x 1.60% = 40.00%). If such participant has more than 25 years of credited service, the retirement benefits shall be the product determined in the previous sentence plus the product determined by multiplying ¼ of one percent (.25%) by each year of credited service in excess of 25 years by the participant's average month earnings. (7)  In no event, however, shall the monthly accrued benefit as of any date of determination be less than $20.00. (b)  In the event a participant terminates covered employment and is subsequently re-employed before such participant's annuity starting date (as defined in article VI hereunder), the accrued benefit of the participant shall be determined by applying the current benefit formula to all years of credited service, whenever worked, subject to the eligibility and other requirements of the plan at the time the work was performed. (c)  In computing the monthly accrued benefit, it will be assumed that such benefit shall be payable in accordance with the terms of the life annuity form as set forth in subsection (1)(a) of article VI. Benefits payable in accordance with any other form will be actuarially adjusted to reflect the difference in the value of the form of payment chosen hereunder as compared to the life annuity form. (d)  The annual accrued benefit as of any determination date shall be 12 times the monthly accrued benefit as determined above. 2.  Normal retirement benefit. The monthly amount of normal retirement benefit payable to a participant retiring on his or her normal retirement date shall be equal to the greater of his or her monthly accrued benefit determined as of such participant's normal retirement date or his or her early retirement benefit. 3.  Early retirement benefit. The monthly amount of early retirement benefit payable to a participant retiring on his or her early retirement date shall be equal to his or her nonforfeitable monthly accrued benefit determined as of such early retirement date reduced by one-third of one percent (.0033 1/3 ) for each month by which the commencement of benefit payments precedes normal retirement date. 4.  Deferred retirement benefit. In the case of a participant who is employed by the employer beyond his or her normal retirement date, the monthly amount of deferred retirement benefit payable to a participant retiring on his or her deferred retirement date shall be equal to his or her monthly accrued benefit determined as of such participant's deferred retirement date, adjusted for form of payment in accordance with article VI.     No amendment to the deferred retirement benefit provisions shall have the effect of decreasing a participant's deferred retirement benefit determined (without regard to such amendment) as of the later of the date such amendment is adopted or becomes effective. 5.  Pension payment requirements. (a)  To qualify for a pension under the plan a participant must terminate employment with the employer and apply for a pension by completing and returning all forms required by the employer. Such forms, and all other forms as may be required in connection with the administration of the plan, may be provided, completed, and returned in electronic form, provided the participant (or beneficiary) has consented to using such processes and all required electronic signatures are provided in a manner that complies with applicable law. (b)  A participant may continue in the employ of the employer beyond his or her normal retirement date, in which event, the participant shall continue to accrue benefits in accordance with the terms of the plan. (c)  Once a participant has had a bona fide retirement and commenced his or her pension under the plan, such retiree is prohibited from subsequently working for the employer more than 1,040 hours in any fiscal year. Such subsequent employment shall not qualify for pension eligibility or additional benefits under the plan. 6.  Maximum retirement benefits. In accordance with the benefit limitations of section 415 of the Code, each participant's annual benefit shall be limited so that the specified maximum permissible benefit, as defined herein, is not exceeded. If necessary, the participant's accrued benefit shall be limited in order to meet the requirements of section 415 of the Code.     With respect to each participant, all qualified defined benefit plans ever maintained by the employer shall be treated as one defined benefit plan and all qualified defined contribution plans ever maintained by the employer shall be treated as one defined contribution plan for purposes of applying the limitations of section 415 of the Code. In the event the participant's annual benefit from all such plans exceeds the maximum permissible benefit specified herein, the participant's accrued benefit shall be reduced to the extent necessary under this plan if the required reduction is not accomplished under the employer's other qualified defined benefit plan(s).     The following definitions shall be used solely for the purposes of this subsection (7): (a)  [Reserved] (b)  Annual benefit means the amount of accrued benefit attributable to employer contributions which would be payable annually in the form of a single life annuity as of the date of determination; except, however, that if the participant has not yet terminated employment with the employer and has not yet reached his or her normal retirement age, the annual benefit shall mean the amount of accrued benefit attributable to employer contributions projected to such participant's normal retirement age assuming the participant will continue working and compensation will remain the same until the participant's normal retirement age. (c)  [Reserved] (d)  Qualified Public Safety Participant shall mean a participant with respect to whom the period of service taken into account in determining the amount of the benefit under this plan includes at least 15 years of credited service of the participant as a full-time employee of any police department or fire department which is organized and operated by the employer to provide police protection, firefighting services, or emergency medical services or as a member of the armed forces of the United States. (e)  [Reserved] (f)  [Reserved] (g)  Limitation year means a plan year for this plan. (h)  [Reserved] (i)  Maximum permissible benefit. Effective for limitation years beginning on or after January 1, 1995, notwithstanding anything in this plan to the contrary, to the extent a participant's benefit is subject to the provisions of section 415 of the code, which have not been set forth in the plan, such code provisions, and regulations and guidance issued thereunder, are hereby incorporated by reference into this plan and for all purposes shall be deemed a part of the plan. (j)  Participation service means an accrual computation period for which the following conditions are met: (1) the participant is credited with at least the number of hours of service (or period of service if the elapsed time method is used), for benefit accrual purposes, required under the terms of the plan in order to accrue a benefit for the accrual computation period, and (2) the participant is included in the plan for at least one day of the accrual computation period. If these two conditions are met, participation service credited to the participant hereunder shall equal the amount of benefit accrual service credited to the participant for such accrual computation period. A participant who is permanently and totally disabled within the meaning of section 415(c)(3)(C)(i) of the Code during an accrual computation period shall receive participation service with respect to that period. ( Ord. of 6-4-2013 ; Ord. of 9-18-2014 , § 1 (Exh. A)) 
Sec. 1-14-6. - Article VI—Form and payment of benefits. 1.  Definitions. The following definitions shall be used solely for the purposes of this section: (a)  Normal form of retirement benefit means, absent an election to the contrary, for an unmarried participant, the single life annuity form, which shall provide for the payment of retirement benefits to the retired participant during his or her lifetime only; and for a married participant, the joint and 50 percent survivor annuity, which shall provide for a reduced payment to the retirement participant, and, upon the participant's death, 50 percent of such amount to the participant's surviving spouse (if any) for the spouse's lifetime. Retirement benefits shall commence on the first day of the month coincident with or next following the date the participant actually retires and shall cease upon his or her death. No retirement benefits will be payable under this form if the participant dies before his or her annuity starting date. Spousal consent of a married participant shall be required for payment of a single life annuity, a contingent annuity in which the spouse is not the contingent annuitant, or a life annuity with guaranteed monthly payments in which the spouse is not the named beneficiary. (b)  Spouse means the spouse, as defined in Georgia law, or surviving spouse of the participant, provided that a former spouse will be treated as the spouse or surviving spouse to the extent provided under a qualified domestic relations order as described in section 414(p) of the Code. The spouse, to be eligible, must be married to the participant as of the earlier of the day on which the participant (1) dies or (2) retires and begins to receive retirement benefit payments. It shall be the participant's sole responsibility to keep the administrator informed of his or her marital status. (c)  Annuity starting date is the first day of the first period for which an amount is paid as an annuity or any other form. For purposes of determining a participant's annuity starting date, the payment of any disability benefits pursuant to article XIV shall be disregarded. In the case of an annuity starting date that occurs on or after the participant's normal retirement age, such date shall apply to any additional benefit accruals after the annuity starting date. In the case of an annuity starting date that occurs prior to the participant's normal retirement age, such date shall not apply to any additional benefit accruals after the annuity starting date. (d)  Earliest retirement age means the earliest early retirement date on which, under the plan, a participant who separates from service (including death) could receive retirement benefits assuming, if appropriate under the circumstances, he or she would have survived to such date or, in the case of a participant who separates from service (including death) and who would not be eligible to receive retirement benefits on an early retirement date, his or her normal retirement age. 2.  Automatic form of retirement benefit. Except as provided in section 2 of article XIII, a participant's vested accrued benefit will be paid in the normal form of retirement benefit, subject to the spousal written consent requirements, unless an optional annuity form is selected. In addition to the optional forms below, a married vested participant may elect a single life annuity with the written consent of his or her spouse. 3.  Optional annuity forms of payment: Except as otherwise specified in paragraph 3(a)(1) of this article VI, all optional annuity forms of payment are actuarially equivalent to the single life annuity. (a)  Life annuity with guarantee of 120 monthly payments: (1)  The life annuity with 120 monthly payments guaranteed form would provide for a benefit that is the actuarial equivalent of the accrued benefit as determined in section 1 of article V. Such benefit shall be payable to the retired participant during his or her lifetime with the guarantee that not less than 120 monthly retirement benefit payments will be made to the retired participant and his or her named beneficiary. (2)  If this form is elected and the retired participant dies prior to the receipt of 120 monthly payments, the balance of the guaranteed number of monthly payments will be paid to the retired participant's named beneficiary until the total of 120 monthly payments has been made to the retired participant and his or her named beneficiary. The first such payment to the beneficiary shall be due and payable as of the first day of the month following the retired participant's death. (3)  In the event there is no named beneficiary living at the death of the retired participant, the balance of the guaranteed number of monthly payments, which would otherwise have become payable to the retired participant's beneficiary, shall be commuted to a single sum and shall be paid to the executors or administrators of the retired participant's estate. (4)  If the beneficiary of a deceased retired participant should die prior to receiving the balance of the guaranteed number of monthly payments, the balance of the guaranteed number of monthly payments, which would otherwise have become payable to the retired participant's beneficiary, shall be commuted to a single sum and shall be paid to the beneficiary's executors or administrators of the beneficiary's estate. (5)  No monthly benefit will be payable under this form to a beneficiary if the participant dies before his or her annuity starting date. (b)  Contingent annuitant option: (1)  In lieu of the automatic form of retirement benefit called for in section 2 of article VI, a participant may elect a contingent annuitant option which provides a benefit that is the actuarial equivalent of the single life annuity that is payable to the retired participant during his or her lifetime and for the continuance of such retirement benefits in 50 percent, 75 percent, or 100 percent of such amount to a contingent annuitant, if living, after the retired participant's death. (2)  The monthly payment to the contingent annuitant shall commence on the first day of the month following the month in which the retired participant dies, if the contingent annuitant is then living, and shall continue monthly with the last payment due for the month in which the contingent annuitant's death occurs. (3)  If a contingent annuitant dies before the participant's annuity starting date is attained, the normal form of retirement benefit payments will, if applicable, automatically become payable as if a contingent annuitant option had not been elected, unless the participant designates another contingent annuitant prior to the participant's annuity starting date, in accordance with procedures of the employer. If the contingent annuitant predeceases the retired participant on or after the annuity starting date, the retirement benefit payments will cease upon the retired participant's death. (4)  No monthly benefit will be payable under this form to a contingent annuitant if the participant dies before his or her annuity starting date. (c)  Life annuity with guaranteed monthly payments: (1)  In lieu of the automatic form of retirement benefit called for in section 2 of article VI, a participant may elect a life annuity with either 60 or 180 monthly payments guaranteed. This form would provide for an actuarially equivalent retirement benefit payable to the retired participant during his or her lifetime with the guarantee that not less than a total of the specified number of monthly retirement benefit payments will be made to the retired participant and his or her named beneficiary. (2)  If this form is elected and the retired participant dies prior to the receipt of the specified number of monthly payments, the balance of the guaranteed number of monthly payments will be paid to the retired participant's named beneficiary until the total of the specified number of monthly payments has been made to the retired participant and his or her named beneficiary. The first such payment to the beneficiary shall be due and payable as of the first day of the month following the retired participant's death. (3)  In the event there is no named beneficiary living at the death of the retired participant, the balance of the specified number of guaranteed monthly payments, which would otherwise have become payable to the retired participant's beneficiary, shall be commuted to a single sum and shall be paid to the executors or administrators of the retired participant's estate. (4)  If the beneficiary of a deceased retired participant should die prior to receiving the balance of the specified number of guaranteed monthly payments, the balance of the specified number of guaranteed monthly payments, which would otherwise have become payable to the retired participant's beneficiary, shall be commuted to a single sum and shall be paid to the beneficiary's executors or administrators of the beneficiary's estate. (5)  No monthly benefit will be payable under this form to a beneficiary if the participant dies before his or her annuity starting date. (d)  Election of optional annuity forms. A participant may elect any optional annuity form by written notice to the administrator at any time prior to his or her annuity starting date; provided, however, that the election of an optional annuity form by a married participant is subject to the spousal written waiver requirements set forth in subsection 1(a) of article VI. Such election must indicate that the participant has revoked the automatic form of retirement benefit as it pertains to him or her, and that in its place has elected the optional annuity form chosen by him or her. An election of an optional annuity form may be revoked in writing by the participant at any time prior to his or her annuity starting date. In no event shall the consent of any person entitled to receive payments upon the death of the participant be required as a condition to the right of a participant to revoke any option previously elected. After an optional annuity form has been revoked, another election of an optional annuity form may be made, subject to the spousal written consent requirement for a married participant. 4.  Death benefit: (a)  (1)  If a participant who has a nonforfeitable benefit and who has not yet attained his or her annuity starting date dies on or before his or her earliest retirement age, the participant's spouse (if any) will receive 50 percent of the retirement benefit that would be payable if the participant had: (i)  Separated from service at the earlier of the actual time of separation or the date of death; (ii)  Survived to the earliest retirement age and; (iii)  Retired with a life annuity at the earliest retirement age. (2)  This death benefit shall be payable to the spouse (if any) of a deceased participant beginning no earlier than the first of the month following the month the participant would have attained his or her earliest retirement age. (3)  This benefit will be paid to the earlier of: (i)  The death of the surviving spouse; or (ii)  The date of remarriage of the surviving spouse. (b)  If a vested participant for whom benefits are payable in accordance with section 2 of this article VI should die during his or her service with the employer or, on or after January 1, 2007, while absent on account of qualified military service (as defined in section 414(u) of the Code), after his or her earliest retirement age and before his or her normal retirement date, then the spouse shall be entitled to a benefit of 50 percent of the participant's early retirement benefit based upon the employee's years of service through the day on which death occurred. The same shall be computed as if such deceased participant retired with a single life annuity on the first day of the month preceding death. This benefit, which shall be payable as of the first of the month following the month of the participant's death, shall be paid to the earlier of: (1)  The death of the surviving spouse; or (2)  To the date of remarriage of the surviving spouse; provided, that this death benefit payable above shall not be given unless it is greater than any other benefit provided for by the plan and shall not be given in addition to any other benefit provided thereby. (c)  If a vested participant for whom benefits are payable in accordance with section 2 of this article VI should die during his or her service with the employer after his or her normal retirement date, then the spouse shall be entitled to a benefit that is actuarially equivalent to the employee's vested benefit at date of death based upon the participant's years of service through the month in which his or her death occurred. The same shall be computed as if such deceased participant retired at the first of the month preceding death. This benefit shall be paid to the earliest of: (1)  120 monthly payments; (2)  The death of the surviving spouse; or (3)  The date of remarriage of the surviving spouse; provided, that this death benefit payable above shall not be given unless it is greater than any other benefit provided for by the plan and shall not be given in addition to any other benefit provided thereby. (d)  Notwithstanding the provisions set forth above, a vested employee's legal dependent child shall become his or her beneficiary, if there is no spouse, in the event a vested participant dies while an employee. The legal dependent child shall be eligible for benefits commencing the month following the death of the employee-parent and continuing monthly until reaching his or her 19th birthday, unless said child is a full-time student at a postsecondary institution of higher education, which status would allow this benefit to continue until the maximum age of 25. The amount of the monthly benefit is 50 percent of the monthly accrued benefit the employee would have received at age 55 or at date of death, if later, as a single life annuity. For families with more than one legal dependent child, the monthly benefit shall be divided equally among the legal dependent children with the same age restrictions for each child. As each child reaches the age of 19 or 25 based on the above age requirements, said benefits shall cease, and the remaining legal dependent children shall begin to receive the benefits previously allocated to those children who no longer qualify (because of age, death, or cannot be located) for such benefits divided equally among those children who are still qualified for the benefit. For the purposes of this paragraph, legal dependent child means a child of a deceased participant as determined in accordance with Georgia law who shall be conclusively presumed to be wholly dependent for support upon the deceased participant at the time of such participant's death if the child is neither married nor emancipated by court order and either under the age of 19 or under the age of 25 or continuously enrolled as a full-time student in a postsecondary institution of higher education. 5.  Required distributions—Code section 401(a)(9) . Notwithstanding any other provision of this plan, distributions under this article VI made on or after January 1, 2006 shall be made in accordance with section 401(a)(9) of the Code and the regulations thereunder, and the provisions of this section 5. Definitions of certain terms used in this section 5 are set forth in subsection (e) hereof. (a)  Time and manner of distribution. (1)  Required beginning date. The participant's entire benefit shall be distributed, or begin to be distributed, to the participant no later than the participant's required beginning date. (2)  Death of participant before distributions begin. If the participant dies before distributions begin, the participant's entire interest will be distributed, or begin to be distributed, no later than as follows: (i)  If the participant's surviving spouse is the participant's sole beneficiary, distributions to the surviving spouse shall begin by December 31 of the calendar year immediately following the calendar year in which the participant died, or by December 31 of the calendar year in which the participant would have attained age 70½, if later. (ii)  If the participant's surviving spouse is not the participant's sole beneficiary, distributions to the designated beneficiary shall begin by December 31 of the calendar year immediately following the calendar year in which the participant died. (iii)  If there is no beneficiary as of September 30 of the year following the year of the participant's death, the participant's entire benefit shall be distributed by December 31 of the calendar year containing the fifth anniversary of the participant's death. (iv)  If the participant's surviving spouse is the participant's sole beneficiary and the surviving spouse dies after the participant but before distributions to the surviving spouse begin, paragraph 5(a)(2), other than subparagraph 5(a)(2)(i) above, shall apply as if the surviving spouse were the participant. For purposes of this paragraph 5(a)(2) and subsection 5(d) below, distributions are considered to begin on the participant's required beginning date (or if subparagraph 5(a)(2)(iv) above applies, the date distributions are required to begin to the surviving spouse under subparagraph 5(a)(2)(i) above). If annuity payments irrevocably commence to the participant before the participant's required beginning date (or to the participant's surviving spouse before the date distributions are required to begin to the surviving spouse under subparagraph 5(a)(2)(i) above), the date distributions are considered to begin is the date distributions actually commence. (3)  Form of distribution . Unless a participant's benefit is distributed in the form of an annuity purchased from an insurance company, or in a single sum as specified in section 2 of article XIII, as of the first distribution calendar year, distributions will be made in accordance with subsections 5(b), 5(c) and 5(d) below. If the participant's benefit is distributed in the form of an annuity purchased from an insurance company, distributions thereunder will be made in accordance with the requirements of section 401(a)(9) of the Code and U.S. Treasury Regulations. (b)  Determination of amount to be distributed each year. (1)  General annuity requirements . If the participant's benefit is paid in the form of annuity distributions under the plan, payments under the annuity shall satisfy the following requirements: (i)  the annuity distributions shall be paid in periodic payments made at intervals not longer than one year; (ii)  the distribution period will be over a life (or lives) or over a period certain not longer than the period described in subsections 5(c) and 5(d); (iii)  once payments have begun over a period certain, the period certain will not be changed even if the period certain is shorter than the maximum permitted; and (iv)  payments will either be nonincreasing or increase only as follows: (A) by an annual percentage increase that does not exceed the annual percentage increase in a cost-of-living index that is based on prices of all items and issued by the Bureau of Labor Statistics; (B) to the extent of the reduction in the amount of the participant's payments to provide for a survivor benefit upon death, but only if the beneficiary whose life was used to determine the distribution period described in subsection 5(c) dies or is no longer the participant's beneficiary pursuant to a qualified domestic relations order within the meaning of section 414(p) of the Code; and (C) to pay increased benefits that result from a plan amendment. (2)  Amount required to be distributed by required beginning date . The amount that must be distributed on or before the participant's required beginning date (or, if the participant dies before distributions begin, the date distributions are required to begin under subparagraphs 5(a)(2)(i) or 5(a)(2)(ii)) is the payment that is required for one payment interval. The second payment need not be made until the end of the next payment interval even if that payment interval ends in the next calendar year. Payment intervals are the periods for which payments are received, e.g. , bi-monthly, monthly, semi-annually, or annually. All of the participant's benefit accruals as of the last day of the first distribution calendar year shall be included in the calculation of the amount of the annuity payments for payment intervals ending on or after the participant's required beginning date. (3)  Additional accruals after first distribution calendar year . Any additional benefits accruing to the participant in a calendar year after the first distribution calendar year shall be distributed beginning with the first payment interval ending in the calendar year immediately following the calendar year in which such amount accrues. (c)  Requirements for annuity distributions that commence during a participant's lifetime . (1)  Joint life annuities where the beneficiary is not the participant's spouse . If the participant's benefit is to be distributed in the form of a joint and survivor annuity for the joint lives of the participant and a nonspouse beneficiary, annuity payments to be made on or after the participant's required beginning date to the beneficiary after the participant's death must not at any time exceed the applicable percentage of the annuity payment for such period that would have been payable to the participant using the table set forth in Q&A-2 of section 1.401(a)(9)-6 of U.S. Treasury Regulations. (2)  Period certain annuities . Unless the participant's spouse is the sole beneficiary and the form of distribution is a period certain and no life annuity, the period certain for an annuity distribution commencing during the participant's lifetime may not exceed the applicable distribution period for the participant under the Uniform Lifetime Table set forth in section 1.401(a)(9)-9 of U.S. Treasury Regulations for the calendar year that contains the annuity starting date. If the annuity starting date precedes the year in which the participant reaches age 70, the applicable distribution period for the participant is the distribution period for age 70 under the Uniform Lifetime Table set forth in section 1.401(a)(9)-9 of U.S. Treasury Regulations plus the excess of 70 over the age of the participant as of the participant's birthday in the year that contains the annuity starting date. (d)  Requirements for minimum distributions where participant dies before date distributions begin . (1)  Participant survived by designated beneficiary . If the participant dies before the date distribution of his benefit begins and there is a beneficiary, the participant's entire benefit shall be distributed beginning no later than the time described in subparagraphs 5(a)(2)(i) or 5(a)(2)(ii), over the life of the beneficiary or over a period certain not exceeding: (i)  unless the annuity starting date is before the first distribution calendar year, the life expectancy of the beneficiary determined using the beneficiary's age as of the beneficiary's birthday in the calendar year immediately following the calendar year of the participant's death; or (ii)  if the annuity starting date is before the first distribution calendar year, the life expectancy of the beneficiary determined using the beneficiary's age as of the beneficiary's birthday in the calendar year that contains the annuity starting date. (2)  No designated beneficiary . If the participant dies before the date distributions begin and there is no beneficiary as of September 30 of the year following the year of the participant's death, distribution of the participant's entire interest will be completed by December 31 of the calendar year containing the fifth anniversary of the participant's death. (3)  Death of surviving spouse before distributions to surviving spouse begin . If the participant dies before the date distribution of his benefit begins, the participant's surviving spouse is the participant's sole beneficiary, and the surviving spouse dies before distributions to the surviving spouse begin, this subsection 5(d) shall apply as if the surviving spouse were the participant, except that the time by which distributions must begin will be determined without regard to subparagraph 5(a)(2)(i). (e)  Definitions . For purposes of this section 5, the following definitions shall apply: (1)  Designated beneficiary means the individual who is designated as the beneficiary under the plan and who is the designated beneficiary under section 401(a)(9) of the Code and section 1.401(a)(9)-1, Q&A-4, of U.S. Treasury Regulations. (2)  Distribution calendar year means a calendar year for which a minimum distribution is required. For distributions beginning before the participant's death, the first distribution calendar year is the calendar year immediately preceding the calendar year which contains the participant's required beginning date. For distributions beginning after the participant's death, the first distribution calendar year is the calendar year in which distributions are required to begin pursuant to subparagraph 5(a)(2)(i) of article VI. (3)  Life expectancy means the life expectancy computed by use of the Single Life Table in section 1.401(a)(9)-9 of U.S. Treasury Regulations. (4)  Required beginning date means April 1 of the calendar year following the calendar year in which the participant attains age 70½ or retires, whichever is later. 6.  Actuarial equivalent or actuarially equivalent. The amount of benefit payable in any form of benefit other than the single life annuity form shall be the actuarial equivalent of the amount payable in the single life annuity form. Actuarial equivalent shall be the adjusted benefit payable hereunder as of any participant's retirement date which would provide for equality in value of the aggregate amount expected to be received under the single life annuity form as compared to the value of the aggregate amount expected to be received under another form of benefit. The actuarial equivalent shall be determined without regard to the participant's sex and based upon seven percent interest and the 1989 Unisex #3 Basis; Longer Life Annuity factors. In no event shall an amendment to the actuarial equivalent benefit provisions deprive a participant of his actuarial equivalent benefit so determined to the later of the effective date or adoption date of any such amendment. Should an amendment be adopted which directly or indirectly affects the computation of a participant's actuarial equivalent benefit, such participant's actuarial equivalent benefit so determined shall be equal to or greater than the actuarial equivalent benefit determined (without regard to such amendment) as of the later of the effective date or adoption date of the amendment. ( Ord. of 9-18-2014 , § 1 (Exh. A)) 
Sec. 1-14-7. - Article VII—Vesting and transfer of employment. 1.  Vesting; entitlement to monthly accrued benefit. A participant shall be fully vested in his monthly accrued benefit upon attaining his normal retirement date as set forth in article IV, and upon termination of employment thereafter he or she shall be entitled to receive his monthly accrued benefit determined as of the date of his termination of employment. 2.  Forfeiture of benefit rights and vesting schedule for charter officers. (a)  Forfeiture of benefit rights upon termination of employment prior to ten years' consecutive service or partial vesting as a charter officer. A participant whose employment with the employer is terminated prior to his or her normal retirement date and who has less than ten consecutive years of credited service, as defined in section 5 of this article VII, with the employer at the date of termination of employment will forfeit all rights to benefits under this plan, unless the charter officer is at least partially vested. For purposes of consecutive years of service in the previous sentence, a period of approved leave of up to one year, Family Medical Leave Act leave, and qualified military service leave shall not be deemed an interruption of consecutive years of credited service. (b)  Vesting schedule for charter officers. (1)  An individual who becomes a charter officer after July 1, 2015, and who elects to participate in the County's Pension Plan shall be subject to the following vesting schedule, based upon his or her total consecutive years of credited service earned in County employment: Completed Consecutive Years of Credited Service Vested Percentage 0—4 0% 5 50% 6 60% 7 70% 8 80% 9 90% 10 100%  (2)  An employee serving in an acting charter officer position will not be subject to the above vesting schedule; however, if an employee was in an acting charter officer position and, without interruption, becomes a permanent charter officer, the period as acting charter officer shall be included in the computation of completed years of credited service. (3)  If an employee ceases to be a charter officer but continues to be an employee, his or her vesting percentage shall be frozen and shall not increase until and unless the employee accumulates ten consecutive years of credited service at which time the employee shall be fully vested in his or her accrued benefit. (4)  If a charter officer terminates employment after becoming partially vested, his or her vested benefit (i.e., the product of the vested percentage and the benefit accrued) shall be fixed. Upon subsequent non-consecutive reemployment, the individual shall be treated as a new employee, with a new hire date, for purposes of accruing benefits and earning nonforfeitable benefits. 3.  Retention of benefit rights upon termination of employment after ten years' service or after becoming partially vested as a charter officer. A participant whose employment with the employer is terminated prior to his or her normal retirement date and who has completed ten consecutive years of credited service, as defined in section 5 of this article VII, shall retain a nonforfeitable right to his monthly accrued benefit as of his or her date of termination of employment. Notwithstanding the preceding, a charter officer who is partially vested shall retain a nonforfeitable right in his or her vested percentage of monthly accrued benefit (i.e., vested percentage multiplied by accrued benefit) as of his or her date of termination of employment. 4.  No nonforfeitable rights when termination of employment caused by death or participant dies subsequent to termination and prior to early or normal retirement dates. Should a participant's termination of employment with the employer be caused by the participant's death or should the participant die subsequent to his or her date of termination and prior to his early retirement date or normal retirement date, he or she shall not, in the absence of any contrary provision of article VI, retain any nonforfeitable rights hereunder. 5.  Ten consecutive years of credited service . Solely for purposes of this article VII, the term "ten consecutive years of credited service" means ten consecutive years of full-time active employment with the employer, except that (a) the following periods of absence shall be included and deemed a part of consecutive years of credited service for such purposes: (1) any period of paid leave, including short-term and long-term disability, (2) any period for which Workers' Compensation is paid, and (3) any period of qualified military service as set forth in subsection 3(c) of article II; (b) the following periods of absence shall not break otherwise consecutive periods of active full-time employment: (1) any approved unpaid leave not listed in subsection 5(a) of this article VII, which does not exceed one year (unless an extension is approved by the employer), and (2) any period of Family Medical Leave Act leave; and (c) any other period of absence or period subsequent to a termination of employment shall constitute a break in consecutive years of credited service. 6.  Authorization to elect early retirement benefit . Subject to the provisions of section 2 of article XIII, if a participant meets the years of credited service requirement as set forth in section 2 of article IV at the date of his or her termination of employment, such participant may elect, in lieu of a benefit payable on the first day of the month coincident with or next following his normal retirement age, to receive a benefit payable on an early retirement date. Such early retirement benefit will be payable in accordance with section 3 of article V and will be payable in a form as determined in accordance with article VI. 7.  Amendments to vesting provisions not to deprive of nonforfeitable rights. No amendment to the vesting provisions shall deprive a participant of his nonforfeitable right accrued (without regard to such amendment) as of the later of the adoption date or effective date of the amendment. 8.  Determination of accrued benefits and nonforfeitable rights in accordance with plan in effect on date of termination of employment. A participant who terminates employment shall have his or her accrued benefits and nonforfeitable right to a retirement benefit hereunder determined in accordance with the provisions of the plan in effect as of the date of such participant's termination of employment. 9.  Transfer of employment. Should a participant's employment with the employer be transferred to an employment classification other than the specified employment classification as set forth in article III, such participant shall not accrue credited service for any purposes of this plan during such period.     If such participant shall, prior to termination of his employment or actual retirement, be reinstated in the employment classification as set forth in article III, he or she shall retain all credited service accrued prior to his or her transfer date and shall commence to accrue additional credited service under the plan. Upon termination of his or her employment, such participant's retirement benefit shall be based on his or her total credited service accrued as a participant under this plan only.     If such participant shall accrue credited service under any other qualified defined benefit pension plan of the employer for any period during which he or she was not employed in the employment classification as set forth in article III and is not reinstated in the employment classification as set forth in article III at the time he or she should subsequently become eligible for retirement benefits hereunder, such participant's retirement benefit shall be based on his or her accrued benefit (as defined in the plan as of the date of transfer) using his or her total credited service accrued as a participant under this plan only. No participant shall be eligible to receive retirement benefits under the plan for any period of credited service for which he or she is receiving retirement benefits under such other plan of the employer.     Notwithstanding section 2 of article II, should a participant's employment with the employer be transferred into the specified employment classification as set forth in article III, such participant's retirement benefit shall be based on his accrued benefit using his total credited service accrued as a participant from the date he or she is transferred into the specified employment classification as set forth in article III. No participant shall be eligible to receive retirement benefits under the plan for any period of credited service for which he or she is receiving retirement benefits under another plan of the employer. ( Ord. of 9-18-2014 , § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. of 6-7-2016(4), §§ 4, 5 ) 
Sec. 1-14-8. - Article VIII—Funding. 1.  Funding policy required. The employer shall adopt a funding policy for this plan. No employee contributions shall be permitted or required. 2.  Authority to make group annuity contract payments; holding in equity account; authority to change agencies and vehicles. For the purpose of carrying out any such funding policy, the employer may enter into and make periodic payments under a group annuity contract. Any amounts so paid may, at the direction of the employer, be held in an equity account maintained in conjunction therewith. The employer expressly reserves the right to change funding agencies or vehicles at any time at its own election and without the consent of any person or organization. 3.  Use or diversion of funds to other purposes prohibited; administrative expenses excepted. No part of the funds held under this plan shall be used for or diverted to purposes other than for the exclusive benefit of participants, their spouses, or their beneficiaries covered under this plan prior to the satisfaction of all liabilities hereunder with respect to them, provided that any funds under this plan may be used to pay reasonable plan administration expenses. 4.  Interest of individuals in contributed funds. Other than for employee contributions and interest thereon held under this plan, no person shall have any interest in or right to any of the funds contributed to or held under this plan except as expressly provided in this plan and the group annuity contract and then only to the extent that such funds have been contributed by the employer. Employee contributions to the Clarke County Pension Plan cannot be distributed in a lump sum or as installment payments. 5.  Employer to pay other costs. The employer shall pay any and all other costs required for the operation of this plan. ( Ord. of 9-18-2014 , § 1 (Exh. A)) 
Sec. 1-14-9. - Article IX—Administration. 1.  This plan shall be administered by the employer in accordance with this plan and the group annuity contract, and for purposes of such plan administration, the employer is hereby deemed to be plan administrator and named fiduciary. 2.  The administrator shall have the discretion and authority and responsibility to determine the benefits payable under this plan; shall administer the plan in accordance with the terms of the plan; shall have the power to determine all questions arising in connection with the administration, interpretation and application of the terms of this plan, including without limitation, questions of eligibility for participation, eligibility for benefits, amount of accrued benefit, and the timing of the distribution thereof (subject to the provision that such power shall be consistently applied in a nondiscriminatory manner among all participants). All such interpretations, constructions and corrections of plan provisions shall be final and binding upon all parties, including without limitation the employer, employees and their families, dependents, and beneficiaries. The administrator may require participants to apply in writing to the administrator for benefits hereunder and to furnish satisfactory evidence of their date of birth and marital status and such other information as deemed advisable by approval of the Mayor and Commission. 3.  If a participant's application for retirement benefits has been rejected by the administrator, then the administrator shall notify the participant of such rejection in writing, setting forth the specific reasons for such rejection. Such written explanation shall be written in a manner calculated to be understood by the participant. 4.  The Administrator shall also afford to any participant whose claim for pension benefits has been denied a reasonable opportunity for a full and fair review of the decision to deny pension benefits in accordance with the procedures set forth below: (a)  Within ten working days from the date of the initial decision by the Human Resources staff who assist in administration of the Plan, which decision shall be confirmed in writing by staff, a participant seeking to contest or appeal the staff decision shall submit to the Administrator an appeal in writing that states the specific claim and relief desired to be considered by the Administrator. Within ten working days from the filing of the appeal, the Administrator will provide a written response to the participant. (b)  If the participant is not satisfied with the Administrator's decision, within ten working days from the date of the Administrator's decision, the participant may file with the Administrator a request for review of the decision by the Manager. Within 20 working days after reviewing a request to hear an appeal, the Manager, or designee, will acknowledge receipt and schedule a meeting to review the facts or will respond in writing, at his/her discretion. The Manager's review will include a review of the law, the facts, the circumstances, the findings, and the Administrator's decision. The relevant law, facts and circumstances, findings and decisions will be summarized and presented to the Manager or designee by the Administrator. It shall be the burden of the participant on appeal to establish that the decision in question does not substantially comply with the pension plan or that the factual basis upon which the adverse action was taken is not true and correct or was substantially inaccurate in all relevant and material aspects. Following a desk review of the information presented in writing by the Administrator and the participant, the Manager or designee, may at his discretion schedule a meeting with the parties to clarify any issues in question in order to have complete information before making a decision. The written decision of the Manager to confirm or overturn the Administrator's decision shall be the final decision of the Unified Government of Athens-Clarke County. ( Ord. of 9-18-2014 , § 1 (Exh. A)) 
Sec. 1-14-10. - Article X—Discontinuance of employer contributions, plan amendments and mergers. 1.  The employer intends to continue its sponsorship of this plan and payment of contributions to this plan indefinitely; but continuance of such sponsorship and such contributions is not assumed as a contractual obligation, or other obligation, of the employer and the right is reserved by the employer to cease its sponsorship of this plan or to reduce, suspend, or discontinue its contributions hereunder at any time. In the event of a suspension of contributions which ripens into a discontinuance, such discontinuance shall be retroactive to the date the last suspension of contributions commenced. 2.  The plan may be amended at any time and to any extent by approval of the Mayor and Commission. No such amendment, however, shall: (a)  Vest in the employer any interest in the funds accumulated in accordance with this plan or the retirement benefits provided hereunder; or (b)  Deprive any participant who has retired under this plan prior to the date of amendment, of any retirement benefit under this plan or change the provisions thereof; provided, however, that any change or modification for the purpose of conforming this plan to the requirements of the Internal Revenue Code of the United States or of any other pertinent provisions of Federal or State Law, or of any regulation or ruling of any duly constituted authority in connection therewith, may be made effective at any time with retroactive effect; or (c)  [Reserved] (d)  Be effective to the extent that any change contained therein (including a change in the actuarial basis for determining optional or early retirement benefits) has the effect of decreasing a participant's accrued benefit determined (without regard to such amendment) as of the later of the adoption date or effective date of the amendment. Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, a participant's accrued benefit may be reduced to the extent permitted under section 412(c)(8) of the Code or under regulations promulgated by the U.S. Secretary of the Treasury, as if such law were applicable. For purposes of this subparagraph (d), an amendment which has the effect of eliminating or reducing an early retirement benefit, a retirement-type subsidy, or an optional form of benefit, with respect to benefits accrued before the later of the amendment's effective date or adoption date, shall be treated as impermissibly reducing a participant's accrued benefit. In the case of a retirement-type subsidy, the preceding sentence shall apply only with respect to a participant who satisfies (either before or after the amendment) the pre-amendment conditions for the subsidy. In general, a retirement-type subsidy is a subsidy that continues after retirement, but does not include a qualified disability benefit, a medical benefit, a social security supplement, or a death benefit (including life insurance). ( Ord. of 9-18-2014 , § 1 (Exh. A)) 
Sec. 1-14-11. - Article XI—Plan termination procedures. 1.  If the plan is terminated or the employer permanently ceases to contribute to the plan, each participant shall be vested to the extent funded, and the assets of this plan available to provide benefits shall be allocated in a fair and equitable manner among those participants, spouses and beneficiaries affected by such termination. An allocation of assets as though the plan were subject to section 4044 of ERISA shall be deemed to satisfy the requirements of this section 1 of article XI. 2.  Any assets of this plan which remain after provision has been made to satisfy all liabilities of this plan, unless in contravention of any provisions of law, shall be distributed to the employer. ( Ord. of 9-18-2014 , § 1 (Exh. A)) 
Sec. 1-14-12. - Article XII—[Reserved]. 
Sec. 1-14-13. - Article XIII—Miscellaneous. 1.  Inclusion in plan construes no right of employment or claims or interest in benefits. Inclusion in this plan shall not be construed as giving the participant any right to be retained in the service of the employer without the employer's consent, nor shall it interfere with the right of the employer to discharge the participant, nor shall it give the participant any right, claim or interest in any retirement benefits herein described except upon fulfillment of the provisions and requirements of this plan. 2.  Lump sum settlements. This section 2 of article XIII is deleted effective January 1, 2006. (a)  If a vested participant terminates employment, and the present value of such participant's nonforfeitable accrued benefit does not exceed (or at the time of any prior distribution did not exceed) $3,500.00, the participant or the person designated by him to receive payments upon his death, if applicable, shall receive a lump sum settlement of such present value and any nonvested portion of his accrued benefit will be forfeited. For purposes of the preceding sentence, if the present value of a participant's vested accrued benefit is zero, the participant shall be deemed to have received a lump sum settlement of such present value. For purposes of this section, a participant receiving disability benefits pursuant to the provisions of this plan shall be deemed to have terminated employment upon attainment of his normal retirement date. No distribution may be made under the preceding provisions of this section 2 after a participant's annuity starting date unless the participant and, if applicable, his spouse (or where the participant has died, the surviving spouse) consent to such distribution within 90 days of the distribution date. For purposes of this section 2, "annuity starting date" and "spouse" shall have the respective meaning set forth in article VI hereunder. A lump sum settlement shall be made any time after the participant's termination of participation but prior to the close of the second plan year following the plan year in which the termination occurs, even though the participant or the person designated by him to receive payments upon his death, if applicable, is not otherwise entitled to commencement of benefit payments at such time under other provisions of the plan. (b)  For purposes of this section, "termination of participation" shall mean: (1)  The day such lump sum is distributed for all participants who terminated employment prior to July 7, 1992; provided, that such distribution occurs prior to July 8, 1993; or (2)  The day employment is terminated for all participants who terminated employment on or subsequent to July 7, 1992 and before September 18, 2014. (c)  The present value shall be determined without regard to the participant's sex based upon the interest rate and mortality assumptions determined as of the first day of the plan year that contains the participant's annuity starting date used by the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation for single employer plan terminations. (d)  (1)  If the plan is amended to change the time for determining the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation interest rate and mortality assumptions, then any lump sum settlement in the one-year period commencing at the time such amendment is effective (if the amendment is effective on or after the adoption date) shall be based on the interest rate and mortality assumptions determined under the plan, either before or after the amendment, which will result in the larger benefit. If such amendment is adopted retroactively (i.e., the amendment is effective prior to the adoption date), then the interest rate and mortality assumptions which will result in the larger benefit shall be used for any lump sum settlement made in the period beginning with the effective date of the amendment and ending one year after the amendment's adoption date. (2)  In addition, in no event shall an amendment changing the method for determining a lump sum settlement (as a result of retirement, disability, or death) deprive a participant of his lump sum settlement so determined to the later of the effective date or adoption date of any such amendment. Should an amendment be adopted which directly or indirectly affects the computation of a participant's lump sum settlement, such participant's lump sum settlement so determined shall be equal to or greater than the lump sum settlement determined (without regard to such amendment) as of the later of the amendment's adoption date or effective date. (3)  If a vested participant receives a lump sum settlement pursuant to this section 2 of article XIII, which is equal to the present value of his entire accrued benefit and subsequently resumes covered employment under the plan, he or she shall not have the right to restore his accrued benefit relating to such distribution. (e)  Direct rollovers. This subsection XIII, 2(e) generally applies to distributions on or after January 1, 1993. (1)  Rollover election. Notwithstanding any provision of the plan to the contrary that would otherwise limit a distributee's election under this subsection XIII, 2(e), a distributee may elect, at the time and in the manner prescribed by the board, to have any portion of an eligible rollover distribution paid directly to an eligible retirement plan specified by the distributee in a direct rollover. (2)  Definitions . (i)  Eligible rollover distribution . An eligible rollover distribution is any distribution of all or any portion of the balance to the credit of the distributee, except that an eligible rollover distribution does not include: any distribution that is one of a series of substantially equal periodic payments (not less frequently than annually) made for the life (or life expectancy) of the distributee or the joint lives (or joint life expectancies) of the distributee and the distributee's designated beneficiary, or for a specified period of ten years or more; any distribution to the extent such distribution is required under section 401(a)(9) of the Code; and the portion of any distribution that is not includible in gross income (determined without regard to the exclusion for net unrealized appreciation with respect to employer securities). (ii)  Eligible retirement plan . An eligible retirement plan is a qualified trust described in section 401(a) of the code, an individual retirement account described in section 408(a) of the Code, an individual retirement annuity described in section 408(b) of the Code, and with respect to distributions after December 31, 2001, an annuity plan described in section 403(a) of the Code, an annuity contract described in section 403(b) of the Code, an eligible plan under section 457(b) of the Code which is maintained by a state, political subdivision of a state, or any agency or instrumentality of a state or political subdivision of a state and which agrees to separately account for amounts transferred into such plan from this plan, and for distributions after December 31, 2007 a Roth individual retirement plan described in section 408A of the Code, and any of which accepts the distributee's eligible rollover distribution, and, in the case of an eligible plan under section 457(b) of the Code. For distributions made after December 31, 2001, for purposes of the direct rollover provisions of XIII, 2(e) of the plan, a portion of a distribution shall not fail to be an eligible rollover distribution merely because the portion consists of after-tax employee contributions which are not includible in gross income. However, such portion may be transferred only to an individual retirement account or annuity described in section 408(a) or (b) of the code, or to a qualified defined contribution plan described in section 401(a) or 403(a) of the code that agrees to separately account for amounts so transferred, including separately accounting for the portion of such distribution which is includible in gross income and the portion of such distribution which is not so includible. (iii)  Distributee . A distributee includes an employee or former employee. In addition, the Employee's or former employee's surviving spouse and the employee's or former employee's spouse or former spouse who is the alternate payee under a qualified domestic relations order, as defined in section 414(p) of the Code, are distributees with regard to the interest of the spouse or former spouse. Effective for distributions made on or after January 1, 2010, a distributee includes a non-spouse beneficiary, provided the direct rollover is made by a direct trustee-to-trustee transfer and such direct rollover is made in accordance with section 402(c)(11)(A) of the Code, applicable regulations, and other guidance issued by the Internal Revenue Service. (iv)  Direct rollover . A direct rollover is a payment by the plan to the eligible retirement plan specified by the distributee. 3.  Assigning, commuting or encumbering benefits prohibited; protection from attachment, garnishment or other processes. No person entitled to benefits under this plan shall have the right to assign, commute or encumber the benefits herein provided. To the maximum extent permitted by law, the benefits or payments herein provided shall not in any way be liable to attachment, garnishment or other process, or to be seized, taken, appropriated or applied by any legal or equitable process to pay any debt or liability of such person. The preceding also applies to the creation, assignment or recognition of a right to any benefit payable with respect to a participant pursuant to a domestic relations order, unless such order is determined to be a qualified domestic relations order as defined in section 414(p) of the Internal Revenue Code or any domestic relations order entered before January 1, 1985. Upon receipt of a domestic relations order, the administrator shall, within a reasonable period of time, review the domestic relations order to determine whether it is a qualified domestic relations order. The administrator shall promptly notify the participant and the alternate payee(s) of the procedures for determining whether such order is qualified. ( Ord. of 9-18-2014 , § 1 (Exh. A)) 
Sec. 1-14-14. - Article XIV—Permanent and total disability. 1.  A participant who terminates employment prior to his normal retirement date as a result of a disability and who is subsequently deemed to be permanently and totally disabled in accordance with the employer's current long-term disability program shall be entitled to additional credited service as specified in section 3 of article XIV. 2.  The administrator may require proof of continued disability. Such proof may be required from time to time but not more frequently than once every six months. 3.  Any participant who is disabled will continue to accrue credited service to the earlier of his or her normal retirement date, death or recovery. 4.  If the participant survives to his normal retirement date, the participant shall be vested and begin to receive his or her normal retirement benefit. The normal retirement benefit shall include the years of credited service stated in section 3 of article XIV above and the accrued benefit which would have been payable at his or her normal retirement date using his or her average monthly earnings as of the date of disability. The form of payment of the normal retirement benefit will be in accordance with and subject to the provisions and restrictions of article VI.     If the disability status ceases as a result of the participant's death, the participant's surviving spouse (if any) shall be entitled to receive a monthly survivor benefit in accordance with and subject to the provisions of section 4 of article VI. ( Ord. of 9-18-2014 , § 1 (Exh. A)) 
Sec. 1-14-15. - Article XV—Pension board. 1.  Members of the pension board. The plan shall be administered by a pension board consisting of seven voting members and three nonvoting ex officio members. Such members are as follows: Voting Members: (a)  Manager. (b)  Human resources director. (c)  Finance director. (d)  Commissioner, to be selected by the mayor and commission. (e)  Two employees currently vested in the pension plan to be selected by a majority vote of employees who are included in the plan: (1)  Employee representing public safety; and (2)  Employee representing general employees. (f)  One retired employee who is drawing retirement benefits and elected by the Athens-Clarke County Retirees Association or its successor organization. Said retired employee to serve a three-year term at the expiration of the term of the current at-large employee on December 31, 2002. Ex Officio/Nonvoting Members: (a)  Athens-Clarke County Attorney; (b)  Compensation and benefits administrator; and (c)  Assistant human resources director who shall serve as secretary to the board. (2)  Meeting for the purpose of election. A meeting for the purpose of election of the voting members shall be held within 30 days following the effective date of this section, and all persons qualified to vote shall be notified by the secretary of the board five days before such meeting, giving the exact time and place of such meeting. (3)  Terms of pension board members. The manager, the human resources director and the finance director shall serve continuously as members of the board. The commission member shall serve during his/her term of office. The original effective date of this ordinance shall be January 1, 2002. The terms of office shall be three years. In order to achieve staggered terms, the initial term of office of the public safety employee shall expire December 31, 2003; the initial term of office of the general government employee shall expire December 31, 2004; and the initial term of office of the retiree shall expire December 31, 2005. No elected representative shall serve more than two consecutive terms.     If a vacancy occurs in the offices of the voting members, the vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term within 30 days and in the same manner as the office was previously filled. Should a voting member of the board be retired under this article or cease to be in the employ of Athens-Clarke County, his or her office, as a member of the board shall be declared vacant. If the title of any position designated to serve on the board is changed, the ACC Manager shall determine the successor position to serve on the board. (4)  Administrative duties of the pension board members. The pension board shall be responsible for the administrative and operational functions necessary or appropriate for the administration of the plan.     The board shall have such powers as are necessary for the proper administration of the plan, including, but not limited to, the following: (a)  On an annual basis the pension board will review benefits provided to participants in conjunction with preparing the budget document, and make recommendations to the mayor and commission concerning changes in the plan to ensure a progressive and competitive retirement program for government employees; (b)  To hear appeals from any participant dissatisfied with any determination made by the human resources department relative to such participant's application for or receipt of retirement benefits; (c)  To establish and maintain the pension fund investment policy; (d)  To review the work of the plan consultants and actuary; (e)  To receive and review the annual actuarial valuations of the plan; (f)  To interview and select investment managers to any funding media and/or investment services; and (g)  Recommend changes and enhancements to the pension plan which must be approved through the budget process by the mayor and commission. (5)  Meeting of the pension board . To constitute a quorum for the transactions of business, there shall be required to be present at any meeting of the board at least four members. Decisions of the board shall be by a majority vote and shall be binding. The board shall meet as often as necessary to conduct business of the board, but not less often than quarterly. (6)  Entitlement to professional assistance. The board and any member thereof shall be entitled to reply upon the correctness of any information furnished by the institution used as the funding media of the plan, the plan consultant or actuary, the investment advisor, the Athens-Clarke County Attorney and/or any attorney who may, from time to time, be retained by the board. Neither the board nor any of its members, nor the employer, nor any official or other representative of the employer shall be liable because of any act or failure to act on the part of the board or any of its members, to any person whatsoever; except that nothing therein shall be deemed to relieve any such individual from liability for his or her own fraud or bad faith. (7)  Pension administrator. The human resources director shall be the pension administrator of the Athens-Clarke County Employees' Pension Plan and shall implement the procedures, policies and decisions of the pension board. Such director shall appoint a staff to assist in the administration of the plan and shall prescribe the duties of such individuals. (8)  Evaluation of investment performance. From time to time, but no less often than annually, the pension board shall evaluate the performance of the investment managers and determine whether or not to retain the services of the investment managers or to secure the services of a different investment manager. (9)  Government contribution to pension fund. Athens-Clarke County government shall contribute to the pension fund on an annual basis as referenced in the annual actuarial report. ( Ord. of 9-18-2014 , § 1 (Exh. A)) 
CHAPTER 1-15. - KEEP ATHENS-CLARKE COUNTY BEAUTIFUL ADVISORY BOARD Sec. 1-15-1. Advisory board established. Sec. 1-15-2. Powers of the advisory board. Sec. 1-15-3. Duties. Sec. 1-15-4. Membership. Sec. 1-15-5. Terms of service of members. Sec. 1-15-6. Election of officers. Sec. 1-15-7. Executive committee. Sec. 1-15-8. Advisory board chair. Secs. 1-15-9, 1-15-10. Reserved. Sec. 1-15-11. Compensation. 
Sec. 1-15-1. - Advisory board established.     There is hereby established the Keep Athens-Clarke County Beautiful Advisory Board. (Ord. of 12-1-92, § 1; Ord. of 4-7-98, § 1; Ord. of 9-5-2000, § 1) 
Sec. 1-15-2. - Powers of the advisory board.     The powers of such advisory board shall be to adopt bylaws to facilitate the purposes of the organization; to initiate, plan and direct community-wide efforts to achieve organizational goals; to solicit and accept donations and appropriations of money, services, products, property, and facilities for use by the advisory board for the accomplishment of its objectives; and to make recommendations to the governing body as well as the private sector regarding measures which it deems necessary to accomplish its objectives. (Ord. of 12-1-92, § 1; Ord. of 9-5-2000, § 2) 
Sec. 1-15-3. - Duties.     The duties of such advisory board shall be to promote public interest in the general improvement of the environment throughout the Athens-Clarke County Community; to initiate, plan, direct and coordinate programs for litter control for the community on a sustainable basis; to implement and maintain the Keep America Beautiful Program; to study, investigate and develop plans for improving the health, sanitation, safety and cleanliness of Athens-Clarke County by beautifying the streets, highways, alleys, river and stream banks, lots, yards, and other similar places in Athens-Clarke County; to aid in the prevention of fires, diseases and other casualties by the removal and elimination of trash and other debris from the streets, highways, alley, lots, yards, plots and other similar places; to encourage the placing, planting, and/or preservation of trees, flowers, plants, shrubbery and other objects or ornamentation in Athens-Clarke County; and to advise and recommend plans to other agencies of Athens-Clarke County for the beautification of the entire community and otherwise to promote public interest in the general improvement of the environment of Athens-Clarke County; provided, however, that nothing herein shall be construed to abridge or change the powers and duties of other departments, boards and like agencies of Athens-Clarke County. (Ord. of 12-1-92, § 1; Ord. of 9-5-2000, § 2) 
Sec. 1-15-4. - Membership. (a)  The advisory board shall consist of no more than 20 and not less than eight voting members. Six of these voting members shall serve by virtue of their office as set forth in paragraph (b) below. The remaining voting members shall be appointed by majority vote of the Mayor and Commission of Athens-Clarke County. Such members shall be residents of Athens-Clarke County. Appointed members of the advisory board should be appointed with precedence given to broad area representation of the community. (b)  Those persons holding the following positions, or their designees, shall serve as voting members of the advisory board by virtue of their office: (1)  Public works director, Athens-Clarke County. (2)  Superintendent, Clarke County School District. (3)  Executive director, Athens Housing Authority. (4)  Executive director, Athens Area Chamber of Commerce. (5)  Director, State Botanical Gardens of Georgia. (6)  Community Relations Director, University of Georgia. (c)  In addition to those members provided for under paragraphs (a) and (b), the following persons, or their designees, shall serve as ex officio nonvoting members of the commission. (1)  Mayor, Athens-Clarke County. (2)  Solid waste Director, Athens-Clarke County. (3)  Chairman, Athens-Clarke County Community Tree Council. (d)  Recommendations for membership shall be submitted to the mayor and commission by a nominating committee selected from the members of the advisory board by the chairman of such advisory board. (Ord. of 12-1-92, § 1; Ord. of 7-2-96, § 1; Ord. of 4-7-98, § 1; Ord. of 7-6-99, § 1; Ord. of 9-5-2000, §§ 2—5; Ord. of 2-1-2005, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 7-3-07, § 1; Ord. of 7-3-2007, §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 1-15-5. - Terms of service of members. (a)  The terms of service of the appointed members of the advisory board shall be for three years each with the Mayor and Commission of Athens-Clarke County appointing three to six members each year. (b)  A member who is absent for more than three meetings a year may have his or her board membership revoked by a majority vote of the board. (c)  Board members, who are appointed by the Unified Government, shall be eligible to serve for no more than two consecutive three-year terms. Second terms of service must be approved by the Board at the June meeting each year. At least one year must elapse after the second term before eligibility to serve is restored. Members whose terms have expired shall continue as members until their successors have been appointed. A member who is rotating off of the Board is encouraged to find his/her replacement. Board members whose terms of service have expired may continue to serve on board committees. (d)  Designees of Board members who serve by virtue of their office shall be eligible to serve for no more than two consecutive three-year terms. Second terms of service must be approved by the Board at the June meeting each year. The Nominating committee will seek Designee recommendations from Board members who serve by virtue of their office. At least one year must elapse after the second term before eligibility to serve is restored. (Ord. of 12-1-92, § 1; Ord. of 7-2-96, § 1; Ord. of 7-6-99, § 1; Ord. of 9-5-2000, §§ 2, 6; Ord. of 2-1-2005, § 3; Ord. of 7-3-2007, § 3) 
Sec. 1-15-6. - Election of officers. (a)  The advisory board shall elect from its membership a chairman, vice-chairman, secretary and treasurer and such other officers as may be desired as set forth below. Officers shall serve for a term of one year beginning on July 1 and ending June 30 of the following year. Members of the advisory board may be re-elected for succeeding terms. (b)  The nominating committee shall nominate members of the advisory board for all executive positions to be voted on by the full advisory board membership. (c)  Officer elections will be held at the June Board meeting. Officers may serve a maximum of two consecutive terms in the same office. At least one year must lapse before eligibility for that office is restored. (d)  In the event an office becomes vacant between annual elections, the Chairperson shall appoint an acting replacement until the Board, at its next meeting, elects a replacement from the Board for the remainder of the term. (Ord. of 12-1-92, § 1; Ord. of 9-5-2000, § 2; Ord. of 7-3-2007, § 4) 
Sec. 1-15-7. - Executive committee. (a)  The chairman, vice-chairman, secretary, treasurer, and one voting member of the advisory board shall serve on the executive committee. (b)  Duties of the executive committee shall be to make decisions on behalf of the advisory board between regular meetings. (Ord. of 12-1-92, § 1; Ord. of 4-7-98, § 1; Ord. of 9-5-2000, §§ 2, 7; Ord. of 2-1-2005, § 4) 
Sec. 1-15-8. - Advisory board chair.     The chair of the Keep Athens-Clarke County Beautiful Advisory Board shall appoint committees to accomplish any work programs. (Ord. of 12-1-92, § 1; Ord. of 4-7-98, § 1; Ord. of 9-5-2000, §§ 2, 8; Ord. of 2-1-2005, § 5) 
Secs. 1-15-9, 1-15-10. - Reserved. Editor's note— Sections 9 and 10 of an ordinance enacted Sept. 5, 2000, repealed §§ 1-15-9, 1-15-10 of the Code in their entirety. Former §§ 1-15-9, 1-15-10 pertained to the executive director and management of funds, respectively, and derived from an ordinance of Dec. 1, 1992, § 1; an ordinance of July 2, 1992, § 1; and an ordinance of July 6, 1999. 
Sec. 1-15-11. - Compensation.     All members of the advisory board shall serve without compensation. (Ord. of 12-1-92, § 1; Ord. of 9-5-2000, § 2) 
CHAPTER 1-16. - COMMISSION ON PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES Sec. 1-16-1. General provisions. 
Sec. 1-16-1. - General provisions. (a)  Creation. There is hereby created a body to be known as the Athens-Clarke County Commission on People with Disabilities. (b)  Purpose. The purpose of the commission on people with disabilities shall be to increase acceptance and full participation of persons with disabilities in the life of this community. This includes promoting employability, housing, state and local government services, public accommodations, transportation and the telephone system. (c)  Appointment; terms; areas of representation; residency requirement. Such commission shall consist of 30 members who shall be appointed for three years for staggered terms of office. (1)  Eleven members shall be selected initially by the mayor and commission of Athens-Clarke County. (2)  Eleven members shall be selected initially by the commission on people with disabilities to represent the community. (3)  Eight members will be nominated by the commission on people with disabilities so as to represent the following areas: business organization, day/employment site, Athens-Clarke County Human and Economic Development Department, State Division of Rehabilitation Services, University of Georgia Disabilities Services, Social Security Institute, civic organizations, media/public relations representative, Georgia Department Of Labor, University Affiliated Program for Persons with Disabilities, vocational training institute, and public school special educational department, parents of disabled children.     Whenever a vacancy exists, the appropriate selecting body described in paragraph (c) above shall make nominations to the mayor and commission for confirmation or rejection. Members shall reside or be employed in Athens-Clarke County. (d)  ADA coordinator to be ex-officio member. The Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) Coordinator for Unified Government of Athens-Clarke County shall be an ex-officio member of the commission on people with disabilities. (e)  General authority. The commission on people with disabilities shall be advisory in nature and authorized to adopt bylaws; to initiate, plan and direct community-wide efforts to achieve such commission's goals; to solicit and accept donations and appropriations of money, service, products, property and facilities for use by such commission; and to make recommendations to the mayor and commission of Athens-Clarke County as well as the private sector regarding measures that are deemed necessary to accomplish its objectives. (f)  Areas of specific authority. The commission on people with disabilities shall be authorized to: (1)  Solicit private donations and support for activities and programs for persons with disabilities. (2)  Seek federal, state and private foundation funds; to conduct educational programs; and to increase the contributions of people with disabilities. (3)  Recommend to the mayor and commission financial and/or other incentives to enhance or support the hiring of persons with disabilities in the private sector. (4)  Attend and take advantage of training available through state, federal, and private agencies to further the education and awareness of members of the commission on people with disabilities. (5)  Make an annual report to the mayor and commission and such other reports as may be requested. (Ord. of 8-4-92, § 1; Ord. of 7-2-96, § 1; Ord. of 7-6-99, § 1) 
CHAPTER 1-17. - DISCRIMINATION AND HARASSMENT Sec. 1-17-1. Prohibited. 
Sec. 1-17-1. - Prohibited. (a)  It is a violation of this code section to discriminate against any employee of the Unified Government or any applicant for employment with the Unified Government in the terms or conditions of employment, the provision of employment opportunities, benefits, or privileges; to create discriminatory work conditions; or to use discriminatory evaluative standards in employment if the basis of that discriminatory treatment is, in whole or in part, the person's sex (including pregnancy), sexual orientation, gender identity, race, color, religion, disability, national origin, citizenship, military or veteran status, genetic information, age, or any other status or classification protected by applicable federal or state laws. (b)  It is a violation of this code section to harass any employee of the Unified Government or any applicant for employment with the Unified Government on the basis of their sex (including pregnancy), sexual orientation, gender identity, race, color, religion, disability, national origin, citizenship, military or veteran status, genetic information, age, or any other status or classification protected by any applicable federal or state laws. (1)  For the purpose of this code section, harassment may take the form of verbal, physical, or visual conduct and is prohibited if (A) enduring the conduct is made either an explicit or implicit term or condition of employment, or (B) the conduct is severe or pervasive enough to create a work environment that a reasonable person would find intimidating, hostile, or abusive. Harassing conduct may include, but is not limited to, offensive jokes, slurs, epithets or name-calling, physical assaults or threats, intimidation, ridicule or mockery, insults or put-downs, offensive objects or pictures, and/or interference with work performance. Petty slights, annoyances, and isolated incidents (unless extremely serious) will not rise to the level of a violation under this section. To be a violation of this section, the conduct must create a work environment that would be intimidating, hostile, or offensive to reasonable people. (2)  Sexual harassment is prohibited under this code section and is made unlawful by Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964. Sexual harassment may include unsolicited and unwelcome sexual advances, requests for sexual favors, or other verbal, physical, or visual conduct of a sexual nature. Verbal sexual harassment may include offensive jokes, name-calling, or unwanted sexual advances. Physical sexual harassment may include unwelcome, unwanted physical contact, including touching, tickling, pinching, patting, brushing up against, hugging, cornering, kissing, fondling, or forced sexual intercourse or assault. Visual sexual harassment may include offensive objects or images, whether in print or on a screen of any type. (3)  This code section is intended to prohibit the harassment of the Unified Government's employees by elected officials, appointed officials, constitutional officers, charter officers, supervisory or management personnel, or other employees. (c)  For the purposes of this code section, the terms "sexual orientation" and "gender identity" shall have the following meanings: (1)  Sexual orientation shall mean the condition of being heterosexual, bisexual, or homosexual, or the perception that an individual is heterosexual, bisexual, or homosexual, or the perception that an individual is associated with individuals who maintain such orientation; and (2)  Gender identity shall mean self-perception as male or female, and shall include a person's identity, expression, or physical characteristics, whether or not traditionally associated with one's biological sex or one's sex at birth, including transsexual, transvestite, and transgender, and including a person's attitudes, preferences, beliefs, and practices pertaining thereto, including, but not limited to, assumption of male or female identity by appearance or medical treatment. (d)  No employee, applicant, or other covered person who, in good faith, makes a complaint about discrimination or harassment will be subjected to any retaliation or incur any penalty or adverse consequence for making a complaint. (e)  The manager shall implement this chapter by instituting policies and procedures for the purpose of permitting an employee or applicant who feels that he or she has a complaint under this chapter or that some employee has violated the mandates of this chapter to make that complaint known to the appropriate officer or authority within the Unified Government. Additionally, the manager shall set up a procedure for investigating and responding to said employee or applicant's complaint. (Ord. of 11-3-92, § 1; Ord. of 6-6-2006, § 1; Ord. of 9-4-2018(1), § 1 ) 
CHAPTER 1-18. - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS Sec. 1-18-1. Contracts to extend territorial jurisdiction. Sec. 1-18-2. Relocation of water or sewer line easements. Sec. 1-18-3. Oaths of police officers. 
Sec. 1-18-1. - Contracts to extend territorial jurisdiction.     Athens-Clarke County shall not exercise any powers nor provide any services listed in article IX, section II, paragraph III of the Constitution of the State of Georgia inside the boundaries of any municipality or any other county except pursuant to express written contract with the municipality or county affected, which contract must be approved by the mayor and commission, and no Athens-Clarke County officer, agent or employee shall utilize any Athens-Clarke County facilities, equipment or Athens-Clarke County employees in violation of such constitutional provision. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1; Ord. of 7-2-96, § 1; Ord. of 7-6-99, § 1) 
Sec. 1-18-2. - Relocation of water or sewer line easements. (a)  Findings. The mayor and commission hereby find that Athens-Clarke County owns easements for water or sewer lines which do not accommodate the existing water and sewer lines as needed, do not accommodate planned construction of an improvement that would intrude over existing easement(s), or do not accommodate planned construction of a water or sewer line. Thus from time to time said easements need to be relocated on the same property in order to exchange an existing easement with the property owner for a different easement location on the same property. (b)  After investigation and upon a written determination by the director of Athens-Clarke County public utilities or his authorized agents that the relocation will not impede the ability of Athens-Clarke County to exercise all of the powers and property interests granted to Athens-Clarke County in the original easement, the director of Athens-Clarke County public utilities is authorized to prepare or to approve easement documents necessary to accomplish such relocation of water or sewer lines. (c)  After written approval of said documents by the Athens-Clarke County Manager and by the Athens-Clarke County attorney, the director of Athens-Clarke County Public Utilities is authorized to submit for execution by the mayor and/or the property owner such documents as required by law to effectuate a legal transfer of the easement interests being relocated. (d)  If the relocation is requested by any party other than Athens-Clarke County, the owner of the property shall be responsible for the preparation of the deeds and plats necessary for the relocation of the easements and all related costs. (Ord. of 9-4-2001, § 1) 
Sec. 1-18-3. - Oaths of police officers.     The Chief of Police of the Unified Government of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia is authorized and empowered to administer all required official oaths of office to police officers employed by the Unified Government. ( Ord. of 9-5-2017(2) , § 1) 
CHAPTER 1-19. - ATHENS-CLARKE COUNTY FACILITIES Sec. 1-19-1. Use of Athens-Clarke County facilities. 
Sec. 1-19-1. - Use of Athens-Clarke County facilities. (a)  The manager, or designee, in his or her discretion may, from time to time, designate certain facilities that may be used by the public. The fees for the use of those facilities are as follows: FEES Application fee ..... $10.00 Security fee (after normal working hours) ..... 25.00 Utility fee (after normal working hours) ..... 5.00/hour DEPOSITS Cleanup/damage: 0—25 persons ..... $25.00 26—50 persons ..... 50.00 51+ persons ..... 100.00 (b)  If any employees and/or appointed or elected officials of the Unified Government desire to sponsor an event in any of the facilities listed hereinabove, they must be present during the event and shall be subject to the same fees set forth in subsection (a), except the deposit fee shall be reduced as follows: DEPOSITS Cleanup/damage: 0—25 persons ..... $12.50 26—50 persons ..... 25.00 51+ persons ..... 50.00 (Ord. of 9-6-94, § 1) 
CHAPTER 1-20. - INDEMNIFICATION Sec. 1-20-1. Indemnification. 
Sec. 1-20-1. - Indemnification.     The following provisions apply to elected and appointed officials and employees who may be subject to legal action while performing duties in connection with their office or employment with Athens-Clarke County. (a)  General indemnification. The Unified Government of Athens-Clarke County will undertake to defend elected and appointed officials, along with employees of said government, against actions arising out of the performance of their duties. Such legal actions include but are not limited to, negligence, violation of contract rights, violation of civil, constitutional, common law, statutory rights, torts or liability claims. (b)  Exclusion of indemnification. This subsection in no way authorizes the Unified Government to furnish a defense to any person charged with a criminal offense involving theft, embezzlement or other like crimes with respect to monetary or property interests of the government. (c)  Payment of judgments. Athens-Clarke County will pay the amount of any judgement rendered against any appointed or elected official or employee whose defense Athens-Clarke County is authorized to undertake under this chapter. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no judgement against said official or employee shall be paid which arises out of a claim or claims for sexual harassment unless the mayor and commission determine that the court which issued the judgement was in error in doing so. Any distribution shall be deemed to be made for public purposes and may be paid from federal, state or local funds. (d)  Construction. Nothing in this section shall be construed to allow into evidence at a trial of any action brought against a person covered by this code section the fact that Athens-Clarke County will be responsible for payment of any judgement levied by the court. (Ord. of 1-7-97, § 1; Ord. of 7-6-99, § 1) 
CHAPTER 1-21. - OFFICE OF PUBLIC INFORMATION Sec. 1-21-1. Office of public information generally. 
Sec. 1-21-1. - Office of public information generally.     There is hereby created the office of public information of Athens-Clarke County, which shall be an operational and budgetary division of the manager and shall be located in office space directed by the manager. The duties of the office shall include, but shall not be limited to, preparing and producing for the press and for the public statements concerning the activities of the government and information in response to inquiries from the public or the press. The employees of said office shall be employees of Athens-Clarke County appointed by the manager under the personnel system with the public information officer position designated as a professional class position. (Ord. of 6-6-2000, § 1; Ord. of 6-4-2013, § 1) Editor's note— An ordinance enacted June 6, 2000, added provisions designated as new Ch. 1-6, § 1-6-1. Since Title 1 already contained a Ch. 1-6, and pursuant to the municipality's instructions, the new provisions have been redesignated as Ch. 1-21, § 1-21-1. 
CHAPTER 1-22. - ATHENS-CLARKE COUNTY DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT 
Sec. 1-22-1. - Establishment.     Pursuant to Athens-Clarke County Charter Section 4-201 et seq., there is hereby created the Department of Economic Development as part of the administrative and service departments of the Unified Government under the supervision and direction of the Manager. (Ord. of 2-5-2013, § 1) 
Sec. 1-22-2. - Purpose.     The purpose of the Department of Economic Development is to be the primary point of contact for industries, large commercial developments, site location consultants, and state economic development organizations interested in developing, expanding, or locating new or expanded businesses in Athens-Clarke County. (Ord. of 2-5-2013, § 1) 
Sec. 1-22-3. - Duties.     The functions, duties, services, and responsibilities of the Department of Economic Development are as follows: • Identify and recruit economic development opportunities that support and enhance Athens-Clarke County's quality of life, increase the tax base, and provide opportunities for sustained, livable wages for workers; • Provide site location assistance to domestic and international companies planning new or expanded facilities; assistance shall include but not be limited to identifying financial and human resources available to support such developments; • Develop an aggressive marketing plan to promote the competitive advantages to businesses and industries of choosing to locate in Athens-Clarke County; • Develop and support a business and industrial retention/expansion program focused on businesses and industries currently operating within Athens-Clarke County; • Develop an Economic Development Incentive Program, to be approved by the Mayor and Commission, that the Department shall be authorized to use unilaterally during its recruitment efforts; • Coordinate with the Athens Area Chamber of Commerce for the purpose of supporting the Chamber's efforts for development and retention of local entrepreneurial commercial businesses and for the purpose of receiving assistance with economic development recruitment efforts managed by the Department; • Create project specific Community Sales Teams to assist and advise the Department in recruiting potential economic development projects. These Community Sales Teams are anticipated to be composed of persons affiliated with local businesses/manufacturing, health care providers, educational institutions, utilities, business development organizations, construction trades, property developers/real estate professionals, the creative arts, tourism/hospitality groups, and other appropriate entities; • Provide staff support for the Mayor and Commission's efforts to review and analyze the recommendations listed in the Mayor's Economic Development Task Force Strategic Plan dated September 11, 2012 for the purpose of developing recommendations for possible ordinance changes that will mitigate barriers to quality economic development without compromising Athens-Clarke County community values; • Develop and maintain a current inventory of facilities and properties available for industrial/business development; develop recommendations for strategies to meet emerging infrastructure and natural resource needs to support future industrial and business development; and • Sign confidentiality agreements with prospective businesses in pursuit of the Department's recruitment efforts as approved by the Manager and in accordance with the Georgia Open Records Act. (Ord. of 2-5-2013, § 1) 
Sec. 1-22-4. - Authorization.     Without limiting the general powers and duties of the Manager as set forth in Athens-Clarke County Charter Section 4-102, in establishing the Department of Economic Development, the Manager is hereby specifically authorized to perform the following: • Create a Director of Economic Development position, a Professional Support Staff position, and an Administrative Support Staff position to accomplish the purpose and duties listed above. Said employees shall be subject to the direction of the Manager as other Unified Government employees in accordance with the Athens-Clarke County Charter. The Manager is authorized to fill these positions upon adoption of this ordinance by the Mayor and Commission. • Activate the Department during the fourth quarter of FY13 at a time when sufficient staff has been employed and a written notice has been given to the Chair of the Economic Development Foundation that the Department is operational, but not later than June 30, 2013; • Notify the Georgia Department of Economic Development and other economic development entities that the Athens-Clarke County Department of Economic Development, rather than the Economic Development Foundation, is the primary contact for economic development activities; • Pay all financial obligations and expenses of the Department in an amount not to exceed $95,000 (ninety-five thousand dollars) for FY13. These funds will be made available from funds no longer needed by the Economic Development Foundation due to its deactivation and/or funds from Athens-Clarke County's Economic Development Fund; and • Enter into a Memorandum of Agreement with the Development Authority of the Unified Government of Athens-Clarke County (the "Statutory Authority") and the Athens-Clarke County Industrial Development Authority (the "IDA") to provide general staff support and administrative assistance through the Department to both Authorities in their implementation of economic development strategies for Athens-Clarke County and in financing economic development projects through the issuance of bonds and other debt securities. (Ord. of 2-5-2013, § 1) 
CHAPTER 1-23. - REGISTRATION OF DOMESTIC PARTNERSHIPS Sec. 1-23-1. Definitions. Sec. 1-23-2. Legal effect of declaration of domestic partnership. Sec. 1-23-3. Establishing existence of domestic partnership. Sec. 1-23-4. Records, copies, filing fees. Sec. 1-23-5. Ending domestic partnerships. Sec. 1-23-6. Enforcement. Sec. 1-23-7. Limited effect. 
Sec. 1-23-1. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Declaration of domestic partnership means a form provided by the Municipal Court in which two people agree to be jointly responsible for the necessities of life incurred during the domestic partnership and that all qualifications for domestic partnership are met when the declaration is signed. The form will require both partners to provide reasonable proof of their primary, regular and permanent residence address. The form must be signed under penalty of perjury and must be witnessed and notarized. The Municipal Court shall, within 30 days of the effective date of this chapter, make such forms available. To help defray costs associated with the providing and filing of these forms, the Municipal Court is authorized to charge a fee as set forth in section 1-23-4 for each completed form.     Domestic partnership means two people of the opposite or same gender who live together in the mutual interdependence of a single home and have signed a declaration of domestic partnership in which they attest that: (1)  They share the same primary, regular and permanent residence and have lived together for the previous six months (documentation must be submitted verifying joint residency); (2)  They have a committed personal relationship with each other that is mutually interdependent and intended to be lifelong; (3)  They agree to be jointly obligated and responsible for the necessities of life for each other; (4)  They are not married to anyone or legally separated from anyone; (5)  They are 18 years of age or older; (6)  They are competent to enter into a contract; (7)  They are not related by blood closer than would bar marriage in the state; (8)  They are each other's sole domestic partner; (9)  They agree to file a termination of domestic partnership within 30 days if any of the facts set out in this definition change; and (10)  Any prior domestic partnership in which any domestic partner participated with a third party was terminated not less than six months prior to the date of the declaration required hereunder, and, if such earlier domestic partnership had been acknowledged under provisions of this chapter, that notice of termination of such earlier domestic partnership was filed in the Municipal Court not less than six months prior to the date of said affidavit. If the prior domestic partnership was terminated by the death of a domestic partner, there shall be no waiting period.     Live together means that two people claiming domestic partnership status share the same primary, regular and permanent residence. It is not necessary that the legal right to possess the residence be in both names. Domestic partners do not cease to live together if one leaves the shared residence for a period not to exceed one year, but intends to return. Whether the relationship between these two people is or is not sexual is in no way relevant for the purposes of determining eligibility under this chapter.     Necessities of life means the cost of basic food, shelter, clothing and medical care. The individuals need not contribute equally or jointly to the cost of these expenses as long as they agree that both are responsible and obligated for the cost. (Ord. of 12-6-2006, § 1) 
Sec. 1-23-2. - Legal effect of declaration of domestic partnership. (a)  Rights and duties created. Neither this chapter nor the filing of a declaration of domestic partnership shall create any legal rights or duties from one of the parties to the other, except those which specifically refer to domestic partnership. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed explicitly or implicitly to create a marital relationship. This chapter does not attempt to alter or affect the laws in the state that regulate any private or civil relationships. Nothing herein requires that entities or individuals provide to unmarried persons one or more benefits, rights, or privileges in the same manner that such entity or person contractually provides benefits, rights or privileges to married persons. (b)  Duration of rights and duties. Once a domestic partnership ends, the partners will incur no further obligations to each other under this chapter. (Ord. of 12-6-2006, § 1) 
Sec. 1-23-3. - Establishing existence of domestic partnership. (a)  Generally. Domestic partners who are residents of Athens-Clarke County or who are employees of Athens-Clarke County may establish the existence of their domestic partnership by presenting an original declaration of domestic partnership to the Athens-Clarke County Municipal Court along with reasonable proof of residence such as, but not limited to, driver's license, utility bill, or state identification card. The Municipal Court will file the declaration in its records and provide the partners with a certificate showing that the declaration was filed with the Municipal Court. The standard declaration form will be available in the Municipal Court during normal business hours. (b)  Limitations. The Municipal Court shall only accept for filing declarations of domestic partnership submitted by domestic partners who have residence in Athens-Clarke County or who are employees of Athens-Clarke County. (c)  Amendments to the declaration. A partner may amend a declaration of domestic partnership filed with the Municipal Court at any time to show a change in such partner's primary residence address. (d)  New declarations of domestic partnership. No person who has created a domestic partnership may create another until six months after a notice of termination has been signed and filed with the Municipal Court; provided, however, that if the domestic partnership ended because of the death of the other party, a new declaration may be filed any time after the notice of termination has been filed. (e)  Evidence of domestic partnership. Any person who requires a person to provide evidence of the existence of a domestic partnership must accept the declaration of domestic partnership, but may choose not to require the declaration, as complete proof of the existence of a domestic partnership. The declaration of domestic partnership may be considered reasonable proof for qualifying for any present or future domestic partner benefits that private corporations or public institutions offer. (Ord. of 12-6-2006, § 1) 
Sec. 1-23-4. - Records, copies, filing fees. (a)  Records of the Athens-Clarke County Municipal Court. The Municipal Court shall keep a record of all declarations of domestic partnerships, amendments to declarations of domestic partnership, and all notices of termination. The records shall be maintained so that amendments and notices of termination shall be filed with the declaration of domestic partnerships to which they pertain. (b)  Filing fees. The Municipal Court shall charge a fee of $30.00 for the filing of a declaration of domestic partnership and shall charge a fee of $5.00 for providing certified copies of declarations, amendments or notices of termination. There will be no charge for the filing of amendments or notices of termination. (Ord. of 12-6-2006, § 1) 
Sec. 1-23-5. - Ending domestic partnerships. (a)  Termination. A domestic partnership ends when: (1)  One partner sends the other partner written notice that such partner has ended the domestic partnership; (2)  One of the partners dies; or (3)  The partners no longer meet one or more of the qualifications or conditions for domestic partnership. (b)  Notice of termination. (1)  To domestic partners. When a domestic partnership ends, the partners must execute a notice of termination naming the partners and stating that the partnership has ended. The notice of termination must be dated and signed under penalty of perjury by at least one of the partners. The notice of termination must be filed with the Municipal Court. (2)  To third parties. A domestic partner who has given a copy of a declaration of domestic partnership to any third party in order to qualify for any benefit or right must, whenever the domestic partnership ends, give that third party a copy of the notice of termination. If a partner has died, the surviving partner must give notice of termination to those third parties such partner knows were given copies of the declaration by the deceased partner in order to qualify for a benefit or right. The notice of termination must be sent to the parties identified in this paragraph within 60 days of the termination of the domestic partnership. (c)  Failure to give notice. Failure to give notice as required by this section will neither prevent nor delay termination of the domestic partnership. (Ord. of 12-6-2006, § 1) 
Sec. 1-23-6. - Enforcement. (a)  Any person may apply to the state court of Athens-Clarke County or the superior court of Athens-Clarke County, depending upon jurisdictional requirements, for enforcement of the provisions of this chapter in law or equity. (b)  Any action to enforce this Chapter must be commenced no later than two years after the claimed violation. (Ord. of 12-6-2006, § 1) 
Sec. 1-23-7. - Limited effect.     Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to alter, affect or conflict with the laws of the state or the United States. (Ord. of 12-6-2006, § 1) 
CHAPTER 1-24. - IDENTITY THEFT PREVENTION PROGRAM AND TREATMENT OF ADDRESS DISCREPANCIES Article 1.  Identity Theft Prevention Program Sec. 1-24-1. Short Title. Sec. 1-24-2. Purpose. Sec. 1-24-3. Definitions. Sec. 1-24-4. Findings. Sec. 1-24-5. Process of Establishing a Covered Account. Sec. 1-24-6. Access to Covered Account Information. Sec. 1-24-7. Credit Card Payments. Sec. 1-24-8. Sources and Types of Red Flags. Sec. 1-24-9. Prevention and Mitigation of Identity Theft. Sec. 1-24-10. Updating the Program. Sec. 1-24-11. Program Administration. Sec. 1-24-12. Outside Service Providers. Article 2. Treatment of Address Discrepancies Sec. 1-24-13. Short Title. Sec. 1-24-14. Purpose. Sec. 1-24-15. Definitions. Sec. 1-24-16. Treatment of Address Discrepancies. Sec. 1-24-17. Furnishing Consumer's Address to Consumer Reporting Agency. Sec. 1-24-18. Methods of Confirming Consumer Addresses. 
ARTICLE 1. - IDENTITY THEFT PREVENTION PROGRAM 
Sec. 1-24-1. - Short Title.     This Article shall be known as the "Identity Theft Prevention Program." (Ord. of 11-5-2008, § 1) 
Sec. 1-24-2. - Purpose.     The purpose of this Article is to comply with 16 CFR § 681.2 in order to detect, prevent and mitigate identity theft by identifying and detecting identity theft red flags and by responding to such red flags in a manner that will prevent identity theft. (Ord. of 11-5-2008, § 1) 
Sec. 1-24-3. - Definitions. For purposes of this Article, the following definitions apply: (a)  Government means the Unified Government of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia. (b)  Covered account means: (i)  An account that a creditor offers or maintains, primarily for personal, family, or household purposes, that involves or is designed to permit multiple payments or transactions, such as a credit card account, mortgage loan, automobile loan, margin account, cell phone account, utility account, checking account, or savings account; and (ii)  Any other account that the creditor offers or maintains for which there is a reasonably foreseeable risk to customers or to the safety and soundness of the creditor from identity theft, including financial, operational, compliance, reputation, or litigation risks. (c)  Credit means the right granted by a creditor to a debtor to defer payment of debt or to incur debts and defer its payment or to purchase property or services and defer payment therefore. (d)  Creditor means any person who regularly extends, renews, or continues credit; any person who regularly arranges for the extension, renewal, or continuation of credit; or any assignee of an original creditor who participates in the decision to extend, renew, or continue credit and includes utility companies and telecommunications companies. For the purposes of this Article, the Government is a creditor. (e)  Customer means a person that has a covered account with a creditor. (f)  Department Director means any department director who works at the discretion of the Manager, any elected official or any individual appointed to manage a department on a permanent or temporary basis. (g)  Identity theft means a fraud committed or attempted using the identifying information of another person without authority. (h)  Manager means the manager of Athens-Clarke County. (i)  Person means a natural person, a corporation, government or governmental subdivision or agency, trust, estate, partnership, cooperative, or association. (j)  Personal Identifying Information means a person's credit card account information, debit card information, and bank account information and for a natural person includes their social security number, mother's birth name, drivers' license information and date of birth. (k)  Red flag means a pattern, practice, or specific activity that indicates the possible existence of identity theft. (l)  Service provider means a person that provides a service directly to the Government. (Ord. of 11-5-2008, § 1) 
Sec. 1-24-4. - Findings. (1)  The Government is a creditor pursuant to 16 CFR § 681.2 due to its provision or maintenance of covered accounts for which payment is made in arrears. (2)  Covered accounts offered to customers for the provision of Government services include water, sewer, solid waste, and stormwater. (3)  The processes of opening a new covered account, restoring an existing covered account, making payments on such accounts, and making payments for property taxes and other services have been identified as potential processes in which identity theft could occur. (4)  The Government limits access to personal identifying information to those employees responsible for or otherwise involved in opening or restoring covered accounts or accepting payment for use of covered accounts. (5)  The Government determines that there is a low risk of identity theft occurring in the following ways, (if any): a.  Use by an applicant of another person's personal identifying information to establish a new covered account; b.  Use of a previous customer's personal identifying information by another person in an effort to have service restored in the previous customer's name; c.  Use of another person's credit card, bank account, or other method of payment by a customer to pay such customer's covered account or accounts; and d.  Use by a customer desiring to restore such customer's covered account of another person's credit card, bank account, or other method of payment. (Ord. of 11-5-2008, § 1) 
Sec. 1-24-5. - Process of Establishing a Covered Account. (1)  As a precondition to opening a covered account with the Government, each applicant shall provide the Government with personal identifying information of the customer as follows: a valid government issued identification card containing a photograph of the customer or, for customers who are not natural persons, a photograph of the customer's agent opening the account with written confirmation of being the authorized agent for the entity. Such applicant shall also provide any other information necessary for the department providing the service for which the covered account is created. Such information shall be entered directly into the Government's computer system and/or held in a secure storage area with access limited to those Government personnel with the need to know. (2)  For each customer account that provides individual customer access to the customer's account information, such account shall be assigned an account number and personal identification number (PIN) which shall be unique to that account. The Government may utilize computer software to randomly generate assigned PINs and to encrypt account numbers and PINs. (Ord. of 11-5-2008, § 1) 
Sec. 1-24-6. - Access to Covered Account Information. (1)  Access to any customer account that includes personal identifying information shall be password protected and shall be limited to authorized Government personnel. (2)  Such password(s) shall be changed by the director of the department providing the service for which the covered account is created, or by the director of information technology on a regular basis, shall be at least eight characters in length and shall contain letters, numbers and symbols. (3)  Any unauthorized access to or other breach of customer accounts is to be reported immediately to the appropriate Department Director and the password changed immediately. (4)  Personal identifying information included in customer accounts is considered confidential and any request or demand that specifically asks for such information shall be immediately forwarded to the Finance Director. (Ord. of 11-5-2008, § 1) 
Sec. 1-24-7. - Credit Card Payments. (1)  In the event that credit card payments that are made over the Internet are processed through a third party service provider, such third party service provider shall certify that it has an adequate identity theft prevention program in place that is applicable to such payments. (2)  All credit card payments made over the telephone or the Government's website shall be entered directly into the customer's account information in the computer data base. (3)  Account statements and receipts for covered accounts shall include only the last four digits of the credit or debit card or the bank account used for payment of the covered account. (Ord. of 11-5-2008, § 1) 
Sec. 1-24-8. - Sources and Types of Red Flags.     All employees responsible for or involved in the process of opening a covered account, restoring a covered account or accepting payment for a covered account shall check for red flags as indicators of possible identity theft and such red flags may include: (1)  Alerts from consumer reporting agencies, fraud detection agencies or service providers. Examples of alerts include but are not limited to: a.  A fraud or active duty alert that is included with a consumer report; b.  A notice of credit freeze in response to a request for a consumer report; c.  A notice of address discrepancy provided by a consumer reporting agency; d.  Indications of a pattern of activity in a consumer report that is inconsistent with the history and usual pattern of activity of an applicant or customer; such as: i.  A recent and significant increase in the volume of inquiries; ii.  An unusual number of recently established credit relationships; iii.  A material change in the use of credit, especially with respect to recently established credit relationships; or iv.  An account that was closed for cause or identified for abuse of account privileges by a financial institution or creditor. (2)  Suspicious documents. Examples of suspicious documents include: a.  Documents provided for identification that appear to be altered or forged; b.  Identification on which the photograph or physical description is inconsistent with the appearance of the applicant or customer; c.  Identification on which the information is inconsistent with information provided by the applicant or customer; d.  Identification on which the information is inconsistent with readily accessible information that is on file with the financial institution or creditor, such as a signature card or a recent check; or e.  An application that appears to have been altered or forged, or appears to have been destroyed and reassembled. (3)  Suspicious personal identification, such as suspicious address change. Examples of suspicious identifying information include: a.  Personal identifying information that is inconsistent with external information sources used by the financial institution or creditor. For example: i.  The address does not match any address in the consumer report; or ii.  The Social Security Number (SSN) has not been issued, or is listed on the Social Security Administration's Death Master File. b.  Personal identifying information provided by the customer is not consistent with other personal identifying information provided by the customer, such as a lack of correlation between the SSN range and date of birth. c.  Personal identifying information or a phone number or address is associated with known fraudulent applications or activities as indicated by internal or third-party sources used by the financial institution or creditor. d.  Other information provided, such as fictitious mailing address, mail drop addresses, jail addresses, invalid phone numbers, pager numbers or answering services, is associated with fraudulent activity. e.  The SSN provided is the same as that submitted by other applicants or customers. f.  The address or telephone number provided is the same as or similar to the account number or telephone number submitted by an unusually large number of applicants or customers. g.  The applicant or customer fails to provide all required personal identifying information on an application or in response to notification that the application is incomplete. h.  Personal identifying information is not consistent with personal identifying information that is on file with the financial institution or creditor. i.  The applicant or customer cannot provide authenticating information beyond that which generally would be available from a wallet or consumer report. (4)  Unusual use of or suspicious activity relating to a covered account. Examples of suspicious activity include: a.  Shortly following the notice of a change of address for an account, the Government receives a request for the addition of authorized users on the account. b.  A new revolving credit account is used in a manner commonly associated with known patterns of fraud patterns. For example: i.  The customer fails to make the first payment or makes an initial payment but no subsequent payments. c.  An account is used in a manner that is not consistent with established patterns of activity on the account. There is, for example: i.  Nonpayment when there is no history of late or missed payments; ii.  A material change in purchasing or spending patterns. d.  An account that has been inactive for a long period of time is used, taking into consideration the type of account, the expected pattern of usage and other relevant factors. e.  Mail sent to the customer is returned repeatedly as undeliverable although transactions continue to be conducted in connection with the customer's account. f.  The Government is notified that the customer is not receiving paper account statements. g.  The Government is notified of unauthorized charges or transactions in connection with a customer's account. h.  The Government is notified by a customer, law enforcement or another person that it has opened a fraudulent account for a person engaged in identity theft. (5)  Notice from customers, law enforcement, victims or other reliable sources regarding possible identity theft or phishing relating to covered accounts. (Ord. of 11-5-2008, § 1) 
Sec. 1-24-9. - Prevention and Mitigation of Identity Theft. (1)  In the event that any Government employee responsible for or involved in restoring an existing covered account or accepting payment for a covered account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible identity theft with respect to existing covered accounts, such employee shall use his or her discretion to determine whether such red flag or combination of red flags suggests a threat of identity theft. If, in his or her discretion, such employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity theft is likely or probable, such employee shall immediately report such red flags to their Department Director. If, in his or her discretion, such employee deems that identity theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to reconcile red flags, the employee shall convey this information to their Department Director, who may in his or her discretion determine that no further action is necessary. If the Department Director in his or her discretion determines that further action is necessary, a Government employee shall perform one or more of the following responses, as determined to be appropriate by the Department Director: a.  Contact the customer; b.  Make the following changes to the account if, after contacting the customer, it is apparent that someone other than the customer has accessed the customer's covered account: i.  Change any account numbers, passwords, security codes, or other security devices that permit access to an account; or ii.  Close the account; c.  Cease attempts to collect additional charges from the customer for the covered account in question and decline to sell the customer's account to a debt collector in the event that the customer's account has been accessed without authorization and such access has caused additional charges to accrue; d.  Notify a debt collector within 24 hours of the discovery of likely or probable identity theft relating to a customer account that has been sold to such debt collector in the event that a customer's account has been sold to a debt collector prior to the discovery of the likelihood or probability of identity theft relating to such account; e.  Notify law enforcement, in the event that someone other than the customer has accessed the customer's account causing additional charges to accrue or accessing personal identifying information; or f.  Take other appropriate action to prevent or mitigate identity theft. (2)  In the event that any Government employee responsible for or involved in opening a new covered account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible identity theft with respect to an application for a new account, such employee shall use his or her discretion to determine whether such red flag or combination of red flags suggests a threat of identity theft. If, in his or her discretion, such employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity theft is likely or probable, such employee shall immediately report such red flags to their Department Director. If, in his or her discretion, such employee deems that identity theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to reconcile red flags, the employee shall convey this information to their Department Director, who may in his or her discretion determine that no further action is necessary. If their Department Director in his or her discretion determines that further action is necessary, a Government employee shall perform one or more of the following responses, as determined to be appropriate by their Department Director: a.  Request additional identifying information from the applicant; b.  Deny the application for the new account; c.  Notify law enforcement of possible identity theft; or d.  Take other appropriate action to prevent or mitigate identity theft. (Ord. of 11-5-2008, § 1) 
Sec. 1-24-10. - Updating the Program.     The Manager shall annually review and, as deemed necessary, update the Identity Theft Prevention Program along with any relevant red flags in order to reflect changes in risks to customers or to the safety and soundness of the Government and its covered accounts from identity theft. In so doing, the Manager shall consider the following factors and exercise its discretion in amending the program: (1)  The Government's experiences with identity theft; (2)  Updates in methods of identity theft; (3)  Updates in customary methods used to detect, prevent, and mitigate identity theft; (4)  Updates in the types of accounts that the Government offers or maintains; and (5)  Updates in service provider arrangements. (Ord. of 11-5-2008, § 1) 
Sec. 1-24-11. - Program Administration.     The Finance Director is responsible for oversight of the program and for program implementation. The Manager is responsible for reviewing reports prepared by staff regarding compliance with red flag requirements and with recommending material changes to the program, as necessary in the opinion of the Manager, to address changing identity theft risks and to identify new or discontinued types of covered accounts. Any recommended material changes to the program shall be submitted to the Mayor and Commission for consideration. (1)  The Finance Director will report to the Manager at least annually on compliance with the red flag requirements. The report will address material matters related to the program and evaluate issues such as: a.  The effectiveness of the policies and procedures of the Government in addressing the risk of identity theft in connection with the opening of covered accounts and with respect to existing covered accounts; b.  Service provider arrangements; c.  Significant incidents involving identity theft and management's response; and d.  Recommendations for material changes to the Program. (2)  The Finance Director is responsible for providing training to all employees responsible for or involved in opening a new covered account, restoring an existing covered account or accepting payment for a covered account with respect to the implementation and requirements of the Identity Theft Prevention Program. The Finance Director shall exercise his or her discretion in determining the amount and substance of training necessary. (Ord. of 11-5-2008, § 1) 
Sec. 1-24-12. - Outside Service Providers.     In the event that the Government engages a service provider to perform an activity in connection with one or more covered accounts the Department Director shall exercise his or her discretion in reviewing such arrangements in order to ensure, to the best of his or her ability, that the service provider's activities are conducted in accordance with policies and procedures, agreed upon by contract, that are designed to detect any red flags that may arise in the performance of the service provider's activities and take appropriate steps to prevent or mitigate identity theft. (Ord. of 11-5-2008, § 1) 
ARTICLE 2. - TREATMENT OF ADDRESS DISCREPANCIES 
Sec. 1-24-13. - Short Title.     This Article shall be known as "Treatment of Address Discrepancies." (Ord. of 11-5-2008, § 1) 
Sec. 1-24-14. - Purpose.     Pursuant to 16 CFR § 681.1, the purpose of this Article is also to establish a process by which the Government will be able to form a reasonable belief that a consumer report relates to the consumer about whom it has requested a consumer credit report when the Government has received a notice of address discrepancy. (Ord. of 11-5-2008, § 1) 
Sec. 1-24-15. - Definitions.     For the purposes of this Article, the following definitions apply: (a)  Notice of address discrepancy means a notice sent to the Government by a consumer reporting agency pursuant to 15 U.S.C. § 1681(c)(h)(1), that informs the Government of a substantial difference between the address for the consumer that the Government provided to request the consumer report and the address(es) in the agency's file for the consumer. (b)  Government means the Unified Government of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia. (Ord. of 11-5-2008, § 1) 
Sec. 1-24-16. - Treatment of Address Discrepancies.     In the event that the Government receives a notice of address discrepancy, the Government employee responsible for verifying consumer addresses for the purpose of providing the government service or account sought by the consumer shall perform one or more of the following activities, as determined to be appropriate by such employee: (1)  Compare the information in the consumer report with: a.  Information the Government obtains and uses to verify a consumer's identity in accordance with the requirements of the Customer Information Program rules implementing 31 U.S.C. § 5318(l); b.  Information the Government maintains in its own records, such as applications for service, change of address notices, other customer account records or tax records; or c.  Information the Government obtains from third-party sources that are deemed reliable by the relevant Government employee; or (2)  Verify the information in the consumer report with the consumer. (Ord. of 11-5-2008, § 1) 
Sec. 1-24-17. - Furnishing Consumer's Address to Consumer Reporting Agency. (1)  In the event that the Government reasonably confirms that an address provided by a consumer to the Government is accurate, the Government is required to provide such address to the consumer reporting agency from which the Government received a notice of address discrepancy with respect to such consumer. This information is required to be provided to the consumer reporting agency when: a.  The Government is able to form a reasonable belief that the consumer report relates to the consumer about whom the Government requested the report; b.  The Government establishes a continuing relation with the consumer; and c.  The Government regularly and in the ordinary course of business provides information to the consumer reporting agency from which it received the notice of address discrepancy. (2)  Such information shall be provided to the consumer reporting agency as part of the information regularly provided by the Government to such agency for the reporting period in which the Government establishes a relationship with the customer. (Ord. of 11-5-2008, § 1) 
Sec. 1-24-18. - Methods of Confirming Consumer Addresses.     The Government employee charged with confirming consumer addresses may, in his or her discretion, confirm the accuracy of an address through one or more of the following methods: (1)  Verifying the address with the consumer; (2)  Reviewing the Government's records to verify the consumer's address; (3)  Verifying the address through third party sources; or (4)  Using other reasonable processes. (Ord. of 11-5-2008, § 1) 
CHAPTER 1-25. - ATHENS CULTURAL AFFAIRS COMMISSION Sec. 1-25-1. Purpose and Establishment. Sec. 1-25-2. Membership and Terms of Service. Sec. 1-25-3. Powers of the Commission. Sec. 1-25-4. Duties of the Commission. Sec. 1-25-5. Funding for Public Art Program. Sec. 1-25-6. Additional Funding for Public Art. 
Sec. 1-25-1. - Purpose and Establishment.     In support and furtherance of its determination that superior and diverse cultural assets and attractions in a city and its built environment are vital to the quality of life of its citizens and vital to the economic success of its businesses; and in recognition of the need for a comprehensive cultural affairs and public art policy that improves and enhances the cultural assets and public spaces within Athens-Clarke County, the Mayor and Commission hereby establish the Athens Cultural Affairs Commission (ACAC) to advise on cultural affairs and aesthetic development of the built environment in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. of 12-7-2010, § 1) 
Sec. 1-25-2. - Membership and Terms of Service.     The Athens Cultural Affairs Commission shall consist of 11 voting members appointed for staggered three-year terms of office. (1)  Eleven Athens-Clarke County resident members shall be appointed by the Mayor and Commission of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia. Whenever a vacancy exists thereafter, nominations may be submitted by the ACAC to the Mayor and Commission, who shall confirm or reject such nominations. (2)  Individuals with expertise in the following areas will be sought as members of the Athens Cultural Affairs Commission: public art, visual art, architecture, environmental design, music, performance, literary art, or others who have demonstrated a professional interest in, or outstanding knowledge of, the arts. (3)  The ACAC may appoint up to four non-voting representatives to serve as members for a period of up to three years. (Ord. of 12-7-2010, § 1; Ord. of 12-3-2013, § 1) 
Sec. 1-25-3. - Powers of the Commission.     The Athens Cultural Affairs Commission shall be authorized to adopt guidelines, policies and other criteria to facilitate the purposes of the ACAC; to appoint committees to assist with implementation of the policies; to initiate, plan and direct community-wide efforts to achieve ACAC goals; to solicit and recommend acceptance of grants, donations and appropriations of funds, staff, services, products, property and facilities for use by the ACAC for the accomplishment of its objectives; and to make recommendations to the Mayor and Commission and the community regarding public art policy and other cultural affairs policy. (Ord. of 12-7-2010, § 1) 
Sec. 1-25-4. - Duties of the Commission.     The Athens Cultural Affairs Commission shall be vested with the responsibility of advising the Mayor and Commission with respect to all aspects of planning, programming, procurement, installation, operation, inventory and maintenance of public art projects and artworks, including art donations, commissions, and temporary projects.     The ACAC shall create a Public Art Master Plan to be approved by the Mayor and Commission and shall be responsible for developing annual budgets in support of public art projects described in the Plan, based on the Unified Government's approved Public Art Capital Account and other funding sources.     The ACAC shall also perform such other duties and responsibilities as may be designated by the Mayor and Commission to promote the public art program and other cultural affairs initiatives, including adopting guidelines to facilitate the mission of the ACAC in its support of a public art program. Appropriate Unified Government departments under the direction of the Manager are hereby authorized to offer assistance to the Athens Cultural Affairs Commission for the accomplishment of its objectives. However, nothing in this Chapter should be construed to abridge or change the powers and duties of departments, boards and agencies of the Unified Government of Athens-Clarke County. (a)  Meetings. To accomplish the duties set forth, the Athens Cultural Affairs Commission shall meet as necessary, but at least monthly, to accomplish its duties and responsibilities. (b)  Annual Reports. The Athens Cultural Affairs Commission shall deliver an annual report to the Mayor and Commission describing its accomplishments of the preceding year and recommending approval for new projects. It shall provide such other reports as may be requested by the Mayor and Commission. (c)  Public Outreach and Education. The Athens Cultural Affairs Commission shall endeavor to increase the visibility and awareness of public art through outreach, education and collaborations. (Ord. of 12-7-2010, § 1) 
Sec. 1-25-5. - Funding for Public Art Program.     Upon adoption of the annual General Capital Budget, the Mayor and Commission of the Unified Government shall appropriate one percent of the value of all approved projects in the Capital Budget, excluding land purchases, leases, finance cost, and projects categorized as "Equipment," to the Public Art Project Account. This account shall be a multi-year account used for the design, fabrication, installation, maintenance and implementation of community public art projects recommended by the ACAC and approved by the Mayor and Commission.     In addition to the above noted capital funding for public art, the ACAC may submit to the Unified Government an annual operating budget request to further support its ongoing efforts to promote a public art program and other cultural community initiatives. (Ord. of 12-7-2010, § 1) 
Sec. 1-25-6. - Additional Funding for Public Art.     The Mayor and Commission shall identify projects within all Special Purpose Local Option Sales Tax (SPLOST) programs that are appropriate for inclusion of public art elements as integral parts of the project construction, beginning with the SPLOST 2011 program. The Mayor and Commission shall, upon review of ACAC recommendations, make such determination prior to project development by taking one of the following actions: (1)  Declare that the project is appropriate for public art and direct the Manager to work with the ACAC to include an art budget in the project planning that is equal to one percent of the project's actual construction contract amount. Final approval of the art type and style shall be made by the Mayor and Commission at a later date based upon a recommendation by the ACAC; or (2)  Declare that the project is appropriate for public art and direct the Manager to work with the ACAC during project planning to develop an art budget that may be greater than or less than one percent of the project's actual construction contract amount. The art budget shall be approved by the Mayor and Commission at the schematic or preliminary planning stage of the project. Final approval of the art type and style shall be made by the Mayor and Commission at a later date based upon a recommendation by the ACAC; or (3)  Declare that the project is not appropriate for public art at this time. The public art appropriation shall be maintained as a separate item in the project budget. The ACAC shall assist the Unified Government in the selection, development and implementation of these art projects as provided in section 1-25-4. (Ord. of 12-7-2010, § 1; Ord. of 12-6-2011, § 1) 