Title 6 - LICENSES AND BUSINESS REGULATIONS [1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Cross reference— Power of Athens-Clarke County to levy, assess and collect business taxes and to license and regulate businesses, § 8-114(3). State Law reference— Commerce and trade, O.C.G.A. Title 10; professions and businesses, O.C.G.A. Title 43; specific business and occupation taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-1 et seq.; exemption from municipal taxation of agricultural products and livestock raised in state, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356. 
CHAPTER 6-1. - OCCUPATION TAXES AND REGULATORY FEES FOR BUSINESSES, PROFESSIONS AND OCCUPATIONS[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- Editor's note— An ordinance of Nov. 21, 1995, repealed former Ch. 6-1, which pertained to similar subject matter, and which derived from an ordinance of Oct. 4, 1994, § 1; and an ordinance of Feb. 7, 1995, § 1; and enacted new provisions set out herein as a new Ch. 6-1. Charter reference— Taxation and other revenues, § 7-101 et seq.; financial administration, § 7-401 et seq. 
Sec. 6-1-1. - Levy and scope. (a)  For the year 1996 and succeeding years thereafter, each person engaged in any business, trade, profession, or occupation in Athens-Clarke County, Georgia, whether with a location in Athens-Clarke County or in the case of an out-of-state business with no location in Georgia exerting substantial efforts within the state pursuant to O.C.G.A § 48-13-7, shall pay an occupation tax for said business, trade, profession or occupation. The occupation tax shall be determined in accordance with the schedule set forth in this chapter. (b)  The occupation tax levied herein is for revenue purposes only and is not for regulatory purposes, nor is the payment of the tax made a condition precedent to the practice of any such profession, trade or calling. (c)  The regulatory tax levied herein upon certain occupations and businesses is an exercise of the police power of the Unified Government of Athens-Clarke County. (Ord. of 11-21-95, § 1) 
Sec. 6-1-2. - Definitions.     As used in this chapter, the term: (a)  Administrator shall mean the director of finance. (b)  Administrative fee means a component of an occupation tax which approximates the reasonable cost of handling and processing the occupation tax. (c)  Employee means an individual whose work is performed under the direction and supervision of the employer and whose employer withholds FICA, federal income tax, or state income tax from such individual's compensation or whose employer issues to such individual for purposes of documenting compensation a form I.R.S. W-2 but not a form I.R.S. 1099. (d)  Business shall mean: (1)  Any person who, in Athens-Clarke County, engages in, causes to be engaged in, or represents himself or herself to be engaged in, any occupation or activity with the object of gain, benefit, or advantage, either directly or indirectly; any person who owns personal or real property which generates income and which is located in Athens-Clarke County. This shall include any person advertising by any means, including, but not limited to, signs, cards, circulars, newspapers, etc., that he or she is engaged in a business of any kind. (2)  No business required by this chapter to secure an occupation tax shall be exempt from the payment of said occupation tax on the ground that the business is operated for a charitable purpose, unless 50 percent or more of the gross receipts from the business are devoted to a charitable purpose. (e)  Date of commencing operations means the date on which a business heretofore not engaged in commercial transactions within Athens-Clarke County becomes engaged in business. (f)  Dominant business activity means that business activity which is the major and principal source of income of the business. (g)  Engaged in business or carrying on business means doing or performing of any act of selling any goods or services, or soliciting business, or offering any goods or services for sale primarily in an attempt to make a profit, including selling or performing services of the character of a wholesaler or retailer, or being involved in any of the functions performed as a manufacturer, or renting real or personal property; all of the foregoing performed either as an owner, operator or agent of any business, trade, profession, or occupation within Athens-Clarke County. (h)  Location or office shall include any structure or vehicle where a business, profession, or occupation is conducted, but shall not include a temporary or construction worksite which serves a single customer or project or a vehicle used for sales or delivery by a business or practitioner of a profession or occupation which has a location or office. (i)  Manufacturing shall mean a person who, either directly or by contracting with others for the necessary labor or mechanical services, manufactures for sale or commercial use any articles, substances or commodities, including, but not limited to, the following: materials upon which commercial activities have been applied, by hand or machinery, so that as a result thereof a new substance of trade or commerce is produced; the production or fabrication of special or custom-made articles; the making, fabrication, processing, refining, mixing, slaughtering, packing, aging, curing, preserving, canning, preparing and freezing of fresh foods, fruits, vegetables and meats. (j)  Nonprofit [shall mean] any organization that is exempt from federal income taxes under section 501 of title 26 U.S.C.A. (k)  Occupation tax means a tax levied on persons, partnerships, corporations or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession or business and enacted by a local government as a revenue raising ordinance or resolution. (l)  Person means any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, joint venture, association, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, syndicate or other group or combination acting as a unit, but specifically excludes charitable nonprofit organization which utilize 50 percent of their proceeds for charitable purposes. (m)  Practitioner of professions and occupations is one who by state law requires state licensure regulating such profession or occupation as designated by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c). For the purposes of this chapter, practitioners of professions or occupations shall not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business, if the business pays an occupation tax. (n)  Regulatory fees means payments, whether designated as license fees, permit fees or by another name, which are required by a local government as an exercise of its police power and as a part of or as an aid to regulation of an occupation, profession or business. The amount of a regulatory fee shall approximate the reasonable cost of the actual regulatory activity performed by Athens-Clarke County. The regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee. (o)  Retailer means a person who sells to consumers or any other person for any purpose, other than for resale, any tangible personal property. (p)  Services means the accommodating or performing a duty or work by a person utilizing time or talents for direct or indirect remuneration. (q)  Wholesaler shall mean a person who sells to jobbers or to persons, other than consumers, any tangible personal property. (Ord. of 11-21-95, § 1) 
Sec. 6-1-3. - Regulatory fees.     In accordance with O.C.G.A § 48-13-9, a regulatory fee shall be imposed on all applicable occupations and businesses in addition to the occupation tax provided for under section 6-1-5. Said fees shall be due and payable before the beginning of each calendar year. A certificate shall be issued upon payment of all applicable regulatory fees. The regulatory fee schedule for persons in the following occupations and professions is as follows: Business/Occupation Regulatory Fee Nude Performances:  Initial year business fee $200.00  Annual renewal business fee 150.00 Massage parlors:  Initial year business fee 200.00  Annual business renewal fee 150.00  Individual permit 20.00  Individual replacement permit 15.00 Pawnbrokers:  Initial year business fee 100.00  Annual renewal business fee 75.00 Alarms:  Initial year fee 175.00  Annual renewal fee 75.00 Street/itinerant merchants: The regulatory fee for persons in this occupation shall be as set forth in title 6, chapter 6 of this Code.  (Ord. of 11-21-95, § 1) 
Sec. 6-1-3.1. - Regulatory fees for trade and merchandise shows. (a)  Promoters or operators of trade or merchandise shows shall pay a regulatory fee of $200.00 for each such event. (b)  A trade or merchandise show is an event at a fixed location for no more than 15 days at which the public or at least 50 named persons are invited to attend for the purpose of examining wares, products, or technologies, whether or not such wares, products or technologies are offered for sale at wholesale or retail to the invitees. Such events shall include, but are not limited to, shows at which retailers exhibit products for a specialized market (collectors, automobile shows, boat shows, etc.), consumer products are shown to the public, persons engaged in a specific industry exhibit their products or wares to other persons engaged in that industry, etc. (c)  Promoters of trade shows or merchandise shows, as defined in this section, are hereby required as follows: To provide the administrator with an "exhibitor's roster," which is to include the name (sole proprietor, corporation or partnership), address, telephone number and Georgia Sales Tax Identification Number and either the federal tax identification number, if the exhibitor has one, or the Social Security number of the principal officer of each exhibitor at least three (3) full business days prior to the day on which the show opens. The administrator shall not issue the regulatory certificate to the promoter of a trade show or merchandise show who does not present two (2) copies of the exhibitor list described in this subsection along with the payment of the fee. The administrator shall provide one (1) of the copies of the exhibitor list to the marshal of Athens-Clarke County and shall maintain the list of exhibitors along with other exhibitors of trade shows and merchandise shows for examination by citizens or consumers who have purchased items at such shows. (d)  The promoter of a trade show or merchandise show shall obtain a floor plan from the owner of the facility at which the show will be held and shall describe all functions and activities which will take place during the event on said floor plan and file same with the administrator concurrently with the payment of the regulatory fee. The administrator shall not accept the payment of any regulatory fee unless said floor plan is provided at that time. The administrator will make the floor plan available to the fire marshal who will have the opportunity to inspect the facility and issue any appropriate orders to the owner of the facility and the promoter of the trade or merchandise show relevant to the plans which have been submitted to him. (Ord. of 12-5-95, § 1) 
Sec. 6-1-4. - Occupation tax levied. (a)  A nonrefundable annual occupation tax shall be levied upon those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one or more locations or offices in Athens-Clarke County or upon the applicable out-of-state businesses with no location or office in Georgia pursuant to O.C.G.A § 48-13-7 based upon the following criteria: (1)  The number of employees of the business or practitioner. (b)  Businesses and practitioners shall be required to pay an occupation tax to only one local government in this state, the local government in which the largest dollar volume of business is conducted or service is performed by the individual business or practitioner. (c)  Businesses and practitioners must provide proof of payment of a local business or occupation tax in another state which purports to tax the business's or practitioner's sales or services in this state, for the business or practitioner to be exempt from local occupation tax in this state. (d)  An occupation tax shall not be levied in any other manner except as described in this chapter. (Ord. of 11-21-95, § 1) 
Sec. 6-1-5. - Occupation tax schedule. (a)  There is hereby levied upon each person engaged in or carrying on business in Athens-Clarke County an annual occupation tax based upon the number of employees using the schedule set forth below: Bracket No. No. Employees Tax Amount 1 0-1 $50.00 2 2-3 131.00 3 4-6 327.00 4 7-10 540.00 5 11-15 780.00 6 16-20 959.00 7 21-35 1,229.00 8 36-50 1,649.00 9 51-75 2,038.00 10 76-100 2,578.00 11 101-150 3,058.00 12 151-250 3,567.00 13 251 and over 3,957.00  (b)  Determination of number of employees. The number of employees of the business or practitioner as computed on a full-time position basis or full-time position equivalent basis, provided that for the purposes of this computation an employee who works 40 hours or more weekly shall be considered a full-time employee and that the average weekly hours of employees who work less than 40 hours weekly shall be added and such sum shall be divided by 40 to produce full time position equivalents. For the purpose of this provision the business shall figure its number of employees based on the calendar year operations preceding the levy of this tax or for the period if in business for less than one year. (Ord. of 11-21-95, § 1; Ord. of 6-2-2009, § 1; Ord. of 6-7-2016(3), § 1 ) 
Sec. 6-1-6. - Administrative fee.     In addition to the occupation tax levied under section 6-1-5 an administrative fee of $50.00 shall be assessed for each business assessed the annual occupation tax. (Ord. of 11-21-95, § 1; Ord. of 6-7-2016(3), § 2 ) 
Sec. 6-1-7. - Paying occupation tax of business with no location in Georgia. (a)  The assessment of an occupation tax is hereby imposed on those businesses and practitioners of professions with no location or office in the State of Georgia if the business' largest dollar volume of business in Georgia is in Athens-Clarke County and the business or practitioner: (1)  Has one or more employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within the jurisdiction of Athens-Clarke County for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients; or (2)  Owns personal or real property which generates income and which is located within Athens-Clarke County. (Ord. of 11-21-95, § 1) 
Sec. 6-1-8. - Business or organizations exempted from occupation tax. (a)  The following persons and businesses are not covered by the provisions of this chapter but may be assessed an occupation tax or other type of tax pursuant to the provisions of other general laws of the State of Georgia or by act of local law: (1)  Individual farmers who raise, grow or cultivate edible food from the soil of Georgia provided, however, farm, milk, or other farmer cooperatives are not exempted when they engage in selling goods and/or services to the public in competition with persons taxed by virtue of this chapter. (2)  Established churches, religious, charitable, and fraternal organizations chartered or operated for nonprofit purposes and which are not engaged in daily selling of goods or services to the public in competition with persons taxed by virtue of the provisions of this chapter. (3)  Persons exempted from taxation by virtue of the Constitution or any statue of the United States or State of Georgia. Those persons shall possess and display at their places of business a certificate of exemption that may be obtained from the Administrator by application of a form provided by same. The applicant for exemption shall clearly state the provision of this chapter or other provision of law under which the applicant claims exemption. The certificate shall contain sufficient facts for the Administrator to determine whether the applicant is entitled to the exemption. The certificate of exemption shall remain valid and the business need not reapply for an annual certificate of exemption as long as the conditions entitling the business to the exemption remain the same. The application for the certificate of exemption shall be made under oath. The certificate of exemption shall not exempt any business from complying with the duty to register. (4)  Persons located in Athens-Clarke County who are subject to a occupation tax levied by the City of Winterville or the City of Bogart shall not be required to register and pay an occupation tax so long as the business does not maintain a place of business located outside of the City of Winterville or the City of Bogart. (5)  Any person exempted from the requirement of paying a occupation tax by any ordinance heretofore or hereafter passed by the mayor and commission. (6)  Any person engaging in casual or isolated activity and commercial transactions, where such involve personal assets and are not the principal occupation of the individual. (7)  Those businesses regulated by the Georgia Public Service Commission. (8)  Those electrical service businesses organized under chapter 3 of title 46 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. (9)  Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including agribusiness. (10)  Cooperative marketing associations governed by O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105. (11)  Motor common carriers governed by O.C.G.A. § 46-7-15. (12)  Those businesses governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355. (13)  Agricultural products and livestock raised in the State of Georgia governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356. (14)  Depository financial institutions governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. (15)  Facilities operated by a charitable trust governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-55. (16)  In order to promote economic development of Athens-Clarke County by the encouragement of trade and merchandise shows in the community, all exhibitors at trade and merchandise shows which have paid the regulatory fee set out in section 6-1-3.1 shall be exempt from occupation taxes imposed by this chapter. (b)  No business required by this chapter to secure an occupation tax shall be exempt from the payment of said occupation tax on the ground that the business is operated for a charitable purpose, unless 50 percent or more of the gross receipts from the business are devoted to a charitable purpose. (Ord. of 11-21-95, § 1; Ord. of 12-5-95, § 1; Ord. of 7-2-96, § 1; Ord. of 7-6-99, § 1) 
Sec. 6-1-9. - Contractors to provide listing of subcontractors.     Before a contractor obtains an occupation tax certificate, he or she shall submit to the department of finance a list of all subcontractors who will be used in construction relating to that certificate. (Ord. of 11-21-95, § 1) 
Sec. 6-1-10. - Option to establish exemption or deduction in occupation tax.     The mayor and commission may by subsequent ordinance or resolution provide for an exemption or reduction in occupation tax to one or more types of businesses or practitioners of occupations or professions as part of a plan for economic development or attracting or encouraging selected types of businesses or practitioners of selected occupations or professions. Such exemptions or reductions in occupation tax shall not be arbitrary or capricious and the reasons shall be set forth in the minutes of the mayor and commission in an adopted plan. (Ord. of 11-21-95, § 1; Ord. of 7-2-96, § 1; Ord. of 7-6-99, § 1) 
Sec. 6-1-11. - Determination of occupation tax and administrative fee, regulatory fee for new business.     If a business is begun for the first time on or after January first of any calendar year, the occupation tax levied and assessed in this chapter against the business shall be determined as follows: (1)  In the event that any person commences business on any date after January 1, the occupation tax and administrative fee shall be due and payable on the date of the commencement of the business. (2)  The Administrator, shall issue an occupation tax certificate for the calendar year in which the application is submitted, and the occupation tax shall be paid in accordance with section 6-1-4 and 6-1-5 except that it shall be based upon: a.  If a new business begins for the first time after July 1st of the calendar year, then the occupation tax shall be 50 percent of the amount in the schedule set forth in section 6-1-5 therein. Administrative fees and regulatory fees shall not be reduced for businesses commencing operation on or after July 1. (Ord. of 11-21-95, § 1) 
Sec. 6-1-12. - Professionals.     Practitioners of professions as described in O.C.G.A § 48-13-9(c) shall elect as their entire occupation tax one of the following: (1)  The occupation tax based on number of employees under section 6-1-5; or (2)  A fee of $400.00 per practitioner who is licensed to provide the service, such tax to be paid at the practitioner's office or location. The per practitioner tax applies to each person in the business who qualifies as a practitioner under the state law. (3)  Attorneys at law are exempted from the provisions of section 6-1-17 and section 6-1-33 of this chapter. (Ord. of 11-21-95, § 1; Ord. of 7-7-98, § 1) 
Sec. 6-1-13. - Practitioners practicing exclusively for the government.     Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a city or county of the state, instrumentalities of the United States, the state or the local government shall not be required to pay an occupation tax for that practice. (Ord. of 11-21-95, § 1) 
Sec. 6-1-14. - Evidence of state license required; to be displayed. (a)  Each person who is listed by the Secretary of State pursuant to title 43 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before an Athens-Clarke County certificate may be issued. (b)  Each person who is licensed by the state shall post the state license in a conspicuous place in the licensee's place of business and shall keep the license there at all times while the license remains valid. (Ord. of 11-21-95, § 1) 
Sec. 6-1-15. - Allocation of employees of business with multiple intra or interstate locations.     Businesses who have multiple locations inside and outside of Athens-Clarke County shall be taxed upon the number of employees employed in Athens-Clarke County. (Ord. of 11-21-95, § 1) 
Sec. 6-1-16. - False registration.     It shall be unlawful for the owner, proprietor, manager, executive officer or employee of any business, coming within the provisions of this chapter, to make a false registration for such business, or to give or file, or direct the giving or filing, of any false information with respect to the occupation tax due under the provisions of this chapter or upon which any occupation tax due under the provisions of this chapter is based. (Ord. of 11-21-95, § 1) 
Sec. 6-1-17. - Occupation tax and regulatory fee certificate displayed.     All persons shall exhibit and display the occupation tax certificate and/or regulatory fee certificate issued to them in some conspicuous place in their business establishment at the address such certificate(s) was issued. Any transient or non-transient person doing business within Athens-Clarke County shall carry said certificate(s) either upon his person or in any vehicle or conveyance which is used in such business and such person shall exhibit the same to any authorized enforcement officer in Athens-Clarke County when so requested. (Ord. of 11-21-95, § 1) 
Sec. 6-1-18. - Evidence of qualification required if applicable.     Any business required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency or any other regulatory matter shall first, before the issuance of a Athens-Clarke County occupation tax certificate show evidence of such qualification. (Ord. of 11-21-95, § 1) 
Sec. 6-1-19. - Duty to register business. (a)  A form or notice shall be mailed to all known persons engaged in or carrying on business in Athens-Clarke County at the beginning of the year for registering each business. However, failure to receive such form or notice shall not release any person from any tax or penalties due under this chapter, nor shall such failure to operate to extend any time limit set by the provisions of this chapter. The registration shall be signed and sworn to by the appropriate persons. (b)  Each business operated in Athens-Clarke County shall identify their dominate activity and any other lines of business at that same location address. (Ord. of 11-21-95, § 1) 
Sec. 6-1-20. - Payment of occupation tax and regulatory fee; penalties for late payment. (a)  When due. Occupation taxes and regulatory fees levied in accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall be due and payable on or before April 1 of each calendar year or, in case of new business, upon commencement of that business. In the case of attorneys at law starting new practices of law, occupation taxes levied in accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall be due and payable within six months of the date of commencing operations. (b)  Additional amounts. For any reason during the year, it is determined that a larger occupation tax should have been assessed, then the additional amount so assessed shall be deemed to have been due and payable on April first of such year. All monies that would have been paid, if the correct amount had been assessed at the appropriate time, shall be considered past due and all penalties and interest provided for herein shall apply. (c)  Assessment of delinquent occupation tax and fees. Any person who fails to pay the occupation tax, administrative or regulatory fee imposed upon him or her by this chapter for ninety days from the due date of the tax or fee, shall be assessed a delinquent charge of 10 percent of the amount of the tax and/or fees due. (d)  Interest. All taxes, regulatory fees, administrative fees, and delinquent charges imposed by this chapter that are not paid by the due date shall bear interest at a rate of 1.5 percent per month from the due date until paid. (e)  Collection of penalties and interest. Penalties and interest imposed by this section shall be collected in the same manner as the tax imposed by this chapter. (f)  Manner of payment. Payment of the tax imposed by this chapter shall be made by mail with personal check, company check, money order, bank draft, certified check, cashier's check, or cash. If payment is made by check, the tax or fee shall not be deemed paid unless the check is honored in the usual course of business. (g)  Postmark. Payments by mail shall be postmarked no later than midnight of April 1 to be accepted without penalty. (Ord. of 11-21-95, § 1; Ord. of 7-7-98, § 2) 
Sec. 6-1-21. - Issuance and levy of executions for collection.     In addition to other remedies available to state, counties and municipalities for the collection of special taxes, occupation taxes, and license fees due the state, counties, and municipalities from persons subject to the occupation tax who fail or refuse to pay the tax or fee, the officer charged with the collection of the tax or fee shall issue executions against the delinquent taxpayers for the amount of the taxes or fees due when the taxes or fees become due. (Ord. of 11-21-95, § 1) 
Sec. 6-1-22. - Determination upon failure to file return. (a)  If any person fails to make a return, the Administrator shall make an estimate of the number of employees of the businesses in Athens-Clarke County which are subject to tax. The estimate shall be made for the period or periods in respect to which the person failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information which is or may come into the possession of the administrator. Written notice shall be given as follows: (1)  The administrator, or designee, shall give to the operator written notice of his determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail, such service shall be addressed to the operator at his address as it appears in the records of the administrator. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by the addressee. (b)  The amount of the determination shall bear interest and penalty as required in section 6-1-19. (Ord. of 11-21-95, § 1) 
Sec. 6-1-23. - Unpaid taxes levied under repealing.     This chapter does not repeal or affect the force of any part of any ordinance heretofore passed where taxes levied under such prior ordinance have not been paid in full. Those parts of ordinances heretofore passed providing for the issuing and enforcing of execution for any tax due, or for imposing fines or penalties for the nonpayment of such tax, or for failure to comply with any other provisions thereof, shall continue and remain in force and effect until such tax or assessment shall be full paid. (Ord. of 11-21-95, § 1) 
Sec. 6-1-24. - Insurers. (a)  Occupation tax. In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8 et seq., there is hereby levied an annual occupation tax upon each insurer doing business within Athens-Clarke County in the amount of $150.00. For each separate business location in excess of one not covered by subsection (b) which is operating on behalf of such insurers within Athens-Clarke County there is hereby levied an occupational tax in the amount of $35.00. For the purposes of this section, the term "insurer" means a company which is authorized to transact business in the class of insurance designated in paragraph (1) of O.C.G.A § 33-3-5. (b)  Occupation tax for insurers insuring certain risks at additional business locations. For each separate business location, not otherwise subject to a business license tax hereunder, operated and maintained by a business organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing and in connection with such loans or sales, offers solicits or takes applications for insurance through a licensed agent of an insurer for insurance, said insurer shall pay an additional occupation tax of $10.00 or 35 percent of the company occupation tax, whichever is greater, per location for each year. (c)  Agency occupation tax, independent agencies, brokers, etc. There is hereby levied an annual occupation tax upon independent agencies and brokers for each separate business location from which an insurance business is conducted and which is not subject to the company license fee imposed by subsection (a) hereof, in the amount of $35.00 for each location within Athens-Clarke County. (Ord. of 11-21-95, § 1) 
Sec. 6-1-25. - Separate businesses.     For the purpose of this chapter, if a business is conducted at more than one location or place, each location or place shall be considered a separate business and must be registered separately and the occupation tax and/or the regulatory fee shall be separately paid. (Ord. of 11-21-95, § 1) 
Sec. 6-1-26. - Occupation tax certificate and regulatory fee certificate not transferable.     An occupation tax certificate and/or regulatory fee certificate shall not be transferable and a transfer of ownership shall be considered in the same light as the termination of such business and the establishment of a new business. Therefore, a new certificate shall be required for each new owner of the business. (Ord. of 11-21-95, § 1) 
Sec. 6-1-27. - Duty to keep information current.     Any person required by this chapter to register his or her business shall notify the administrator in writing within 30 days of the following changes: (1)  Any change of address of the business, in which case the same occupation tax certificate shall be valid at the new location; (2)  Any change of ownership, in which case the transfer shall be treated as the termination of one business and the establishment of a new business for the purposes of this chapter; (3)  The termination of any business. (Ord. of 11-21-95, § 1) 
Sec. 6-1-28. - Inspection of books and accounts. (a)  Upon request by the administrator or his or her authorized representative, any person holding a certificate from Athens-Clarke County, shall open to the administrator his or her place of business for the purpose of enabling the administrator or his or her representative to ascertain and gain such information as may be necessary for determination of the proper classification of such certificate holder for occupational tax purposes and determination of the correct amount of occupation tax to which such person is subject. Upon request by the administrator or his authorized representative, any person holding an occupation tax certificate from Athens-Clarke County shall furnish the administrator or his or her authorized representative, during regular business hours at such person's place of business, all books of account, payroll records, invoices, papers, reports and memorandum containing entries showing amount of purchases, sales receipts, inventory and other information, ascertained and from which the correct amount of fee to which he or she is subject may be determined, including exhibition of bank deposit books, bank statements, copies of sale tax reports to the state, copies of Georgia income tax reports and federal income tax reports. (b)  It shall further be the duty of all taxpayers hereunder to secure, preserve, maintain, and keep for a period of three (3) years the records and documents enumerated and referred to in this section. (Ord. of 11-21-95, § 1) 
Sec. 6-1-29. - Confidentiality of information.     Except in case of judicial proceedings or other proceedings necessary to collect the occupation tax hereby levied and assessed, it shall be unlawful for any officer, employee, or agent to divulge or make known in any manner the information required to be submitted under the terms of this chapter. All information so submitted shall be confidential, and open only to the officials, employees, or agents using such information for the purpose of the occupation levy and assessment and the collection of same. Independent auditors or bookkeepers employed by the mayor and commission shall be classified as employees. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the disclosure of the tax levied and assessed upon any person, or the name, address and type of business of such taxpayer. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to prohibit publication by Athens-Clarke County of statistics classified so as to prevent the identification of particular returns. (Ord. of 11-21-95, § 1; Ord. of 7-2-96, § 1; Ord. of 7-6-99, § 1) 
Sec. 6-1-30. - Administration of ordinance. (a)  The administrator shall administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter for the levy, assessment and collection and penalties imposed herein. (b)  In carrying out its responsibilities hereunder, the administrator shall have the following duties: (1)  To prepare and provide the necessary forms for registration of a business, and for the submission of required information as may be necessary to properly administer and enforce the provisions of the ordinance; (2)  To issue to each person an occupation tax certificate within a reasonable time after the payment of the occupation tax assessed and levied in this chapter; provided, however, where under other ordinances of Athens-Clarke County, permits, certifications, and compliance with the enumerated conditions are required for the operation of the business, the administrator shall not issue said certificate until the applicant exhibits to the administrator such obtained permits, certifications and compliances; (3)  To audit periodically, and when deemed necessary by the administrator, the books and records of the business subject to the provisions of this chapter, and to require the submission of such additional information as may be necessary in order to correctly determine the amount of the occupation tax due and to insure the collection of same; and (4)  To issue in any year without a charge an occupation tax certificate when an applicant exhibits to the administrator such permits, certifications and compliance under the law of the state or United States, would entitle the applicant to such. (5)  The administrator shall have the power and authority to make and publish reasonable rules and regulations not inconsistent with this chapter or other laws of Athens-Clarke County and the state or the Constitution of this state for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter and the collection of the occupation tax and fees hereunder. (Ord. of 11-21-95, § 1) 
Sec. 6-1-31. - Compliance with other ordinances and laws. (a)  All businesses are required to comply with the provisions of all ordinances of Athens-Clarke County and other laws and the issuance of a occupation tax certificate to any business pursuant to this chapter shall not authorize that business to engage in or carry on business or to perform any other activity in violation of state or federal law or regulations and other ordinances of Athens-Clarke County nor shall it relieve that business from obtaining any certificate or permit required by the provision of other laws or ordinances. (Ord. of 11-21-95, § 1) 
Sec. 6-1-32. - Severability.     If any section, provision or clause of any part of this chapter shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional, or if the provisions of any part of this chapter as applied to any particular situation or set of circumstances shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional, such individuality shall not be construed to effect the portions of this chapter not so held to be invalid, or the application of this chapter to other circumstances not so held to be invalid. It is hereby declared as the intent that this chapter would have been adopted had such invalid portion not been included herein. (Ord. of 11-21-95, § 1) 
Sec. 6-1-33. - Violations.     Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter; any person committing any offense made unlawful herein; any person engaging in business within Athens-Clarke County without first having obtained the occupation tax certificate, as herein provided for; and any person engaging in business within Athens-Clarke County without first registering such business, shall be deemed guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in section 1-1-5 of this Code. Each day's continuance of a violation shall be considered a separate offense. (Ord. of 11-21-95, § 1) 
CHAPTER 6-2. - GOING-OUT-OF-BUSINESS SALES; FIRE SALES, ETC. Sec. 6-2-1. Definitions. Sec. 6-2-2. Applicability of chapter; general regulations. Sec. 6-2-3. License required. Sec. 6-2-4. Same—Application. Sec. 6-2-5. Same—Conditions of issuance. Sec. 6-2-6. Duties of licensee. 
Sec. 6-2-1. - Definitions.     For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:     Fire and other altered goods sale: A sale held out in such a manner as to reasonably cause the public to believe that the sale will offer goods damaged or altered by fire, smoke, water or other means.     Going-out-of-business sale: A sale held out in such a manner as to reasonably cause the public to believe that upon the disposal of the stock of goods on hand the business will cease and be discontinued, including, but not limited to, the following sales: Adjuster's, adjustment, alteration, assignee's, bankrupt, benefit of administrator's, benefit of creditors', benefit of trustees, building coming down, closing, creditor's committee, creditor's, end, executor's, final days, forced out, forced out of business, insolvents', last days', lease expires, liquidation, loss of lease, mortgage sale, receiver's, trustee's, and quitting business.     Goods: Any goods, wares, merchandise or other property capable of being the object of a sale regulated under this chapter.     Removal of business sale: A sale held out in such a manner as to reasonably cause the public to believe that the person conducting the sale will cease and discontinue business at the place of sale upon disposal of the stock of goods on hand and will then move to and resume business at a new location in Athens-Clarke County or will then continue business from other existing locations in Athens-Clarke County. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1) 
Sec. 6-2-2. - Applicability of chapter; general regulations. (a)  Provisions supplemental to general licensing ordinance. The provisions of this chapter are intended to augment and be in addition to the provisions of title 6, chapter 1. Where this chapter imposes a greater restriction upon persons, premises, businesses or practices than is imposed by title 6, chapter 1, this chapter shall control. (b)  Interval between sales. Any person who has held a sale, as regulated under this chapter, at the location stated in the application within one year last past from the date of such application shall not be granted a license. (c)  Restricted location. Where a person applying for a license under this chapter operates more than one place of business, the license issued shall apply only to the one store or branch specified in the application and no other store or branch shall advertise or represent that it is cooperating with or in any way participating in the licensed sale, nor shall the store or branch conducting the licensed sale advertise or represent that any other store or branch is cooperating with or participating in any way in the licensed sale. (d)  Persons exempted. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to or affect the following persons: (1)  Persons acting pursuant to an order or process of a court of competent jurisdiction; (2)  Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public officials; (3)  Duly licensed auctioneers selling at auctions; and (4)  Any publisher of a newspaper, magazine or other publication who publishes in good faith any advertisement, without knowledge of its false, deceptive or misleading character, or without knowledge that the provisions of this chapter have not been complied with. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1) 
Sec. 6-2-3. - License required.     A license issued by the finance department shall be obtained by any person before selling or offering to sell any goods at a sale to be advertised or held out by any means to be one of the following kinds: (1)  Going-out-of-business sale; (2)  Removal of business sale; or (3)  Fire and other altered stock sale. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1) 
Sec. 6-2-4. - Same—Application.     A person desiring to conduct a sale regulated by this chapter shall make a written application to the license officer setting forth and containing the following information: (1)  The true name and address of the owner of the goods to be the object of the sale; (2)  The true name and address of the person from whom the owner purchased the goods to be sold and the price therefor, and if not purchased, the manner of such acquisition; (3)  A description of the place where the sale is to be held; (4)  The nature of the occupancy, whether by lease or sublease, and the effective date of termination of the occupancy; (5)  The dates on which, and the period of time in which the sale is to be conducted; (6)  A full and complete statement of the facts in regard to the sale, including the reasons for the urgent and expeditious disposal of goods there by and the manner in which the sale will be conducted; (7)  The means to be employed in advertising the sale, together with the proposed content of any advertisement; and (8)  A complete and detailed inventory of the goods to be sold at the sale, as disclosed by the applicant's records. The inventory shall be attached to and become part of the required application.     All goods included in the inventory shall have been purchased by the applicant for resale on bona fide orders without cancellation privileges and shall not comprise goods purchased on consignment. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1) 
Sec. 6-2-5. - Same—Conditions of issuance.     A license shall be issued under this chapter on the following terms: (1)  Nature of sale. The license shall authorize only the one type of sale described in the application at the location named therein. (2)  Saleable goods. The license shall authorize only the sale of goods described in the inventory attached to the application. (3)  Surrender of general license. Upon being issued a license under this chapter for the going-out-of-business sale, the licensee shall surrender to the license officer all other business licenses he may hold at that time applicable to the location and goods covered by the application for a license under this chapter. (4)  Transfer. Any license provided for in this chapter shall not be assignable or transferable. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1) 
Sec. 6-2-6. - Duties of licensee.     A licensee under this chapter shall: (1)  Adhere to inventory. Make no additions whatsoever, during the period of the licensed sale, to the stock of goods set forth in the inventory attached to the application for license; (2)  Advertise properly. Refrain from employing any untrue, deceptive or misleading advertising; (3)  Adhere to advertising. Conduct the licensed sale in strict conformity with any advertising or holding out incident thereto; (4)  Keep duplicate inventory. Keep available at the place of sale a duplicate copy of the inventory submitted with the application and present such duplicate to inspecting officials upon request; and (5)  Segregate noninventoried goods. Keep any other goods separate and apart from the goods listed in the filed inventory as being objects of sale and make the distinction clear to the public by placing tags on all inventoried goods in and about the place of sale, apprising the public of the status of all such goods. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1) 
CHAPTER 6-3. - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[3] Sec. 6-3-1. Definitions. Sec. 6-3-2. License—Required; classes; fees. Sec. 6-3-3. Same—Application procedure. Sec. 6-3-4. Same—When issuance prohibited. Sec. 6-3-5. General regulations pertaining to all licenses. Sec. 6-3-6. Regulations pertaining to certain classes of licenses only. Sec. 6-3-7. Home-brew special events. Sec. 6-3-8. Employment Restrictions. Sec. 6-3-9. Reserved. Sec. 6-3-10. Dive defined; prohibited; penalty for violation. Sec. 6-3-11. Alcohol promotions; Pricing of alcoholic beverages. Sec. 6-3-12. Open containers. Sec. 6-3-13. Classic Center. Sec. 6-3-14. Furnishing alcoholic beverages in violation of state law. Sec. 6-3-15. Compliance; violations; penalties. Footnotes: --- (3) --- Editor's note— An ordinance of September 4, 2007 amended the Code by repealing former Ch. 6-3, §§ 6-3-1—6-3-9, in its entirety, and adding a new Ch. 6-3. Former Ch. 6-3 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from ordinances of August 8, 1991; December 5, 1991; October 6, 1992; December 8, 1992; March 2, 1993; April 6, 1993; May 4, 1993; September 7, 1993; March 1, 1994; October 4, 1994; May 3, 1995; June 6, 1995; October 3, 1995; July 1, 1997; October 7, 1997; November 4, 1997; December 2, 1997; April 7, 1998; December 8, 1998; December 7, 1999; December 5, 2000; June 12, 2001; November 6, 2001; March 5, 2002; April 1, 2003; November 4, 2003; and April 5, 2005. Cross reference— Drug and alcohol testing for employees, Ch. 1-13; authority of manager to close businesses selling alcoholic beverages during emergencies, § 3-4-1; public intoxication, § 3-5-4; sale, use or consumption of alcoholic beverages on premises having amusement machines, § 3-8-2; alcoholic beverage taxation, Ch. 6-4; alcoholic beverages in massage businesses, § 6-8-8. State Law reference— Alcoholic beverages, O.C.G.A. Title 3; local regulation of distilled spirits, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-40 et seq.; local regulation of malt beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-40 et seq.; local regulation of wine, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-40; public drunkenness, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-41; ordinances on drinking or drunkenness, O.C.G.A. §§ 37-8-11, 37-8-53. 
Sec. 6-3-1. - Definitions.     The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter:     Alcohol: Ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever process produced.     Alcoholic beverage: Includes all alcohol, distilled spirits, beer, malt beverage, wine, or fortified wine.     Alcoholic Treatment Center: Any state, county, or municipal government-owned or operated hospital, community mental health center, or other facility utilized for the diagnosis, care, treatment, or hospitalization of persons who are alcoholics.     Brew pub: Any eating establishment in which beer or malt beverages are manufactured or brewed, subject to the barrel production limitation prescribed in section 3-5-36 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated for retail consumption. As used in this chapter, the term "eating establishment" means an establishment which is licensed to sell distilled spirits, malt beverages, or wines and which derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross food and beverage sales from the sale of prepared meals or food.     Brewer: A manufacturer of malt beverages.     Broker: Means any person who purchases or obtains an alcoholic beverage from an importer, distillery, brewery, or winery and sells the alcoholic beverage to another broker, importer, or wholesaler without having custody of the alcoholic beverage or maintaining stock of the alcoholic beverage.     Brown bag establishment: Any private club, restaurant, music hall, theater, bowling alley or any other establishment providing food or entertainment in the normal course of business in which the owners or their employees or agents knowingly allow patrons to bring in and consume on the premises the patrons' own alcoholic beverages.     Brown bagging: The act of a patron or patrons entering any private club, restaurant, music hall, theater, bowling alley, or other establishment providing food or entertainment in the normal course of business and bringing in and consuming the patrons' own alcoholic beverages.     Church: A permanent building owned and operated exclusively by a religious organization and publicly designated a church where persons regularly assemble for religious worship. The mini mum distance requirements from church buildings shall not apply to space in a shopping center or residences also used for religious purposes.     College campus: Real property owned by a college or university with educational buildings in which are taught the subjects commonly taught in the colleges of this state.     Crime of moral turpitude: A crime which is contrary to justice, honesty, modesty, good morals or a person's duty to other people. Misdemeanors that are crimes of moral turpitude for the purpose of the chapter include but are not limited to theft, bad checks, shoplifting, making terroristic threats, giving false name to a police officer, false swearing, forgery, fraud or extortion .     Distilled spirits or liquor: Any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume, including, but not limited to, all fortified wines.     Doorperson: The employee of any Class D, E, or F licensee who has the responsibility for and duty of checking the identification of patrons entering the licensed premises for on-premises consumption of alcohol.     Election day: That period of time beginning with the opening of the polls and ending with the closing of the polls.     Financial interest: Includes, but is not limited to, holding any indebtedness or security interest in a business.     Grocery store : A retail establishment which has a total retail floor space of at least 10,000 square feet of which at least 85 percent is reserved for the sale of food and other nonalcoholic items and conducts all of its sales inside the building containing its retail floor space.     Growler: A sealed retail container containing a malt beverage drawn from a tap on a cask or keg on site, packaged and securely sealed by the license holder or its employees, and sold on the licensed premises by a Class B license holder.     Home-brew beverage: Any malt beverage produced pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-5-4.     Home-brew special event: Any contest, judging, tasting, or other similar event that occurs at a central location outside of private residences whereby different home-brew beverages that have been manufactured in private residences are sampled, compared, and consumed by participants in and judges of such events for awards, money, prizes, recognition or any other valuable consideration.     Hotel: A building or other structure kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public to be a place where sleeping accommodations are offered for adequate pay to travelers and guests, whether transient, permanent or residential, in which 50 or more rooms are used for the sleeping accommodations of such guests, such sleeping accommodations being conducted in the same building or in separate buildings or structures used in connection therewith that are on the same premises and are a part of the hotel operation. Motels meeting the qualifications set out in this definition for hotels shall be classified in the same category as hotels.     Housing Authority Property: Any property containing 300 housing units or fewer owned or operated by a housing authority created by Article 1 of Chapter 3 of Title 8, of the Official Code of Georgia, known as the "Housing Authorities Law."     Immediate family: Means any person related to the holder of an alcoholic beverage license within the first degree of consanguinity or affinity as determined according to canon law, which shall include a person's spouse, parents, stepparents, parents-in-law, brothers and sisters, stepbrothers and stepsisters, brothers-in-law and sisters-in-law, children, stepchildren, and children-in-law.     Importer: Means any person who imports an alcoholic beverage into this state from a foreign country and sells the alcoholic beverage to another importer, broker, or wholesaler and who maintains a stock of the alcoholic beverage.     In-room service: Means: (a)  The delivery of alcoholic beverages in unbroken packages by an employee of a hotel to a registered guest's room or to a registered guest at any location in the same building as the hotel when such alcoholic beverages have been ordered by the guest and when the guest shall be billed for the cost of such alcoholic beverages at the time of delivery and when the sale of such alcoholic beverages is completed at the time of delivery; and (b)  The provision of a cabinet or other facility located in a hotel's guest room which contains alcoholic beverages and which is provided upon written request of the guest and which is accessible by a lock and key only to the guest and for which the sale of the alcoholic beverages contained therein is deemed to be final at the time except for a credit which may be given to the guest for any unused portion.     Legal alien: A foreign national who possesses a valid United States government-issued I-551 card. An application for I-551 status does not meet the legal alien definition. Any other status which allows a person to enter the United States does not comply with this definition.     Legal resident: A United States citizen or a legal alien.     Licensed alcoholic beverage caterer: Any holder of a class D, E, or F alcoholic beverage license issued under this chapter who obtains an alcoholic beverage caterer license and who otherwise qualifies with the provisions set forth in O.C.G.A. Title 3, Chapter 11.     Licensed premises: Includes all the space or area owned, leased and/or controlled by the licensee and used for the purpose of operating under the license, including but not limited to all rooms wherein alcoholic beverages are sold, furnished, served, or consumed, except when such a room is located in a hotel, motel, or similar facility or in a shopping center in which case only such room and any adjoining storage, office, toilet, and other similar rooms shall constitute the licensed premises. For Class D, E, or F licenses, such premises include adjoining patios, decks, porches or sidewalk cafes. A floor plan for each licensed premise as defined herein must be submitted with each application for a license under this chapter.     Licensee: The person to whom a license under this chapter is issued.     Malt beverage: Means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops, or any other similar product, or any combination of such products in water, containing not more than 14 percent alcohol by volume and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager beer, small beer, and strong beer. The term does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine.     Manufacturer: Any maker, producer, or bottler of an alcoholic beverage. The term also means: (a)  In the case of distilled spirits, any person engaged in distilling, rectifying, or blending any distilled spirits; and (b)  In the case of any malt beverages, any brewer; and (c)  In the case of wine, any vintner.     Manager: A person who has responsibility for management of the operations, including sale of alcoholic beverages, at the location to be licensed or supervision of management of the operations, including sale of alcoholic beverages, at the location to be licensed and who is a full-time employee of the corporation, partnership, proprietor, or other ownership entity.     Movie theater (cinema, motion picture theater): Any indoor facility or auditorium, open to the public, which is used primarily for and designed for the purpose of exhibiting films or other similar performances by use of film projectors or digital cinema projection. This definition shall not include adult entertainment establishments of any kind. For the purposes of this chapter, a movie theater shall be required to have the following: (1)  At least two auditoriums for audience viewing of films with a minimum of 100 permanently-affixed stadium seats per auditorium and one permanently-affixed and wired large commercial screen per auditorium; and (2)  films must be shown at regularly scheduled and advertised times and shown during all times that the movie theater is open to the public.     Package: A bottle, can, keg, barrel, or other original consumer container.     Person: Any individual, firm, partnership, cooperative, nonprofit membership corporation, joint venture, association, company, corporation, agency, syndicate, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, fiduciary, or other entity or group or combination acting as a unit, body politic, or political subdivision, whether public, private, or quasi-public.     Private club: A corporation organized and existing under the laws of the State of Georgia, like fraternal or veterans' organizations, having bylaws and being a part of a national organization in existence for at least one year immediately prior to the application for any license hereunder, having at least 75 members, regularly paying monthly, quarterly or semiannual dues, organized and operated exclusively for fraternal brotherhood, pleasure, recreation and other non-profitable purposes, no part of the net earnings of which inures to the benefit of any stockholder or member, and owning, hiring or leasing a building or space therein for the reasonable use of its members with suitable kitchen and dining space and equipment, and maintaining and using a sufficient number of employees for cooking, preparing and serving meals for its members and guests; provided, that no member or officer, agent or employee of the club is paid, or directly or indirectly receive in the form of salary or other compensation, any profits from the sale of distilled spirits or any beverage licensed hereunder to the club or its members or guests beyond the amount of such salary as may be fixed by its members at any annual meeting or by its governing board out of the general revenue of the club.     Public entertainment facility which permits the consumption of alcoholic beverages on its premises: A business which is open to the public and provides entertainment, amusements or dancing, charges an admission fee, and permits alcoholic beverages to be consumed on the premises by the business invitee and which is not licensed under this chapter.     Restaurant: Any public place kept, used, maintained, and advertised and held out to the public as a place where meals are served and where meals are actually and regularly served, without sleeping accommodations, such place being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment, having employed a sufficient number of cooks and kinds of employees to prepare, cook, and serve suitable food at tables with seating, and holding a certificate of inspection and approval from the county health department. At least one meal per day shall be served at least five days a week, with the exception of holidays, vacations, and periods of remodeling, and the serving of such meals shall be the principal business conducted, with the serving of alcoholic beverages to be consumed on the premises as only incidental thereto. A restaurant shall have 50 percent or more of its total annual gross sales of food and alcoholic beverages from the sale of prepared meals or food.     Restaurant, low volume: A restaurant as defined in this section that has gross annual alcoholic beverages sales of less than $25,000.01.     Retail consumption dealer: Any person who sells distilled spirits for consumption on the premises only to consumers and not for resale.     Retailer or retail dealer: Except as to distilled spirits, any person who sells alcoholic beverages, either in unbroken packages or for consumption on the premises, at retail only to consumers and not for resale. With respect to distilled spirits, the terms mean any person who sells distilled spirits in unbroken packages at retail only to consumers and not for resale.     School building or educational building on a college campus: Governmental or church school buildings and such buildings at such other schools as teach the subjects commonly taught in the common schools and colleges of this state, and which are public schools or private schools as defined in O.C.G.A. § 20-2-690(b).     Wholesale or wholesale dealer: Any person who sells alcoholic beverages to other wholesale dealers, to retail dealers, or to retail consumption dealers.     Wine: Any alcoholic beverage containing not more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, champagnes, combinations of such beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines and like products. The term does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. A liquid shall first be deemed to be a wine at that point in the manufacturing process when it conforms to the definition of wine contained in this section. (Ord. of 9-4-2007, § 1; Ord. of 12-7-2010, § 1; Ord. of 5-1-2012, § 1; Ord. of 6-4-2013, § 1; Ord. of 11-4-2014, § 1 ; Ord. of 12-2-2014, § 1 ; Ord. of 10-6-2015(1), § 1 ; Ord. of 7-5-2016, § 1 ; Ord. of 11-1-2016(2), § 1 ; Ord. of 8-1-2017(1), §§ 1—3 ) 
Sec. 6-3-2. - License—Required; classes; fees. (a)  License required. It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture, serve, furnish, sell or offer for sale, at retail or wholesale, within the corporate limits of Athens-Clarke County any alcoholic beverage, including malt beverage or wine, without having a manufacturer's license or retail or wholesale alcoholic beverage dealer's license. It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture, serve, furnish, sell or offer for sale, at retail or wholesale, within the corporate limits of Athens-Clarke County any alcoholic beverage, including malt beverage or wine, in violation of the terms of such license or this chapter. (b)  Classes. The licenses shall be divided into the following classes: (1)  Class A, retail liquor package; (2)  Class B, retail beer package; (3)  Class C, retail wine package; (4)  Class D, retail liquor by the drink; (5)  Class D1, retail liquor by the drink, low volume restaurant; (6)  Class E, retail beer by the drink; (7)  Class F, retail wine by the drink; (8)  Class G, wholesale liquor; (9)  Class H, wholesale beer; (10)  Class I, wholesale wine; (11)  Class J, licensed alcoholic beverage caterer; (12)  Class K, brewer, manufacturer of malt beverages only; (13)  Class L, brew pub operator; (14)  Class M, broker; (15)  Class N, importer; (16)  Class O, Hotel in-room service liquor, beer, and wine; (17)  Class P, manufacturer of wine only; (18)  Class Q, manufacturer of distilled spirits only.     Sunday sales permits . All licensees who engage in Sunday sales as permitted under section 6-3-5 (i)(7) or (8) shall also be required to have a separate Sunday sales permit.     Wine-tasting permits and growler-tasting permits. All licensees who engage in wine-tastings as permitted under section 6-3-6(c) shall also be required to have a separate wine-tasting permit. All licensees who engage in growler-tastings as permitted under section 6-3-6(f) shall also be required to have a separate growler tasting permit. (c)  Fees. The basic fees for each type of license listed in paragraph (b) hereinabove shall be as follows except that private clubs as defined in section 6-3-1 shall pay 70 percent of the basic fee. Class A, retail liquor package ..... $5,000.00 Class B, retail beer package ..... 1,000.00 Class C, retail wine package ..... 1,000.00 Class D, retail liquor by the drink ..... 5,000.00 Class D1, retail liquor by the drink, low volume restaurant ..... 2,500.00 Class E, retail beer by the drink ..... 1,000.00 Class F, retail wine by the drink ..... 1,000.00 Class G, wholesale liquor ..... 5,000.00 Class H, wholesale beer ..... 1,140.00 Class I, wholesale wine ..... 1,140.00 Class J, licensed alcoholic beverage caterer ..... 600.00 Class K, brewer, manufacturer of malt beverages only ..... 2,600.00 Class L, brew pub operator ..... 600.00 Class M, broker ..... 600.00 Class N, importer ..... 600.00 Class O, hotel in-room service liquor, beer, and wine ..... 600.00 Class P, manufacturer of wine only ..... 600.00 Class Q, manufacturer of distilled spirits only ..... 5,000.00     Wine-tasting permit and growler tasting permit fees . All licensees who engage in wine-tastings as permitted under section 6-3-6(c) shall pay, in addition to the above fees, a fee of $250.00. All licensees who engage in growler-tastings as permitted under section 6-3-6(f) shall pay, in addition to the above fees, a fee of $250.00. (d)  Change of business. A new owner or new location shall pay the base fee for his initial license. (e)  Payment. The fees referred to in this section shall be payable annually on a calendar-year basis except for the initial year when they will be prorated for the number of quarters remaining in the calendar year at the time the license was purchased. If the license is purchased and is not used for the full calendar year or if the license is revoked or suspended following issuance thereof, there shall be no refunds for any portion of the fees. All new licenses must be paid and received by the business not later than 30 days from notification of approval. If not received, the license granted shall be considered void and treated as if denied. Payment shall be made by means of a check, credit card or United States currency. (Ord. of 9-4-2007, § 1; Ord. of 11-6-2007, § 1; Ord. of 6-2-2009, § 1; Ord. of 1-5-2010, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 5-1-2012, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 3-5-2013, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 12-2-2014, §§ 2, 3 ; Ord. of 6-7-2016(2), § 1 ; Ord. of 11-1-2016(2), § 2 ; Ord. of 8-1-2017(1), §§ 4—6 ) 
Sec. 6-3-3. - Same—Application procedure. (a)  Generally. The applicant for a license under this chapter shall make a written application under oath on the form as provided by the Director of Finance or his designated representative. Except as otherwise provided by law, such application shall be a public record and open to public inspection by any citizen of Athens-Clarke County at a reasonable time and place. (b)  Application fee . The applicant, upon turning in his complete application to the Director of Finance, or his designated representative, at the same time shall provide a certified check, credit card payment or money order for $400.00 made payable to Athens-Clarke County for the application fee, plus any additional related fees required by any other governmental agencies or departments. A $100.00 investigative fee must be paid for each additional investigation done during the year due to ownership or manager change.     Additionally, each applicant for a new license shall submit to the Finance Department such information as may be required by the Georgia Crime Information Center and by the Federal Bureau of Investigation, including classifiable sets of fingerprints, and such fees as may be set by the Georgia Crime Information Center and by the Federal Bureau of Investigation for a records check comparison by the Georgia Crime Information Center and by the Federal Bureau of Investigation. Application for a license under this chapter shall constitute consent for performance of a records check comparison. (c)  Entities—Ownership . All applicants other than individual persons shall list the names and addresses of all individual persons who have an ownership interest in such entity and the percentage ownership of each person, unless: (1)  The applicant's corporate stock or other ownership interest is listed on the stock exchange or available for over the counter sales and subject to regulation by federal and state securities laws; or (2)  The applicant (i) is a privately-owned entity; (ii) seeking a license for retail package sales of liquor, beer, or wine, or is a restaurant seeking a license for retail sales by the drink of liquor, beer, or wine; and (iii) is operating, at the time of its application, at least 200 (two-hundred) separate retail locations within the United States.     Except as provided above, if a named interest owner therein is another corporation or other entity, the same information shall be given for such corporation or entity. If during the life of the license, the identity of the interest owners or their percentage of ownership should change, that information shall be sent to the Director of Finance or his designated representative for processing. A change in ownership shall require a new application. Corporations or limited liability companies must file a compliance copy from the office of the Secretary of State showing active status as an incorporated business. (d)  Same—Additional data. (1)  Corporate, partnership, sole proprietors, and limited liability company applications. All corporate applicants shall list the names and addresses of the officers of the corporation. All sole proprietors shall apply in the name of the sole proprietor. All limited liability applicants shall provide the names and addresses of all members and managers of the limited liability company. In addition thereto, all applicants, including sole proprietors and partnerships if the sole proprietor or at least one partner is not working full-time in a managerial capacity on the premises, shall name a manager, whose name shall appear as such on the license issued to the corporation. The corporation, partnership, sole proprietor, or limited liability company shall provide the name and address of said manager, who shall be a full-time employee of the corporation, partnership, sole proprietorship, or limited liability company and who shall be the individual who does in fact have regular, managerial and supervisory authority over the business conducted on the licensed premises. In addition, the manager shall be an agent for service for the corporation, partnership, sole proprietorship, or limited liability company in addition to all other methods allowed for serving a corporation or other entity by the laws of Georgia. Any person who has been a manager of a corporation, partnership, sole proprietorship, or limited liability company whose license has been revoked is ineligible to act as manager for any licensee thereafter. A change in ownership shall require a new application. (2)  Intention to provide adult entertainment. Every application shall inquire if the applicant intends to provide live nude performances on the licensed premises or other forms of adult entertainment regulated under Chapter 6-11 of the Code of Athens-Clarke County. It is mandatory for this question to be answered by the applicant. (3)  Individual's requirements applicable to clubs. In the case of a private club, fraternal or veterans order, its chief officer and general manager shall meet the same requirements that any individual applicant must meet and maintain. (e)  Investigation. The Director of Finance or his designated representative shall submit the application after filing to the police department. Each applicant authorizes Athens-Clarke County and its agents to secure from any court, law enforcement agency, or other public agency his criminal history and the criminal history of all individuals required to be listed on the application, including but not limited to sole proprietor, partners, members, corporate officers, stockholders, and managers, and authorizes Athens-Clarke County to use such information in determining whether the license applied for shall be issued. Each applicant waives any right that he would otherwise have to preclude Athens-Clarke County or its agents from obtaining and using such information and each applicant further waives any liability of Athens-Clarke County or its agents for obtaining and using such information, and agrees to indemnify and hold Athens-Clarke County harmless against the claims of any person listed by the applicant on the application and by doing so has authorized Athens-Clarke County to investigate. The police department shall make an arrest and conviction investigation concerning any applicants hereunder and all individuals required to be listed on the application, including but not limited to sole proprietor, partners, LLC members, corporate officers, corporate stockholders, and managers. The police department shall submit the results of the investigation to the Director of Finance or his designated representative within 30 days of submission. (f)  Offenses. Any person making a false statement in any application for a license or false statement in connection with renewal thereof, shall be guilty of an offense and punished as provided by state law relating to false swearing, and further, a license, if previously granted or renewed, may be revoked for the violation. It shall be an offense for any person to give other than the true and correct legal name of the intended licensee, and a conviction for a violation thereof shall be punished as provided by section 1-1-5 of this Code, and in his discretion, the judge of the municipal court may revoke, suspend or probate any license for such violation and the administrative hearing officer as provided in section 1-5-1 may revoke, suspend, or probate any license for such violation. (g)  Duration; renewal. All licenses are issued only on a calendar-year basis and shall be eligible for renewal each year following issuance. Any license that is renewed pursuant to this Chapter shall be subject to any of the enforcement actions and imposition of any of the remedies provided in section 6-3-15 of this Chapter even though conduct that is the basis of such enforcement action may have occurred in a previous license year or an administrative hearing pursuant to section 1-5-1 of this Code with respect to such license may have been initiated in a prior license year. In the event that a license has been revoked by the administrative hearing officer, and the licensee has appealed such revocation to the Superior Court, or the time for filing such an appeal has not expired, consideration or issuance of any application for renewal of such license for a subsequent year shall be suspended until final judgment in the appeal has been entered by the Court or the revocation has become final with no appeal being filed. Each licensee shall make a written application for renewal on or before November first of each calendar year which shall swear to the truthfulness of such information that is the same as the prior application and shall set forth facts which are different from the prior year's application. The form shall be approved by the Director of Finance or his designated representative. All fees shall be tendered with the application in the form of a cashier's check, money order, or credit card. (h)  Penalty for filing renewal application and license fee payment after November first. There shall be a penalty fee charged for filing alcoholic beverage renewal application and license fee payment after November first as follows: November 1— November 15 $200.00 November 16— November 30 $300.00 After December 1 20% of annual license fee but not less than $500.00, whichever is greater.      If an alcoholic beverage license renewal application and license fee have not been filed with the Athens-Clarke County finance office by the last business day in December of each year, the license shall be declared to be abandoned and any relicensing shall require a new application. (i)  Taxes and fees. All taxes and fees due to Athens-Clarke County, including without limitation all ad valorem taxes due to the Athens-Clarke County Tax Commissioner, must be paid prior to license issuance. (j)  State license; forfeiture failure to comply; revocation of state license. A state alcoholic beverage license must be obtained by the applicant in order for the license issued by Athens-Clarke County to be valid. Failure of the licensee to obtain a state license before beginning operation of the premises shall be an automatic forfeiture and cancellation of the license issued by Athens-Clarke County, and no refund of license fees shall be made to the licensee. If a state alcoholic beverage license is revoked by the state, then the license issued by Athens-Clarke County shall automatically be revoked and void effective as of the date of such revocation. (k)  Licenses or permits constitute grant or privilege. All alcoholic beverage licenses or permits issued hereunder constitute a mere grant or privilege to carry out such business during the term of the license subject to all terms and conditions imposed by this chapter and related laws and other ordinances of Athens-Clarke County relating to such business, as amended from time to time by the Mayor and Commission. (l)  Applications for Sunday sales permit. (1)  Sunday sales permit for restaurants or rental of rooms for overnight lodging. The licensee of any restaurant as defined in this chapter or any licensed establishment which derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross income from the rental of rooms for overnight lodging, desiring the privilege to sell, furnish or otherwise dispense distilled spirits, malt beverages, or wine on Sunday in accordance with paragraph 6-3-5(i) shall, before dispensing such beverages on Sunday, file an affidavit with the Director of Finance, or his designee, certifying under oath that: (i)  Such establishment holds or has applied for a current Athens-Clarke County occupation tax certificate for a restaurant/eating establishment or for a hotel, motel or other establishment for rental of rooms for overnight lodging; and (ii)  Such restaurant, if an existing business, derived at least 50 percent of its total annual gross food and beverage sales income from the sale of prepared meals or food during the preceding calendar year and qualifies as a restaurant as defined in this Chapter; or if a new business, fully intends and expects to derive at least 50 percent of its total annual gross food and beverage sales income from the sale of prepared meals or food during the remainder of the current calendar year and to qualify as a restaurant as defined in this Chapter. Such an affidavit may be submitted at any time the above stated conditions are met, and must be submitted annually with such establishment's alcoholic beverage license renewal application if Sunday sales authorization is to be continued. No new application for Sunday sales permit for the same location will be allowed unless filed by an applicant with 100 percent change in ownership and control. For purposes of this subparagraph, 100 percent change in ownership and control shall mean a 100 percent change in all individuals, partners, officers, directors, shareholders, members, managers and/or all persons having any whole, partial, beneficial or other interest in the business where the alcoholic beverage license is located. 100 percent change in ownership and control shall not include a transfer in ownership and control to any person in the immediate family of any individuals, partners, officers, directors, shareholders, members, managers and/or any persons having any interest in the business where the alcoholic beverage license is located. The application for the alcoholic beverage license must be applied for and approved prior to the sale of the business. An alcoholic beverage license may not be issued until the new owner has established that the sale of the business is bona fide. The applicant for the new license must provide documentation concerning the sale, including but not limited to documentation concerning ownership of and all business interests in the old license in addition to documentation concerning the ownership of and all business interests in the new license, as requested by the Director of Finance; (iii)  Such hotel, motel, or other establishment for rental of rooms for overnight lodging, if an existing business, derived at least 50 percent of its total annual gross income from the rental of rooms for overnight lodging during the preceding calendar year and qualifies for a Sunday sales permit; or if a new business, fully intends and expects to derive at least 50 percent of its total annual gross income from the rental of rooms for overnight lodging during the remainder of the current calendar year and to qualify for Sunday sales under this Chapter. Such an affidavit may be submitted at any time the above-stated conditions are met, and must be submitted annually with such establishment's alcoholic beverage license renewal application if Sunday sales authorization is to be continued. No new application for Sunday sales permit for the same location will be allowed unless filed by an applicant with 100 percent change in ownership who can prove that the sale of the business is bona fide under the same requirements for 100 percent change in ownership and control as set forth in subparagraph (2) above. (2)  Sunday Sales Permit for Package Stores. Class A, Class B, and Class C licensees who engage in Sunday sales in accordance with section 6-3-5(i) shall, before engaging in such sales, file an application for a Sunday sales permit for package store with the Director of Finance. Any establishment not complying with the requirements of this section is hereby specifically prohibited from receiving a Sunday sales permit and prohibited from dispensing alcoholic beverages on Sunday. (m)  Reserved. (Ord. of 9-4-2007, § 1; Ord. of 11-6-2007, § 2; Ord. of 5-1-2012, § 3; Ord. of 12-3-2013, § 1; Ord. of 6-7-2016(2), § 2 ; Ord. of 11-1-2016(2), § 3 ; Ord. of 12-4-2018(4), § 1 ) 
Sec. 6-3-4. - Same—When issuance prohibited.     Issuance of licenses required under section 6-3-2 is limited as set forth below. (a)  Restrictions. No license defined herein shall be issued to a person: (1)  Who is not a legal resident of the United States; (2)  Who is not at least 21 years of age prior to the date of application; (3)  Who owes any debt or obligation to the Unified Government of Athens-Clarke County, including but not limited to excise taxes, occupational taxes, property taxes, or utility fees; or (4)  Who indicates on the license application an intention to provide live nude performances on the premises or any other form of adult entertainment on the premises that requires an adult entertainment license pursuant to Chapter 6-11. (b)  Convictions; pending violations. No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be issued to any person: (1)  Who has been convicted within fifteen years immediately prior to the filing of the alcoholic beverage application with the Director of Finance of any felony or for whom outstanding indictments, accusations or criminal charges exist charging such individual with any of such offenses and for which no final disposition has occurred. If at the time of application, the applicant is charged with any of the offenses prescribed in this subsection, consideration of the application shall be suspended until entry of a plea or verdict or dismissal; (2)  Who has been convicted within five years immediately prior to the filing of the alcoholic beverage application with the Director of Finance of the violation (i) of any state, federal or local ordinance pertaining to the manufacture, possession, transportation or sale of malt beverages, wine or intoxicating liquors, or the taxability thereof; (ii) of a crime involving moral turpitude; or (iii) of a crime involving soliciting for prostitution, pandering, gambling, letting premises for prostitution, keeping a disorderly place, the traffic offense of hit and run or leaving the scene of an accident, or any misdemeanor serious traffic offense as defined in O.C.G.A. § 40-6-390 et seq., but excluding any first or second conviction for driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs, or for whom outstanding indictments, accusations or criminal charges exist charging such individual with any of such offenses and for which no final disposition has occurred. If at the time of application, the applicant is charged with any of the offenses prescribed in this subsection, consideration of the application shall be suspended until entry of a plea or verdict or dismissal; (3)  Who has been convicted of three violations of the ordinances of Athens-Clarke County governing alcoholic beverages licensed hereunder within the last five years immediately prior to the filing of the licensee's application with the Director of Finance, except as specifically provided in paragraph (c) below, concerning revocation of alcohol license, or paragraph (d) below, concerning selling alcohol to underage persons. If at the time of application, the applicant is charged with any of the offenses prescribed in this subsection, consideration of the application shall be suspended until entry of a plea or verdict or dismissal; or (c)  For 12 consecutive months immediately following the date of the revocation, no person whose license was revoked shall be eligible for renewal of or issuance of a license at the same location for which the previously revoked license was issued. Furthermore, during said 12-month period, the person whose license was revoked shall not be eligible to apply for any additional licenses above the number of licenses held immediately prior to said revocation. In determining the number of licenses that may be renewed or issued to said person after revocation, the Finance Director shall not include the revoked license. (d)  Except as provided in paragraph (e) below, for 24 consecutive months immediately following the date of a citation for any violation for selling alcohol to underage persons within a licensed premise, no application for change in ownership of the license at the same location where the violation occurred shall be allowed unless there is a 100 percent change in ownership and control between the old licensee and the new applicant. For purposes of this subparagraph, 100 percent change in ownership and control shall mean a 100 percent change in all individuals, partners, officers, directors, shareholders, members, managers and/or all persons having any whole, partial, beneficial or other interest in the business where the alcoholic beverage license is located. 100 percent change in ownership and control shall not include a transfer in ownership and control to any person in the immediate family of any individuals, partners, officers, directors, shareholders, members, managers and/or any persons having any interest in the business where the alcoholic beverage license is located. The application for the alcoholic beverage license must be applied for and approved prior to the sale of the business. An alcoholic beverage license may not be issued until the new owner has established that the sale of the business is bona fide. The applicant for the new license must provide documentation concerning the sale, including but not limited to documentation concerning ownership of and all business interests in the old license in addition to documentation concerning the ownership of and all business interests in the new license, as requested by the Director of Finance. (e)  For 24 consecutive months immediately following the date of a citation for any violation for selling alcohol to underage persons within a licensed premise, an application for less than 100 percent change in ownership and control between the old licensee and the new application shall be allowed only if the following requirements are met: (1)  The applicant for less than 100 percent change in ownership of the license at the same location where the violation occurred must agree as part of the application that any past violations for selling alcohol to underage persons within the licensed premise shall become part of the record of violations for the new business as if the new owners had been cited and found in violation. Such record of violations shall be taken into consideration in any future hearings against the new licensee. (2)  Such applications for less than 100 percent change in ownership shall be made prior to the sale of the business but after any pending citations for violations for selling alcohol to underage persons within the licensed premise are adjudicated. (f)  No person shall hold a license in any retail category hereunder and a license under any wholesale category at the same time. (Ord. of 9-4-2007, § 1) 
Sec. 6-3-5. - General regulations pertaining to all licenses. (a)  License not transferable to another location. Each license is issued for a specific location only and may not be transferred to another location. A new application is required for each licensed premise. No license, except for a manufacturer license, may be issued to different licensees for the same location. (b)  Transfer of license to another person. No alcoholic beverage license shall be transferred from one person to another during the year in which the license was obtained, except in the case of the death of a person holding a license, in which event his personal representative may continue to operate under the license for six months from the date of his qualification. (c)  Location. None of the above licenses shall be issued except in the following zones as defined in Title 9 (Zoning) of the Code of Athens-Clarke County: (1)  C-G, Commercial General; (2)  C-D, Commercial Downtown; (3)  C-N, Commercial Neighborhood; (4)  C-O, Commercial Office; (5)  C-R, Commercial Rural; (6)  E-I, Employment Industrial; (7)  E-O, Employment Office; (8)  I, Industrial; (9)  G, Government District; (10)  PD, Planned Development (if applied to C-G, C-D, C-N, C-O, C-R, E-I, E-O, or I designations); (11)  RM (Mixed Density Residential) zones with special use approval for restaurants for Class D, E, or F licenses for the restaurants only.     Class A licenses shall not be issued for a location in which the nearest wall of the building proposed as the licensed premises is closer than 100 feet, straight line measurement, to the property line of a private dwelling located within a single-family residentially zoned district or within 200 yards of any church building or within 200 yards of any school building or educational building, school grounds or college campus. Excluded hereunder is a private dwelling that has been unoccupied for at least 12 months immediately prior to the application being filed.     No new retail package liquor licensed place of business engaged in the retail package sales of distilled spirits shall be located within 500 yards of any other business licensed to sell package liquor at retail, as measured by the most direct route of travel on the ground; provided, however, that this limitation shall not apply to any hotel licensed under this chapter. This restriction shall not apply at any location for which a license has been issued prior to July 1, 1997, or to the renewal of such license. Nor shall the restriction of this subsection apply to any location for which a new license is applied for if the sale of distilled spirits was lawful at such location at any time during the 12 months immediately preceding such application.     Class B and C licenses shall not be issued for a location in which the nearest wall of the building proposed as the licensed premises is closer than 100 yards of any school building, school grounds or college campus. Provided, however, that the foregoing prohibition with respect to a college campus shall not apply to grocery stores.     Class D, Class E, and Class F alcoholic beverage licenses shall not be issued for a location in which the nearest wall of the building proposed as the licensed premises is closer than 100 yards in a straight line measurement to the nearest wall of a school building or educational building on a college campus or church or 100 feet of the property line of a private dwelling located within a single-family residentially zoned district which is in existence at the time of the issuance of the original license. Such distance requirements for Class D, Class E, and Class F licenses shall be in effect for all districts in which such licenses are authorized, with the exception of the Commercial Downtown (CD) and the campus of the Georgia Center for Continuing Education and with the exception of any restaurant as defined in this Chapter. In addition, the requirements for minimum distances from a church or private dwelling located within a single-family residentially zoned district provided for in this section shall not apply to Class D, E, and F licenses for retail liquor, wine or beer by the drink in movie theaters as defined in this Chapter if the movie theater for which the license is applied is located within a shopping center, as defined in the local zoning ordinances, except that for the purposes of this section such shopping center must have at least 19,500 square feet of gross floor area of commercial space on any one floor, measured upon the basis of the entire area covered by the same roof or sharing common walls.     No licenses for consumption on the premises of alcoholic beverages shall be issued under this chapter for any location within 100 yards of any housing authority property. This prohibition shall not apply at any location for which a license has been issued prior to July 1, 2000, nor to the renewal of such license. Nor shall this prohibition apply at any location for which a new license is applied for if the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises was lawful at such location at any time during the 12 months immediately preceding such application.     At the time of application, a plat from a registered surveyor shall be attached to the application which shall certify that all applicable state and local distance requirements for the proposed location have been met. A current certified plat from a registered surveyor is required showing actual addresses measured in a straight line measurement to the nearest wall of a school building, educational building, church, alcoholic treatment center, and property line of school grounds, college campus, housing authority property or private dwelling located within a single-family residentially zoned district.     All licenses which are in existence and valid as of the date of passage of this chapter may continue to be renewed hereunder even though they may be in violation of this subsection; furthermore, that location may continue to be licensed hereunder so long as the premises are continuously used for the sale of alcoholic beverages hereunder, even though not under the same owner. At such time as the license for this premises is revoked, not renewed or is allowed to lapse, or a new license is not applied for and granted for the location within 60 days of the expiration or termination of the previous license, this subsection and the prohibitions herein shall apply to any new application for that location.     After issuance of a license, no change in the location of the building or walls can be made that affects distance requirements so that the distance requirement would not be satisfied as a result of the change. The distance requirements must be met at all times during the term of the license. (d)  Interests of public employees; prohibited. No license shall be granted to any Athens-Clarke County, state or federal employee whose duties include the regulation or policing of alcoholic beverages or licenses or any tax-collecting activity. (e)  Inspection of books and accounts. Upon demand by the Director of Finance, or his designated representative, any person holding a license from the Unified Government of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia, shall open to the Director of Finance, or his designated representative, his place or places of business for the purpose of enabling the director or his representative to ascertain and gain such information as may be necessary for determination of the proper classification of such license holder for license fee purposes and determination of the correct amount of license fee to which such person is subject. Upon demand by the Director of Finance, or his designated representative, any person holding a license from Athens-Clarke County shall furnish the director or his representative, during normal business hours at such person's place of business, all books of account, invoices, papers, reports and memoranda containing entries showing amount of purchases, sale receipts, inventory and other information, ascertained and from which the correct amount of the fee to which he is subject may be determined, including exhibition of bank deposit books, bank statements, and copies of sales tax reports, and any other such documents as Athens-Clarke County may deem necessary. Any person holding a license from Athens-Clarke County shall secure, preserve, maintain and keep for a period of three years the records and documents enumerated and referred to in this section. (f)  Failure to open. All holders of licenses issued hereunder must within 45 days after the issuance of such license open for business the establishment referred to in the license. Failure to open the licensed establishment as referred to within such period shall serve as a forfeiture and cancellation of the unused license and no refund of the license fee shall be made to the license holder. (g)  False representation of age. It shall be unlawful for any person to falsely misrepresent his age in any manner whatsoever for the purposes of purchasing or otherwise acquiring any beverage licensed hereunder. (h)  Adding to, refilling bottles, misrepresentations as to quantity, etc. It shall be unlawful for a licensee hereunder, his employees, subcontractors or his agents, to add to the contents of a bottle or to refill an empty bottle or in any manner to misrepresent the quantity, quality or brand name of any beverage licensed hereunder. (i)  Hours of operation. The following hours of operation shall apply to the sale of alcoholic beverages licensed hereunder: (1)  Class A, retail liquor package store—8:00 a.m. to 11:30 p.m., Monday through Saturday. Seasonal time changes shall be 2:00 a.m. current time; (2)  Class B and C, retail package beer and/or wine—7:00 a.m. to 11:30 p.m., Monday through Saturday. Seasonal time changes shall be 2:00 a.m. current time; (3)  Class D, retail liquor by the drink—Monday through Friday beginning at 7:00 a.m. until 2:00 a.m. the next day; Saturday morning from 7:00 a.m. until 1:55 a.m. on Sunday mornings. Seasonal time changes shall be 2:00 a.m. current time; (4)  Class E and F, retail beer and/or wine by the drink- Monday through Friday, beginning at 7:00 a.m. until 2:00 a.m. the next day; Saturday morning from 7:00 a.m. until 1:55 a.m. on Sunday mornings. Seasonal time changes shall be 2:00 a.m. current time; (5)  Class D, E, and F licenses for alcoholic beverages that also have a valid Sunday sales permit when New Year's Eve is on Sunday shall be authorized to sell, offer for sale, serve and/or permit the consumption of alcoholic beverages upon the licensed premises between the hours of 12:00 a.m. (midnight) and 2:30 a.m. on New Year's Day; (6)  Public entertainment facilities - Hours of operation. It shall be unlawful to keep any public entertainment facility which permits the consumption of alcoholic beverages on its premises open for business or to permit the same to be used or patronized at any time except during the hours provided in subsections (i)(3) and (4) above; (7)  Notwithstanding subparagraphs (3), (4) and (6) above, the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be lawful on Sundays from 11:00 a.m. until 12:00 midnight in any licensed restaurant as defined in this Chapter and in any licensed establishment which derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross income from the rental of rooms for overnight lodging. (8)  Notwithstanding subparagraphs (1) and (2) above, the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be lawful on Sundays between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m. in any licensed retail package store that holds a Sunday sales permit for package store. (9)  Notwithstanding subparagraphs (3), (4) and (6) above, the sale of alcoholic beverages by Class D, E, or F licensees shall be lawful from 12:30 p.m. until 12:00 midnight on one Sunday during each calendar year that shall be designated by the Commission by resolution. On such designated Sunday, Class D, E, and F licenses for alcoholic beverages shall be authorized to sell, offer for sale, serve and/or permit the consumption of alcoholic beverages upon the licensed premises between the hours of 12:00 a.m. (midnight) and 2:30 a.m. on the following Monday. (j)  Time limit for clearing patrons from premises: (1)  All licensed premises for the sale of retail beer and/or wine by the drink (Class E and F) or retail liquor by the drink (Class D), excluding bona fide full-service restaurants as defined below which have obtained an after-hours service permit from the Finance Director, shall be closed to the public, and the premises shall be cleared of all persons except employees of the licensed premises engaged in their employment duties within 45 minutes after the time set by subsection (i) of this section for discontinuance of the sale of alcoholic beverages on the premises. Thereafter all licensees shall remove or cause to be removed all alcoholic beverages from the area of the premises utilized by customers, patrons, and invitees; all alcoholic beverages shall be stored in original containers or storage containers on a shelf or cabinet; no alcoholic beverages shall be furnished to, consumed by, or possessed by any person within the premises; and the premises shall remain closed for business until the beginning hours of operation (7:00 a.m.) provided in subsection (i) of this section. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision of this paragraph. (2)  For the purposes of this subsection (j), "bona fide full service restaurant" means an established place of business: a.  Which is licensed to sell alcoholic beverages, distilled spirits, malt beverages, or wines for consumption on the premises; b.  Where meals with substantial entrees selected by the patron from a full menu are served; c.  Which has adequate facilities and sufficient employees for cooking or preparing and serving such meals for consumption at tables in dining rooms on the premises; d.  All permits shall be issued on a calendar basis and shall come up for renewal each year after issuance. Each applicant shall make a written application for renewal following issuance on a form approved by the Director of Finance. The $60.00 fee shall be tendered with the application for renewal. If a permit renewal application is not filed by December 31, the permit shall be declared abandoned, and any permit thereafter shall require a new application; e.  Which does not provide live music or other types of entertainment or permit dancing by the patrons; f.  All of the above-listed requirements for a bona fide full-service restaurant must be sworn to by affidavit executed by the owner, operating partner, if a partnership, or president of the corporation, if a corporation. The application for an after-hours service permit must be accompanied by said affidavit. (3)  After-hours service permit required. Any establishment that qualifies as a bona fide full service restaurant and intends to operate after the hours for clearing patrons from the premises set forth above must obtain an after-hours service permit from the Director of Finance. a.  The applicant for a permit under this subsection shall be the alcoholic beverage licensee and shall make a written application under oath on the form as provided by the Director of Finance or his designated representative. b.  Upon application for a permit, the applicant shall pay an investigation fee of $60.00. c.  In addition, upon application, the applicant shall provide a copy of a current state food service establishment permit issued pursuant to the requirements of O.C.G.A. section 26-2-371. No permit shall issue unless the applicant has a current, valid food service permit. d.  All permits shall be issued on a calendar basis and shall come up for renewal each year after issuance. Each applicant shall make a written application for renewal following issuance on a form approved by the Director of Finance. The $60.00 fee shall be tendered with the application for renewal. If a permit renewal application is not filed by December 31, the permit shall be declared abandoned, and any permit thereafter shall require a new application. e.  Any person making a false statement in any application for a permit or a renewal shall be guilty of an offense and punished as provided by state law relating to false swearing, and further a permit previously granted or renewed may be revoked for the violation. (4)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee to operate after the hours for clearing patrons set forth above without a valid after-hours service permit. A conviction for a violation thereof shall be punished as provided by the Code of Athens-Clarke County section 1-1-5, and the judge of the municipal court may revoke, suspend, or probate any permit for such violation. The administrative hearing officer may revoke, suspend, or probate any permit for such violation as provided by the Code of Athens-Clarke County section 1-5-1. (k)  Sales prohibited, limited on certain days. All alcoholic beverages licensed hereunder shall not be sold on the following days: Christmas day or Sundays, except as provided for in subsection (i)(7) above. The sale of alcoholic beverages on any election day shall be permitted in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 3-3-20. (l)  Sales, etc., to persons under legal age. It shall be unlawful to provide alcoholic beverages to any persons under the age permitted by O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23. (m)  Display of license. Every licensee, its agents or employees, shall post the most current alcoholic beverage license issued for the licensed premises in public view at eye level (an approximate height of five feet from the floor) within 15 feet of the entrance to the licensed premises. (n)  Bringing beverages purchased elsewhere onto premises. No licensee for the sale of malt beverages, wine or distilled spirits shall authorize or permit any patron or customer to bring onto the premises malt beverages, wine or distilled spirits purchased elsewhere. Further, no licensee for the sale of malt beverages, wine or distilled spirits shall bring onto the premises any malt beverages, wine or distilled spirits purchased from a retailer for the purpose of resale. (o)  Brown bagging, brown bag establishments prohibited. Except as specifically provided for herein at bona fide brown bag restaurants, brown bagging and brown bag establishments as defined in this chapter are prohibited within Athens-Clarke County.     For the purposes of this paragraph, a "bona fide brown bag restaurant" means an established place of business: (1)  Which is not licensed to sell or serve alcoholic beverages on the premises but allows patrons to bring in and consume on the premises the patrons' own alcoholic beverages; (2)  Where meals with substantial entrees selected by the patron from a full menu are served; (3)  Which has adequate facilities and sufficient employees for cooking or preparing and serving such meals for consumption at tables in dining rooms on the premises; (4)  Which is prepared to and offers to serve meals every hour the establishment is open; (5)  Which does not charge patrons for admission to the establishment; and (6)  Which is in a zoning district that allows a restaurant as a legal use. (p)  On-premises entertainment. (1)  Reserved. (2)  It shall be unlawful to permit on the premises so licensed any contest or form of entertainment which consists of the wetting or soaking of the upper torso of a female or the pelvic areas of a male or female. (3)  Reserved. (4)  Upon the violation hereof by any such licensee, its license may, after a hearing before the judge of municipal court, be revoked, suspended or put on probation under conditions. (q)  Sales areas, activities. It shall be unlawful for any licensee to make delivery of any alcoholic beverages licensed to be sold except within the premises or area licensed for sale thereof. No package store licensee shall permit the consumption of alcohol sold by him by the package on the lot or premises where the licensed establishment is located, nor shall any individual consume the contents of such packages on the lots or premises where the licensed establishment is holding a Class A, B, or C license. Provided, however, that such licensee may sell package malt beverages or wines by means of a drive-in window, provided any such drive-in window shall be well lighted and clearly visible from the street or sidewalk and shall not be located at the rear of any licensed premises. (r)  Possession of unlicensed beverages. All licensees hereunder are forbidden to possess, keep, maintain or otherwise store or keep any alcoholic beverages for which the licensee does not hold a license on the premises so licensed. (s)  Employee consumption during work hours. It shall be unlawful for any employee of any licensee to consume alcoholic beverages on the premises of the licensee during such employee's working hours. (t)  Employees prohibited from mingling with customers. (1)  It shall be unlawful for any employee of a licensee under this chapter to dance or sit with customers in the premises or for any customer to be permitted to purchase food or drink for such employees during such employees' working hours. (2)  Alcoholic beverages shall only be served by the licensee or the licensee's employees or agents. (u)  Suspension of sales during civil emergency. The Athens-Clarke County Manager may, upon determining that there is an immediate danger of civil disorder or natural disaster or any other immediate threat to the public peace and order, by executive order, suspend the sales of all beverages licensed under this chapter until such danger or threat has passed and for a reasonable period of time thereafter. (Ord. of 9-4-2007, § 1; Ord. of 11-6-2007, § 3; Ord. of 8-5-2008, § 2; Ord. of 6-2-2009, § 2; Ord. of 1-5-2010, § 3; Ord. of 11-1-2011, § 1; Ord. of 2-7-2012, § 1; Ord. of 5-1-2012, § 2; Ord. of 5-1-2012, § 4; Ord. of 6-4-2013, § 2; Ord. of 6-7-2016(2), § 3 ; Ord. of 11-1-2016(2), § 4 ; Ord. of 1-3-2017(2), § 1 ; Ord. of 8-1-2017(1), §§ 7—11 ; Ord. of 10-3-2017(1), §§ 1, 2 ; Ord. of 11-20-2018(1), § 1 ) 
Sec. 6-3-6. - Regulations pertaining to certain classes of licenses only. (a)  Package stores. (1)  All package stores holding a Class A license shall be within a building or room totally physically separate from any other business activities. The only ingress and egress for customers and their purchases shall be through a door opening to the outside or to an area for public pedestrian traffic and not from or into any other business establishment. This outside door shall open facing a public street or public pedestrian area. (2)  Any opening of any type shall be prohibited between any area licensed as Class A and any other business area. The only means of ingress and egress for both customer and employee shall be through a door open to the outside and facing a public street or public pedestrian area. (3)  In a Class A establishment, the total commercial transactions shall take place within the area licensed for retail alcoholic package sales. (4)  Retail beer and wine by the package (Class B and C) shall be permitted in food stores, grocery stores, supermarkets, convenience food stores and discount/general merchandise stores as an item incidental to the sale of food stuffs and groceries. (5)  Except as specifically provided for in paragraphs (c) and (f) below concerning wine-tastings and growler-tastings, the original retail containers of any alcoholic beverage sold by a package store retail licensee hereunder shall not be opened on the lot or premises of the location licensed for the sale thereof. (6)  Visibility of premises from public street. No licensee for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the package shall operate under the license, unless the front entrance to the licensed premises is clearly visible from the public street; provided, however, that this restriction shall not apply where the licensee is a motel, hotel, private club or is located in shopping center or multiple-story business building. (7)  Visibility into interior, lighting of retail package store. No screens, blinds, curtains, partitions, articles or things which shall prevent a clear view into the interior shall be permitted in the window or from the doors of any retail store for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the package; and no booth, screen, partition or other obstruction shall be permitted within the interior of any such store. Each store shall be so lighted that the interior of the store is visible day and night. (b)  By the drink sales for consumption on the premises. (1)  Extensions of sales areas; curb sales. Any licensee for the sale of malt beverages and/or wine for the consumption on the premises or distilled spirits by the drink shall be authorized to extend the area utilized by such licensee to an adjoining building, addition, patio or deck area, or expansion on the same piece of property or an adjoining lot, so long as the business operation is under the same business management and licensed area under the same ownership; provided, however, the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be prohibited in parking lots or "at curb." (2)  Temporary alcoholic beverage permit for bona-fide non-profit, tax-exempt civic organization. Upon the filing of an application as required by the Director of Finance and payment of a fee of $50.00 by a bona-fide non-profit, tax-exempt civic organization, the Finance Department may issue a permit authorizing the organization to engage in any or all of the following activities: (i) conduct a wine-tasting event pursuant to subsection (c) of this section, (ii) sell alcoholic beverages for consumption only on the premises, or (iii) sell wine at retail for off-premises consumption for a period not to exceed three days, subject to provisions of this chapter regulating the time for selling such beverages. a.  No more than two permits may be issued to an organization in any one calendar year pursuant to this paragraph. b.  Permits issued pursuant to this paragraph shall be valid only for the place specified in the permit. No permit may be issued unless the sale of distilled spirits, wine, or malt beverages is lawful in the place for which the permit is issued. The zoning restrictions and distance restrictions contained in Section 6-3-5(c) shall apply. c.  Proof of such non-profit, tax-exempt status, such as a determination from the Internal Revenue Service that the organization is exempt under Section 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code must be provided. (c)  Wine tastings. Wine tastings are permitted as long as they comply with the following rules and regulations: (1)  The applicant for a wine tasting must hold a valid current wine license in the state. (2)  No wine tasting may be conducted on the premises of any place of business licensed to sell distilled spirits in the unbroken container at retail. (3)  No permit to conduct a wine tasting will be issued to conduct a wine tasting on the premises of a beer and wine store operating in connection with a licensed retail liquor store. (4)  Wine tastings may only be conducted in connection with an instructional or educational promotion. (5)  All wines used for tasting purposes must have been purchased from a licensed state wine wholesaler. (6)  Wine tastings must comply with all laws and regulations otherwise pertaining to the sale and distribution of alcoholic beverages in the state. (7)  All applicants and permit holders must comply with all state statutes and sections of this Code and other Athens-Clarke County ordinances concerning alcoholic beverages, including but not limited to those dealing with hours of operation, zoning, and distance requirements. (d)  Requirements for caterers. (1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, carry on or conduct the sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages off-premises and in connection with a catered event or function or to any location not licensed hereunder without first having obtained a caterer's license as provided herein. (2)  A licensed alcoholic beverage caterer may sell only that type of alcoholic beverage which is authorized by his alcoholic beverage license. (3)  Sunday sales. An alcoholic beverage caterer wishing to cater an event or function on Sunday must possess a valid Sunday sales license and comply with the requirements of state law with respect to the service of alcoholic beverages on Sunday. (e)  Rental of licensed premises for private functions. Class D, E, and F licensees are permitted to rent or otherwise make the licensed premises available for private functions which have been scheduled in advance; provided, however, that the licensee, its agents, managers, and employees, shall retain complete control over the licensed premises and over selling, serving, or furnishing alcoholic beverages during the private function to the same extent required as if the function were open to the public. Nothing in this paragraph shall be deemed to waive any provisions of this chapter or state law governing the sale of alcoholic beverages on the licensed premises. The licensed premises shall remain open to all agents of the state and Athens-Clarke County for law enforcement and inspection purposes during such private functions. No doors to the licensed premises shall be locked preventing egress or ingress during such functions. Nothing in this paragraph shall be deemed to waive the prohibition governing selling, furnishing, or delivering alcoholic beverages to underage persons by any other person within the licensed premises. A Class D, E, or F licensee not qualified as a restaurant as defined in this Chapter shall, prior to making the licensed premises or a portion thereof available for a private event, enter into a written agreement with the sponsor of the private event that includes, without limitation, the name of the sponsor, the name and telephone number of at least one individual representative of the sponsor, a description of the specific area or areas within the licensed premises where the private event will be held, the date of the event, and the duration of the event on such date, specifying a beginning time and an ending time. All such written agreements shall be kept on the licensed premises for a period of 24 months from the date of each agreement and shall be available for inspection and copying by the chief of police or designee or by the Athens-Clarke County attorney or designee. A Class D, E, or F licensee not qualified as a restaurant that makes the licensed premises or a portion thereof available for a private event shall, during all times when entry to the public shall be prohibited or limited because of a private event, post a sign hereinafter described in such places and in such a manner that all text on the sign is clearly visible and legible to any person seeking admittance to the licensed premises. Such sign shall include the following information: (i) that a private event is occurring; (ii) the specific area or areas within the licensed premises where the private event is being held; (iii) the duration of the event, specifying a beginning time and an ending time; and (iv) the following statement: "Requests for information regarding unlawful discrimination by alcoholic beverages licensees, together with any allegations of unlawful discrimination by such licensees or their agents, should be directed to the Athens-Clarke County Attorney's Office (attorneysoffice@athensclarkecounty.com) (706) 613-3035". Such sign shall be available for inspection by patrons, persons who have been denied admittance, the chief of police or designee or the Athens-Clarke County attorney or designee. No Class D, E, or F licensee not qualified as a restaurant shall deny admittance to a licensed premises during the licensee's business hours on the ground that the licensed premises or a portion thereof is closed for a private event unless such licensee has first complied with the requirements of this paragraph. A violation of this paragraph shall be adjudicated in accordance with section 6-3-15 (b). (f)  Growler-tasting permit. (1)  The holder of a Class B license that sells growlers shall be eligible for a growler-tasting permit to provide samples of malt beverages offered for sale in growlers to customers under the conditions set forth in this paragraph. Sampling of all other malt beverages on the premises of a Class B licensee is prohibited. (2)  A licensee may provide growler samples on limited occasions when a customer requests a sample of a growler malt beverage offered for sale within the premises, or in conjunction with growler malt beverage education classes and sampling designed to promote growler malt beverage appreciation and education. (3)  For samples provided at customer request, samples shall not exceed two ounces per sample, and no customer shall consume more than eight ounces in any two-hour period. (4)  Not more than two times per week for a period of not to exceed two consecutive hours, the holder of a growler-tasting permit may conduct educational classes and sampling for class participants. For educational classes and sampling, samples shall not exceed two ounces per sample. (5)  No open growler samples or containers shall be removed from the licensed premises. (6)  Only the licensee or an employee shall open, handle, seal and serve growler malt beverages or samples thereof. (7)  Growler malt beverage sampling and tasting is permitted only within the enclosed interior portion of the premises. (8)  No permit to conduct a growler-tasting will be issued to conduct a growler-tasting on the premises of a beer and wine store operating in connection with a licensed retail liquor store. (9)  All growlers used for tasting purposes must have been purchased from a licensed state beer wholesaler. (10)  All applicants and permit holders must comply with all state statutes and sections of this Code and other Athens-Clarke County ordinances concerning alcoholic beverages, including but not limited to those dealing with hours of operation, zoning, and distance requirements. (g)  Growler sales by brew pubs . The retail sale of growlers is authorized for any brew pub as defined by section 6-1-1 of this chapter holding a Class B license to sell malt beverages by the package. Such sales by a Class B licensee shall not be counted in determining a brew pub's total annual gross food and beverage sales. The filling of growlers with malt beverage drawn from a tap on a cask, barrel, tank, or keg on the premises of any such brew pub shall not constitute the breaking of a package as defined by O.C.G.A. § 3-3-26. Growlers offered for retail sale in a brew pub may only be filled, handled, sealed, or sold by the licensee or an authorized employee thereof. Each growler must be securely sealed and removed from the licensed premises in its original sealed condition. All licensees and permit holders operating pursuant to this section must comply with all other state statues and sections of this Code and other Athens-Clarke County ordinances concerning alcoholic beverages, including but not limited to those dealing with hours of operation, Sunday sales, zoning and distance requirements. (h)  Dress codes. A Class D, E, or F licensee not qualified as a restaurant as defined in this Chapter desiring to utilize a dress code in determining who may be admitted to the premises must apply such dress code uniformly to all persons who request admittance to the establishment. Such a dress code must remain consistent on any given date or for any special event and shall not be used to discriminate among persons requesting admittance. Any dress code must be stated on a sign posted in such places and in such a manner that all text on the sign is clearly visible and legible to any person seeking admittance to the licensed premises. The sign shall also include the following statement: "Requests for information regarding unlawful discrimination by alcoholic beverages licensees, together with any allegations of unlawful discrimination by such licensees or their agents should be directed to the Athens-Clarke County Attorney's Office (attorneysoffice@athensclarkecounty.com) (706) 613-3035". The written dress code in effect on any given day shall be available for inspection by patrons, persons who have been denied admittance, the chief of police or designee or the Athens-Clarke County attorney or designee. A licensee utilizing a dress code shall keep on the licensed premises for a period of 24 months from the date that such dress code was used a copy of each written dress code and the dates that such dress code was used by the licensee. Such copies shall be available for inspection and copying by the chief of police or designee or by the Athens-Clarke County attorney or designee. A violation of this paragraph shall be adjudicated in accordance with section 6-3-15(b). (i)  Nondiscrimination . It shall be unlawful for any Class D, E, or F licensee that is not qualified as a restaurant as defined in this Chapter, or any officer, employee or agent thereof, to discriminate against any person in the admission to the licensed premises or in the sale, service or delivery of products within such licensed premises on the basis of such person's race, color, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, religion, national origin, citizenship, age, disability or pregnancy. This paragraph, however, shall not apply to private clubs that admit only members or guests of members. For purposes of this section, any private club claiming exemption under this paragraph must be incorporated as a nonprofit corporation under the laws of the state or officially qualified as a charitable or veterans' organization by the United States Internal Revenue Service. Nothing in this paragraph shall prohibit the imposition of age limits up to age 21. A violation of this paragraph shall be adjudicated in accordance with section 6-3-15 (b). An individual claiming to be aggrieved by an alleged violation of this paragraph or of paragraphs (e) or (h) of this code section by a Class D, E, or F licensee that is not qualified as a restaurant as defined in the Chapter may file a sworn written complaint with the Athens-Clarke County Attorney on a form prescribed by the Attorney, who shall conduct a preliminary investigation of such complaint. If the Attorney finds reasonable grounds that such unlawful conduct occurred, then the Attorney shall institute an administrative action pursuant to Section 1-5-1 of the Code of Athens-Clarke County. The Attorney is authorized to utilize alternative enforcement measures, including without limitation, informal mediation and entry of negotiated consent orders. If the Attorney does not find reasonable grounds that such unlawful conduct occurred, the Attorney shall notify the claimant in writing, and the claimant shall have the right to institute an administrative proceeding with respect to such determination pursuant to Section 1-5-1 of the Code of Athens-Clarke County. (Ord. of 9-4-2007, § 1; Ord. of 9-6-2011, § 1; Ord. of 12-2-2014, §§ 4, 5 ; Ord. of 10-6-2015(1), §§ 2, 3 ; Ord. of 7-5-2016, § 2 ; Ord. of 11-1-2016(1), §§ 1, 2 ) 
Sec. 6-3-7. - Home-brew special events. (a)  Prohibition. It shall be unlawful to conduct a home-brew special event except in compliance with this Chapter. (b)  Permits. (1)  No person shall sponsor or conduct a home-brew special event unless a permit therefor is first obtained from the Manager or his or her designated representative. (2)  Any person seeking a home-brew special event permit hereunder shall file with the Central Services Department a written permit application at least ten business days in advance of the date proposed for such event. (3)  The permit application shall be on a form provided to the applicant by the Central Services Department and shall contain the name of the sponsor and/or organizer, the date, beginning and ending times and location of the event and the location of the event premises, approximate number of persons who will attend, a general description of the event, a description of the prizes or awards to be offered, and any other information that is reasonably necessary to enable the Manager to approve or deny the application in accordance with this Chapter. (4)  The Manager shall consider the following factors in determining whether or not to issue a permit: (1) whether or not the event as proposed complies with applicable ordinances, laws and regulations, and (2) whether or not the event as proposed poses a potential significant adverse impact on the health, safety and welfare of the event participants or on the public. The Manager may impose conditions upon the grant of a permit to minimize any significant impacts on health, safety and welfare that may be caused by an approved event, and such conditions shall be noted on the permit. The issuance of a home-brew special event permit shall be separate from and in addition to any special event permit that may be required pursuant to Chapter 6-5 of the Code of Athens-Clarke County. In reviewing an application, the Manager may consider past practices of the sponsors or organizers of the event under consideration, including whether or not representations in the application for a prior event were truthful or complete, whether or not the prior event was conducted in accordance with the application and permit, and whether or not the conduct of the prior event had a significant adverse impact on the health, safety and welfare of the event participants or on the public. (5)  The Manager shall grant or deny the permit at least five days prior to the scheduled date of the event, but in no instance more than 30 business days after the filing of a complete permit application. (6)  The permit shall be posted in the event premises at all times during the event. (7)  The fee for processing the application for a permit shall be $50.00 and shall be non-refundable. An applicant may receive no more than six permits per calendar year and shall submit a separate application for each event. No additional permit fees will be charged to an applicant for subsequent applications submitted during a calendar year. (c)  Regulations. (1)  Consumption of alcoholic beverages within the premises of a permitted home-brew special event shall be limited solely to home-brew beverages, and such home-brew beverages shall be consumed only by the participants in and judges of the home-brew special events and only within the event premises. (2)  Home-brew special event permits shall not be issued for any location licensed under this Chapter and shall only be issued to locations in the following zones as defined in Title 9 (Zoning) of the Code of Athens-Clarke County: (i)  C-G, Commercial General; (ii)  C-D, Commercial Downtown; (iii)  C-N, Commercial Neighborhood; (iv)  C-O, Commercial Office; (v)  C-R, Commercial Rural; (vi)  E-I, Employment Industrial; (vii)  E-O, Employment Office; (viii)  I, Industrial; (ix)  G, Government District; (3)  A permitted event shall begin no earlier than 8:00 a.m. Monday through Saturday and noon on Sunday and shall conclude no later than 11:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday and 12:00 midnight on Friday and Saturday. (4)  Home-brew beverages shall not be sold, offered for sale, or made available for consumption by the general public. (5)  Home-brew beverages may only be transported to home-brew special events in accordance with state law. (6)  A home-brew special event permittee shall be subject to all laws, rules and regulations of Athens-Clarke County and the state, including without limitation the provisions of section 6-3-15 of this Chapter. ( Ord. of 11-4-2014, § 2 ) 
Sec. 6-3-8. - Employment Restrictions. (a)  Reserved. (b)  Employment Restrictions. No licensee shall allow any employee, agent, or subcontractor who within the previous five years has two or more convictions of violations of Section 6-3-5(l), concerning providing alcohol to underage persons, to dispense, sell, serve, take orders for, or handle alcoholic beverages. No licensee shall allow any employee, agent, or subcontractor who within the previous five years has one or more convictions of violations of section 6-3-5(l) to serve as doorpersons. The prohibitions of this paragraph shall apply only to those convictions that have occurred after January 1, 2008. The term "conviction" as used in this paragraph shall include a finding or verdict of guilt, plea of guilty, or a plea of nolo contendere, regardless of whether the adjudication of guilt or sentence is withheld or not entered thereon. The records of such convictions will be made available for employers by Athens-Clarke County. The effective date of this paragraph shall be January 1, 2008. (Ord. of 9-4-2007, § 1; Ord. of 11-3-2010, § 1) Editor's note— Ord. of Nov. 3, 2010, § 1, changed the title of § 6-3-8 from Mandated Employee Training and Employment Restrictions to Employment Restrictions. 
Sec. 6-3-9. - Reserved. 
Sec. 6-3-10. - Dive defined; prohibited; penalty for violation. (a)  Term defined. As used in this section, the term "dive" shall mean any place or establishment where illegal drugs are found, possessed, kept or sold; or where any person possesses or consumes any illegal or unlicensed alcoholic beverage or possesses or uses any illegal drug; or where any person commits any illegal sexual act; or where any person engages in gambling activities. (b)  Prohibition. It shall be unlawful for any person or organization or group of persons to have, operate or maintain any place or establishment defined as a dive. (c)  Penalty for violation. There shall be a fine of not less than $500.00 for the violation of any of the provisions of this section. (Ord. of 9-4-2007, § 1) 
Sec. 6-3-11. - Alcohol promotions; pricing of alcoholic beverages. (a)  This section shall be construed to cover, include and apply to every type of alcoholic beverage licensed to be sold in Athens-Clarke County, including beer, wine, malt beverages and spirituous liquors. (b)  Except at private functions not open to the public that meet the requirements of section 6-3-6(e), it shall be unlawful for any Class D, E, or F licensee or employee or agent of such licensee to engage in or allow any of the following practices in connection with the sale or other disposition of alcoholic beverages: (1)  Offer or deliver any free alcoholic beverage to the general public. This subsection shall not apply to wine tastings conducted in accordance with Section 6-3-6(c) where wine is offered in a quantity only to taste the product. (2)  Sell, offer to sell, or deliver to any person or group of persons any alcoholic beverage at a price less than $1.00. (3)  Sell, offer to sell, or deliver to any person or group of persons two or more alcoholic beverages during any set period of time at a fixed price. (4)  Sell, offer to sell, or deliver alcoholic beverages after 11:00 p.m. to any person or group of persons at reduced prices less than the normal retail price of the establishment for that alcoholic beverage charged the general public on that day. (5)  Increase the volume of alcohol contained in a drink without increasing proportionately the price regularly charged for such alcoholic beverage. (6)  Sell two or more alcoholic beverages for a price substantially the same as is charged for one such alcoholic beverage. (7)  Require or encourage the purchase of a second or subsequent alcoholic beverage at the same time another alcoholic beverage is purchased. (c)  There shall be no advertisement or promotion in any way, whether within or without the licensed premises, of any of the practices prohibited under this section. (d)  No provision of this section shall be construed to prohibit licensees from offering free food or entertainment at any time; provided all patrons or customers are allowed equal access to such free food or entertainment, or to prohibit licensees from including an alcoholic beverage as a part of a meal package, or to prohibit the sale or delivery of wine by bottle or carafe when sold with meals or to more than one person, or to prohibit any hotel or motel from offering room services to registered guests. (Ord. of 9-4-2007, § 1) 
Sec. 6-3-12. - Open containers. (a)  "Open container" defined. The term "open container", as used in this chapter, means any bottle, can, glass, cup or other vessel which contains an alcoholic beverage not in its original container. The term "open container" shall also mean the original container of an alcoholic beverage and which contains an alcoholic beverage on which the seal has been broken or which is otherwise ready for consumption. (b)  "Semipublic parking facility" defined. The term "semipublic parking facility" shall include any privately owned area wherein motor vehicles may be parked by the public in conjunction with any business, enterprise, commercial establishment, office building, church, school, or multiple-family residential building. (c)  Possession of open container prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his or her possession any alcoholic beverages in any open container while on the public streets, sidewalks, alleyways or rights-of-way, in any public or semipublic parking facility including areas of ingress and egress, or on any outdoor public patio within Athens Clarke-County, Georgia. (d)  Application to special events. This prohibition shall not apply to any exceptions or exemptions as may be provided for in chapter 5 of title 6 regulating special events within Athens-Clarke County. (e)  Application to property owned by Board of Regents. This prohibition shall not apply to any property owned by the Board of Regents of the State of Georgia. (f)  Application to sidewalk cafes. The prohibition in subsection (c) above shall not apply to patrons of a sidewalk cafe as defined in the sidewalk cafe ordinance, if such establishment is otherwise licensed to sell alcoholic beverages under the applicable laws and ordinances in Athens-Clarke County. (g)  Exemption not applicable to persons in automobiles. The exemption contained in subsection (d) above shall not apply to persons in automobiles. (h)  Possession in automobiles prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his or her possession any alcoholic beverages in any open container while an occupant of any motor vehicle, whether such vehicle is underway or not, while such vehicle is on the public streets, sidewalks or rights-of-way, or in any public or semipublic parking facility within Athens-Clarke County. An open container shall be considered to be in the possession of the operator of a vehicle if the container is not in the possession of a passenger or is not located in a locked glove compartment, locked trunk or other locked nonpassenger area of the vehicle. (i)  Application of subsection (h) to passengers of limousines; buses and campers. Subsection (h) shall not apply to: (1)  A passenger of a limousine or other similar vehicle in which the driver is operating the vehicle pursuant to a contract to provide transportation for hire and such driver holds a valid commercial driver's license pursuant to Georgia law or any other state; (2)  A passenger of a bus in which the driver holds a valid commercial driver's license pursuant to Georgia law or any other state; (3)  Or to the occupants in the living quarters of a camper or motor home. (j)  Posting of notice by establishments. All licensed alcohol establishments are hereby required to post in a conspicuous location inside such establishment a notice informing patrons that open containers are prohibited on the public streets, sidewalks or right-of-ways, or in any public or semipublic parking facility within Athens-Clarke County. (Ord. of 9-4-2007, § 1) 
Sec. 6-3-13. - Classic Center. (a)  Upon application, pursuant to procedures contained in this chapter, the concessionaire awarded the right to purvey food and beverages at the Classic Center shall be permitted to obtain Class D, E, and F licenses for the retail sale of beer and/or wine by the drink and retail liquor by the drink on the premises of the Classic Center which sales are hereby expressly allowed. Said concessionaire shall hold said licenses subject to all regulations set out in this chapter. In addition thereto, said concessionaire shall hold these licenses for these premises only so long as it shall remain the authorized concessionaire of the Classic Center Authority. (b)  An event hosted at the Classic Center shall be exempt from the provisions of Section 6-3-12(c) so that persons in possession of alcoholic beverages in open containers may cross Foundry Street and adjacent sidewalks and rights-of-way between event areas on Classic Center property on either side of Foundry Street, provided that: (1)  The event has been issued a special event permit pursuant to chapter 6-5 that refers to this exemption and includes as a special condition of such special event permit the numbered conditions in this paragraph; (2)  Foundry Street is closed to vehicular traffic during the event; (3)  The area of the exemption shall be no wider than 20 feet, collocated with an existing marked crosswalk, and kept free from obstructions; (4)  The area of the exemption shall be securely enclosed on both sides by a fence, barricade or other similar such structure approved by the chief of police, or his designee, so as to separate that area from the areas in which alcoholic beverages are not permitted; (5)  At least one security officer, approved by the chief of police, or his designee, is present to ensure that persons with open containers of alcoholic beverages cross Foundry Street only within the area of exemption and to assist with emergency vehicle access when needed. (Ord. of 9-4-2007, § 1; Ord. of 8-2-2016(1) ) 
Sec. 6-3-14. - Furnishing alcoholic beverages in violation of state law.     It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly, by himself or through another, to furnish or cause to be furnished, or permit any other person in his employ to furnish, distilled spirits, wines, malt beverages, or any other alcoholic beverages to any person under any circumstances that constitute a violation of state law. (Ord. of 9-4-2007, § 1) 
Sec. 6-3-15. - Compliance; violations; penalties. (a)  Violations; penalties . It shall be unlawful for any person to violate the provisions of this Chapter. Upon conviction for the violation thereof each person shall be subject to the punishment allowed under section 1-1-5, after hearing before the judge of municipal court. In addition, upon conviction for the violation thereof by a licensee, the licensee's agents or employees, any license may be revoked, suspended or put on probation under conditions. (b)  Civil fines; probation, suspension, revocation of license. (1)  It shall be a violation of this chapter for any licensee to permit any person to engage in any activity on the premises for which the license is issued or within the place of business, which is in violation of the laws or regulations of any federal or state law or of any local ordinance of Athens-Clarke County, which is related to unlawful discrimination in the provision of public accommodations, building codes, fire codes, smoking, excise tax, property tax, health, solid waste disposal, illegal gambling, alcohol, or other controlled substances. (2)  Any person holding any license issued pursuant to this chapter or any employee or agent of such person who violates any provision of this chapter, or directs, consents to, permits, or acquiesces in such violation either directly or indirectly shall, by such conduct, subject the license to suspension, revocation or probation upon conditions. In addition, a maximum civil fine of $1,000.00 may be imposed on the licensee for each violation. In considering the amount of the civil fine, if any, the administrative hearing officer shall consider the following factors: a.  The gravity of the violation; b.  Any previous violations within a two-year period; c.  The costs to Athens-Clarke County related to compliance or enforcement efforts undertaken by Athens-Clarke County in pursuing the case; d.  Actions of the licensee, its employees, subcontractors or agents in connection with the violation.     The imposition of a civil fine under the provisions of this section shall not prevent the suspension, revocation, or non-renewal of the license or the taking of punitive or remedial action for any other violation of the ordinances of Athens-Clarke County or for subsequent violations of this section. No license shall be renewed if any civil fines imposed pursuant to this section have not been paid by the licensee prior to renewal.     For purposes of administering and enforcing this chapter, any act committed by an employee, agent or representative of a licensee shall be deemed to be an act of such licensee. (Ord. of 9-4-2007, § 1; Ord. of 11-1-2016(1), § 3 ) 
CHAPTER 6-4. - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES—TAXATION[4] Article 1. Excise Taxes Sec. 6-4-1. Excise taxes—Malt beverages and wine. Sec. 6-4-2. Same—Distilled spirits. Article 2. Mixed Drink Excise Tax Sec. 6-4-3. Definitions. Sec. 6-4-4. Administration generally. Sec. 6-4-5. Imposed; rate. Sec. 6-4-6. Collection by due licensee. Sec. 6-4-7. Payment; returns, collection fees; penalties and interest for late payments. Sec. 6-4-8. Determination of deficiency amount. Sec. 6-4-9. Determination upon failure to file return. Sec. 6-4-10. Overpayment. Sec. 6-4-11. Purchasers or successors of business. Sec. 6-4-12. Legal action to collect. Sec. 6-4-13. Revocation of license. Sec. 6-4-14. Penalty. Footnotes: --- (4) --- Charter reference— Revenue and taxation, Art. VII. 
ARTICLE 1. - EXCISE TAXES 
Sec. 6-4-1. - Excise taxes—Malt beverages and wine. (a)  Generally. There is hereby imposed and levied a specific excise tax upon all wholesale dealers in malt beverages and/or wine selling, transferring or dispensing malt beverages and/or wine within Athens-Clarke County, as follows: (1)  Upon all malt beverages: $0.4166 per ounce of malt beverages (the proportional equivalent of $0.05 per 12 ounces of malt beverage); except in the case of all malt beverages sold in or from a barrel or bulk container, and being commonly known as tap or draft beer, which shall be subject to an excise tax of $6.00 for each barrel or bulk container having a capacity of 15½ gallons and at a like rate for fractional parts thereof, or $12.00 for each barrel or bulk container having a capacity of 31 gallons and at a like rate for fractional parts thereof. (2)  Upon all wine by the package: $0.22 per liter, and a proportionate tax at like rates on all fractional parts of a liter. (b)  Cumulative. The taxes shall be in addition to all other taxes and/or license fees heretofore or hereafter imposed and to be paid and collected as provided by this chapter. (c)  Payment. The excise tax provided for herein shall be imposed upon and shall be paid by the wholesale dealer (duly licensed by proper authorities under the laws of Georgia) in malt beverages and/or wine selling, transferring or dispensing such malt beverages and/or wine within Athens-Clarke County. The taxes shall be paid by such wholesale dealer on or before the tenth day of the month following the calendar month in which the beverages are sold, transferred or dispensed within Athens-Clarke County. Each wholesaler responsible for the payment of the excise tax shall file a report on or before the tenth day of each month with the director of finance showing for the preceding calendar month the exact quantities of malt beverages and/or wine, by size and type of container, constituting a beginning and ending inventory for the month, sold, transferred or dispensed within Athens-Clarke County. The wholesaler shall remit the tax imposed hereunder to Athens-Clarke County on or before the tenth day of the month next succeeding the calendar month in which such sales or transfers were made. (d)  Untaxed beverages. No wholesale or retail dealer in malt beverages and/or wine in Athens-Clarke County shall offer for sale or transfer for gift any malt beverages and/or wine unless the excise tax levied herein has been paid on the items sold, dispensed or otherwise transferred. No retailer in malt beverages or wine shall purchase any such items except from a wholesale dealer duly licensed by proper authority of the laws of Georgia. (e)  Wholesale sales. No wholesale malt beverage or wine dealer shall sell malt beverages or wine at retail at the same location where malt beverages or wine is sold at wholesale. (f)  Inspection. The director of finance, or his designated representative, shall be authorized to enter upon the premises of any wholesale or retail malt beverage or wine dealer at responsible hours to make any inspection of books, records or inventory as he deems necessary to ensure compliance with this section. (g)  Violations. If any wholesaler or retail dealer subject to the provisions of this section shall wilfully violate the same, or fail or refuse to comply with the provisions thereof, such dealer shall be punished as provided by section 1-1-5 of this Code and shall be subject to such license being revoked, suspended, put upon probation, if issued by Athens-Clarke County, or other penalty imposed. (h)  Penalties. The director of finance, or his designated representative, may issue execution against the responsible party for failure to pay any excise tax when due. As a penalty for failure to pay any tax imposed hereunder on time and as provided hereby, there shall be added thereto a penalty of 10 percent of the amount of such tax, plus interest at the legal rate. After three months there shall be added an additional penalty of 10 percent of the amount of such tax thereto. (Ord. of 8-8-91, § 2) 
Sec. 6-4-2. - Same—Distilled spirits. (a)  In addition to licenses and taxes levied upon dealers at retail of distilled spirits as defined in O.C.G.A. § 3-1-2, the following excise tax shall be levied and collected and the same is hereby levied by authority of O.C.G.A. § 3-4-80 (Georgia Laws 1980, pp. 1573, 1609, as amended): Upon every retail dealer of distilled spirits as defined in O.C.G.A. § 3-1-2, an excise tax on the sale of distilled spirits by the package of $0.22 per liter of distilled spirits, excluding fortified wine, and a proportionate tax at like rates on all fractional parts of a liter on all such spirits sold or distributed in Athens-Clarke County. (b)  The tax herein levied shall be paid by retailers to wholesalers at the time of delivery of the beverages to the retailer. It shall be the duty of each such retailer to pay, and it shall be the duty of each wholesaler of such beverages to receive, the proper amount of the tax hereby levied upon such beverages or cases thereof delivered by a wholesaler to a retailer. All persons selling such beverages at wholesale or making delivery of the same in Athens-Clarke County shall remit by the tenth of each calendar month, less three (3) percent collection fee, all sums collected by such wholesaler during the preceding calendar month. Such remittance shall be made to the director of finance. (c)  It shall be unlawful for any retailer of such beverages or distilled spirits to receive and retain any such beverages unless he shall have paid the excise tax thereon. It shall be unlawful for any wholesaler of such beverage to sell or deliver any such beverage to any retailer thereof unless he shall, concurrently with such delivery, collect the tax imposed hereby. It shall be unlawful for any wholesaler of such beverages to fail or omit to remit to Athens-Clarke County promptly, when due, the taxes levied hereby and collected by such wholesaler. It shall be unlawful for any person engaged as a retailer of such beverages to receive any such beverages from another retailer of such beverages unless the tax herein imposed shall have been paid. It shall be unlawful for any retailer of such beverages to receive and retain such beverages from another retail store, whether such other store shall be owned by the receiving retailer or not, or whether such other store is located within the corporate limits of Athens-Clarke County or not, unless the tax herein imposed shall have been paid and remitted to the director of finance. No retail dealer in distilled spirits in Athens-Clarke County shall offer for sale any distilled spirits unless the excise tax levied herein has been paid as provided hereby. Any distilled spirits found on the premises of any retail dealer on which the excise tax has not been paid as provided herein shall be confiscated. All retail and wholesale dealers shall keep a correct record of all purchases, transfers or distribution of distilled spirits within Athens-Clarke County, and all retail dealers shall require the wholesale dealer to furnish an invoice of each purchase, which shall be kept and preserved by the retail dealer at his or her place of business for a period of six (6) months from the date of purchase and shall be open and subject to inspection by the authorized representatives of the commission of Athens-Clarke County at all reasonable times. The books and records of all wholesalers selling or delivering such beverages and of all retailers thereof in Athens-Clarke County shall be subject to inspection and audit by the agents of Athens-Clarke County to ensure compliance herewith. It shall be unlawful for any person affected hereby to deny any authorized agent of Athens-Clarke County reasonable access to its books and records, and it shall be the duty of each such person to keep accurate and complete records of payments and collections of such excise tax and remittances to Athens-Clarke County. Any wholesale or retail dealer or other person who violates this chapter or who aids and abets another in the violation of same or in the evasion of collection of the tax due hereunder shall be subject to the penalty imposed by section 1-1-5 of this Code. (Ord. of 8-8-91, § 3) 
ARTICLE 2. - MIXED DRINK EXCISE TAX 
Sec. 6-4-3. - Definitions.     For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them below except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Distilled spirits or liquor: Any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume, including, but not limited to, all fortified wines.     Drink: Any alcoholic beverage served for consumption on the premises which may or may not be diluted by any other liquid.     Due date: From the twentieth day after the close of the monthly period for which tax is to be computed.     Licensee: Any person who holds a license or permit from Athens-Clarke County to sell alcoholic beverages by the drink.     Monthly period: The calendar months of any year.     Person: An individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, nonprofit corporation or cooperative non- profit membership, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate or any other group or combination acting as a unit, the plural as well as the singular member, excepting the United States of America, the State of Georgia, and any political subdivision of either thereof upon which Athens-Clarke County is without power to impose the tax provided herein.     Purchase price: The consideration received for the sale of distilled spirits by the drink valued in money, whether received in cash or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property or services of any kind or nature and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the licensee to the purchaser, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever.     Purchaser: Any person who orders and gives present or future consideration for any distilled spirits by the drink.     Return: Any return filed or required to be filed as provided in this section.     Tax: The tax imposed by this section. (Ord. of 6-12-2001, § 1) 
Sec. 6-4-4. - Administration generally. (a)  The director of finance or his authorized representative shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article for the levy and collection of the tax imposed hereby. (b)  The director of finance shall have the authority to make and publish reasonable rules and regulations not inconsistent with this article or other laws of Athens-Clarke County and the State of Georgia, or the Constitution of this state or the United States for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article and the collection of the taxes hereunder. (c)  Every licensee for the sale of distilled spirits by the drink in Athens-Clarke County shall keep such records, receipts, invoices and other pertinent papers in such form as the director of finance may require. (d)  The director of finance or designee may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment, and other facilities of any licensee liable for the tax, in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the licensee, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. (e)  In administration of the provisions of this article, the director of finance may require the filing of reports by any person having in such person's possession or custody information relating to the sales of distilled spirits which are subject to the tax. The reports shall be filed with the finance department when required and shall set forth the price charged for each sale, the date of sale and such other information as the director of finance may require. (Ord. of 6-12-2001, § 1) 
Sec. 6-4-5. - Imposed; rate.     There is hereby imposed and levied upon every sale of distilled spirits purchased by the drink in Athens-Clarke County a tax in the amount of three percent of the purchase price of said drink. (Ord. of 6-12-2001, § 1) 
Sec. 6-4-6. - Collection by due licensee.     Every licensee or his agent is hereby authorized and directed to collect the tax imposed by this article from the purchasers of distilled spirits by the drink sold within his licensed premises. (Ord. of 6-12-2001, § 1) 
Sec. 6-4-7. - Payment; returns, collection fees; penalties and interest for late payments. (a)  All amounts of such taxes shall be due and payable monthly to the finance department of Athens-Clarke County on or before the twentieth day of the next succeeding respective monthly period. (b)  The remittance of the taxes collected should be on a return which shall include gross receipts from the sale of distilled spirits by the drink, amount of tax collected or due for the related period, and such other information as may be required by the director of finance. (c)  Payments received after the twentieth date of the month shall be assessed a penalty of ten percent of the amount due but not less than $100.00 and interest at the rate of one percent per month or any part thereof. (d)  Licensees collecting the tax shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and payment of the amount due, if the amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be the same rate authorized for deductions from state sales and use taxes under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-50. (Ord. of 6-12-2001, § 1) 
Sec. 6-4-8. - Determination of deficiency amount. (a)  If the director of finance is not satisfied with the return or returns of the tax or the amount of the tax required to be paid to Athens-Clarke County by any licensee he may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information within his possession or that may come into his possession. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one or more monthly periods. (b)  The amount of the determination shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month or fraction thereof from the due date of the taxes. (c)  In making a determination, the finance department may offset overpayment, for a period or periods, against underpayment, for another period or periods against penalties and against the interest on underpayment. The interest on overpayment shall be computed in the manner set forth in subsection (b) above. (d)  If any part of the deficiency for which a deficiency determination has been made is due to negligence or disregard of rules and regulations, a penalty amount of ten percent per month shall be added to the amount of the deficiency. (e)  If any part of the deficiency for which a deficiency determination is due to fraud or an intent to evade any provisions of this chapter or other authorized rules and regulations, a penalty of 25 percent of the deficiency shall be added to the amount of the deficiency. (f)  The director of finance, or authorized representative, shall give to the licensee written notice of his determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail, such service shall be addressed to the licensee at the address as it appears in the records of the director of finance. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by the addressee. (g)  Except in the case of failure to make a return, every notice of a deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the twentieth day of the calendar month following the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period should last expire. (Ord. of 6-12-2001, § 1) 
Sec. 6-4-9. - Determination upon failure to file return. (a)  If any licensee fails to make a return, the director of finance shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the licensee for the sale of distilled spirits by the drink at said licensee's pouring outlet. The estimate shall be made for the period or periods in respect to which the licensee failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information which is or may come into the possession of the finance department. Upon the basis of this estimate, the director of finance shall compute and determine the amount required to be paid Athens-Clarke County, adding to the sum thus determined a penalty equal to ten percent thereof. One or more determinations may be made for one or for more than one period. Written notice shall be given in the manner prescribed in subsection (f) of section 6-4-8. (b)  The amount of the determination shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month or fraction thereof from the twentieth day of the month that any portion thereof should have been returned, until the date of payment. In addition, a penalty of ten percent of the determination, but not less than $100.00, shall also be assessed for failure to file a return. (Ord. of 6-12-2001, § 1) 
Sec. 6-4-10. - Overpayment.     If the licensee or person determines that he has overpaid tax, penalty or interest, or paid more than once, which fact has not been determined by the director of finance, the licensee will have three years from the date of payment to file a claim in writing stating the specific ground upon which the claim is founded. The claim shall be audited. If the claim is approved by the director of finance, the excess amount paid Athens-Clarke County may be credited on any amounts then due and payable from the persons by whom it was paid or his administrators or executors. (Ord. of 6-12-2001, § 1) 
Sec. 6-4-11. - Purchasers or successors of business. (a)  If any licensee or person liable for any amount under this article sells out his business or quits the business, his successors or assigns shall withhold a sufficient amount of the purchase price to cover such amount until the former owner produces a receipt from the director of finance showing that Athens-Clarke County has been paid or a certificate stating that no amount is due. (b)  If the purchaser of a business fails to withhold purchase price as required, he shall be personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld by him to the extent of the purchase price. (Ord. of 6-12-2001, § 1) 
Sec. 6-4-12. - Legal action to collect.     At any time within three years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and payable and at any time within three years after the delinquency of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected, the director of finance may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction in the name of Athens-Clarke County to collect the amount delinquent, together with interest, court fees, filing fees, attorney's fees and other legal fees incident thereto. (Ord. of 6-12-2001, § 1) 
Sec. 6-4-13. - Revocation of license.     The failure to pay the above prescribed tax shall render the licensee or person liable therefore subject to revocation of their alcoholic beverage license in accordance with the procedures set forth in Title 6, Chapter 3. (Ord. of 6-12-2001, § 1) 
Sec. 6-4-14. - Penalty. (a)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in section 1-1-5. Any licensee or other person who fails to furnish any return required to be made or who fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the director of finance or who renders a false or fraudulent return shall be deemed guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as aforesaid. (b)  Any person who fails to pay any taxes due under this article shall not be permitted to renew his occupation tax certificate or alcoholic beverage license until all said taxes have been paid in full. (Ord. of 6-12-2001, § 1) 
CHAPTER 6-5. - SPECIAL EVENTS Sec. 6-5-1. Definitions. Sec. 6-5-2. Permits. Sec. 6-5-3. Application; fee. Sec. 6-5-4. Identification of producer. Sec. 6-5-5. Administrative review. Sec. 6-5-6. Special conditions on permit. Sec. 6-5-7. Final approval of permit; minimum review period. Sec. 6-5-8. Emergency issuance of permit. Sec. 6-5-9. Permit fees. Sec. 6-5-10. Liability. Sec. 6-5-11. Vendors. Sec. 6-5-12. Sale of beer and/or wine. Sec. 6-5-13. Glass containers prohibited. Sec. 6-5-14. Police services. Sec. 6-5-15. Toilet facilities. Sec. 6-5-16. Entertainment. Sec. 6-5-17. Fireworks. Sec. 6-5-18. Tents, stages, etc. Sec. 6-5-19. Street closing and parking restrictions. Sec. 6-5-20. Banners, signs, etc. Sec. 6-5-21. Duration of permit. Sec. 6-5-22. Cessation of activities. Sec. 6-5-23. Picketing and demonstrations, etc. Sec. 6-5-24. Funeral processions. Sec. 6-5-25. Sidewalk cafes; displays. 
Sec. 6-5-1. - Definitions.     The following definitions shall apply to the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter:     Manager: The manager of the government of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia, or his designee for the administration of this chapter.     Producer: Any person, group of persons, organization, association, club, or other entity responsible for planning, producing and conducting an event.     Special event: The term 'special event' or 'event' shall mean any organized activity having as its primary purpose entertainment, recreation and/or education which provides a substantial public and community benefit, such as a festival, celebration, foot or vehicle race, parade, march, rally or assembly, which takes place in whole or in part on a public street, sidewalk or right-of-way, or any organized activity that occurs on private property and impacts government services on public rights-of-way.     Vendor: Any person or persons who engage in the sale to the public of any food or food products, goods, services, or merchandise of whatever nature from any location, either mobile or stationary, on a temporary itinerant basis on any public street, sidewalk, or right-of-way. The definition of vendor, as used in this chapter, shall not be construed to include or prohibit a permanent business, operating under the provisions of the business license ordinance and other applicable laws, from displaying goods or merchandise on a public sidewalk immediately in front of and adjacent to the permanent business structure so long as such displays do not impede the normal flow of pedestrian traffic and so long as other laws and ordinances pertaining to such business or displays are complied with. (Ord. of 9-1-92, § 1; Ord. of 3-7-2017(2), § 1 ) 
Sec. 6-5-2. - Permits. (a)  Required. It shall be unlawful for any person, group, organization, association, club or other entity to conduct or cause to be conducted any special event in Athens-Clarke County without having obtained a valid permit for such event. (b)  Geographic limitation; responsibility for police and sanitation service. A special event shall be limited to the specific geographic area(s) within which the event is to take place and the producer of a special event shall be responsible for the provision of police and sanitation services within the boundaries of the event for a period of two hours past the conclusion of the event or until the area is cleared of all activities and structures related to such event. (c)  Time limitation. Except for clearing of the area, no special event shall be allowed to continue beyond the time approved on the permit for the event. (d)  Delineation of boundaries; preservation of areas for circulation. The outermost boundaries of the special event shall be fully and clearly delineated on a map, which shall be no smaller than 8½ × 11 inches in size, and attached to the application for a permit. All public streets and/or sidewalks within and adjacent to such area(s) shall be clearly identified. The manager, or designee, shall require, as part of the approval for the event, that areas no less than five feet in width shall be designated and preserved for public circulation and access to adjoining business establishments outside the area(s) delineated for the event. (e)  Maps for walks or runs. The producer of a special event such as a walk or run, as to which the provisions of subsection (d) above would not be practicable, shall submit with the application for a permit a map, which shall be no smaller than 8½ × 11 inches in size, showing the exact route of the course for the walk or run. (Ord. of 9-1-92, § 1; Ord. of 3-1-94, § 1) 
Sec. 6-5-3. - Application; fee. (a)  A producer of a special event shall make application for a permit for such event at the office of the manager on a form prescribed by the manager. Application forms may be obtained from the office of the manager, the office of the clerk of commission, and the police department. (b)  An application for a special event should be filed at least 60 days prior to the date the event is scheduled to occur. However, no application shall be accepted earlier than one year prior to the date of the event. (c)  A nonrefundable application fee of $25.00 shall be paid at the time the application for a permit is filed. Such fee shall be payable to Athens-Clarke County by cash, money order, or cashier's check. (Ord. of 9-1-92, § 1) 
Sec. 6-5-4. - Identification of producer.     The producer of an event, if a group or organization, shall be fully identified on the application. However, a special event permit shall be issued only to an individual person, who may be the actual producer or a designated agent of the producer, and such individual person shall be solely and fully responsible for compliance with all provisions, including all financial requirements, of this chapter and other applicable laws. (Ord. of 9-1-92, § 1) 
Sec. 6-5-5. - Administrative review.     The manager shall cause the application to be circulated to each government department and/or other agency whose services the manager determines would be affected by the nature and activities of the proposed event. Each such department or agency shall review the application and note the services which it will be required to perform, the number of personnel to perform such services, the length of time to perform such services, the cost to perform such services, and any other information which would assist the manager in facilitating the event and services required. (Ord. of 9-1-92, § 1) 
Sec. 6-5-6. - Special conditions on permit.     Each department of the government reviewing an application may recommend in writing certain conditions or restrictions as deemed necessary to facilitate the event, to comply with other laws or regulations, and/or to ensure the safety, health and welfare of the community. In reviewing the recommendations of the departments, the manager may impose such conditions or restrictions as a part of the permit and such special conditions so imposed shall be construed to have the full force and effect of law as a provision of this chapter. A violation of such conditions or restrictions shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. (Ord. of 9-1-92, § 1) 
Sec. 6-5-7. - Final approval of permit; minimum review period. (a)  The manager is authorized to approve and issue a permit for a special event after considering all comments and conditions of the reviewing departments and agencies as well as other information pertaining to the proposed event as described on the application, and after the payment of all applicable fees and costs. (b)  A minimum of 30 working days shall be allowed for the administrative review of an application and the issuance of a permit. (c)  The government shall approve, tentatively approve or deny the permit no later than 30 working days following the date the completed application is filed. If the permit is denied, the producer shall be notified in writing of the denial and the reason(s) for the denial. The manager may tentatively approve an application for a permit received more than 135 days prior to the proposed special event. A tentative approval reserves the locations, dates and times of a special event and is subject to revision based upon the manager's subsequent review, in accordance with paragraph (a) of this Code section, of information received following issuance of a tentative permit. If a permit is tentatively approved, final approval and issuance of the permit shall occur no later than 90 days prior to the special event. (Ord. of 9-1-92, § 1; Ord. of 5-7-2013, § 1) 
Sec. 6-5-8. - Emergency issuance of permit.     In extraordinary circumstances, the manager or the chief of police, as his designee, shall be authorized to waive or otherwise expedite any or all of the review process and to issue a special event permit upon payment by the producer of all applicable fees and costs for such event. (Ord. of 9-1-92, § 1) 
Sec. 6-5-9. - Permit fees. (a)  The fee for a permit to conduct a special event shall be based on all services to be provided by the government for such event and shall be equal to the estimated actual cost to the government to provide such services. The initial permit fee shall be the aggregate of the estimated costs of such services calculated by each government department. If, at the conclusion of the event, the cost of government services is greater than the initial payment, the producer of the event shall be billed for the difference. Failure to pay the outstanding amount within 30 days of the billing date shall be a violation of this chapter. (b)  The initial permit fee must be paid in full prior to the issuance of a permit and no later than 72 hours prior to the date of the event. (c)  The fees required in this section shall be in addition to any other fees which may be required by any other ordinances or regulations that might be applicable. (d)  No producer of any special event, except as otherwise provided for, shall be exempt from the payment of the appropriate fees and charges required under this chapter. (Ord. of 9-1-92, § 1) 
Sec. 6-5-10. - Liability.     The producer of any special event shall hold harmless the Unified Government of Athens-Clarke County, its officers, employees and agents from liability of damages arising from any acts or omissions emanating from a special event. Proof of such waiver shall be filed with, and made a part of, the application form. The producer shall be responsible for providing any and all other insurance that may be necessary for any special event. (Ord. of 9-1-92, § 1) 
Sec. 6-5-11. - Vendors. (a)  Sales permitted. The sale of food, including the sale of beer and/or wine, or any merchandise or services of any type by a vendor shall be allowed as a component of a special event provided such vendor is approved and authorized in writing by the producer of the event and shall be conducted in accordance with such conditions and limitations as shall be imposed in writing by the producer and submitted as part of the application for a permit. (b)  Authorization of vendors. The producer of a special event shall have sole responsibility and authority to allow or disallow sidewalk or street vending as a component of an event and to designate the location and activities of such vendors. It shall be unlawful for any vendor to engage in such business at any location or in any manner not authorized by the producer of the event. (c)  Identification required. Any vendor authorized by the event producer shall be required to prominently display on his or her person a badge identifying the vendor as an authorized participant in the event. Such identification shall be not less than three inches by three inches, shall state that the bearer is an official participant in the event, and shall bear the signature of the producer of the event. (d)  Permit not required. Vendors authorized by the producer of an event as a component of the event shall not be required to obtain any separate vendors permit to operate during the period of the event. However, all other vendors, of whatever nature, not authorized as a participant in the special event shall obtain the appropriate licenses and permits as required under other applicable ordinances. (e)  Unauthorized vending prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any vendor not authorized by the producer of a special event as provided under this section to engage in such business within a distance of 25 yards of such event from one hour before until one hour after the event. (f)  Exemption. Whether or not approved by an event producer, a vendor that has been assigned a fixed location for the purpose of vending within the Athens Downtown Tax District may continue to engage in such business at that assigned location during any special event in accordance with the Vendors Ordinance (6-6-8.n) and other applicable laws. (g)  Food sales. The vendor of any food, whether hot or cold, as a part of a special event shall be subject to all rules and regulations of the county health department. It shall be the responsibility of the producer of an event to assure compliance with this section by any such vendors. (Ord. of 9-1-92, § 1; Ord. of 3-1-94, §§ 2, 3) 
Sec. 6-5-12. - Sale of beer and/or wine.     Special outdoor cafe areas where beer and/or wine may be dispensed and consumed shall be permitted only within the delineated boundaries of a special event subject to the following conditions: (1)  The dispensing or consumption of beer and/or wine shall not be permitted at any special event which, due to the size of such event, does not require the closing of at least one city block. (2)  The producer of a special event shall have the discretion to provide special outdoor cafe areas where beer and/or wine may be served within the delineated boundaries of the event. (3)  Whenever any event will include the dispensing and consumption of beer and/or wine, the producer of such event, at least 45 days prior to the event, shall meet with appropriate staff members of the Athens-Clarke County government as designated by the manager in order to review the plans, conditions and restrictions pertaining to the event. Prior to the issuance of a permit for the event, the producer shall sign a statement of understanding of and agreement to the terms and conditions imposed on the event. Such statement shall become a part of the conditions of the permit for the event. (4)  A special outdoor cafe area within a special event where beer and/or wine is permitted shall be securely enclosed on all sides by a fence, barricade or other similar such structure approved by the chief of police, or his designee, so as to completely separate that area from the areas in which alcoholic beverages are not permitted. Every special outdoor cafe permitted under this section shall be rectangular in shape with one of the longer sides of such special outdoor cafe area abutting a street curb. (5)  One special outdoor cafe area, limited to no more than 300 persons and not exceeding an area greater than 4,000 square feet, may be located at any location within the event. (6)  Additional special outdoor cafe areas shall be limited to no more than 150 persons and shall not exceed an area greater than 2,000 square feet. (7)  No more than two special outdoor cafe areas designated for up to 150 persons shall be permitted within any one city block and shall be restricted to no more than one such area on either side of the street. (8)  Within any city block where a special outdoor cafe designated for up to 300 persons is located, no additional special outdoor cafe areas shall be permitted. (9)  Every special outdoor cafe permitted under this section shall provide seating and food service for every person admitted to such area. Food service shall not be required in a special outdoor cafe that has a separate home-brew special event permit. (10)  The dispensing of beer and/or wine at any special outdoor cafe area shall be restricted to: (1) a holder of an alcoholic beverage caterer license issued by Athens-Clarke County, (2) a holder of a temporary alcoholic beverage permit issued to a bona-fide non-profit, tax-exempt civic organization by Athens-Clarke County, or (3) a holder of a separate home-brew special event permit issued by Athens-Clarke County. The name of such licensee(s) or permittee(s) and the current assigned number, as such appears on the license or permit, shall be required as a part of the application for a special event permit. (11)  The producer of the special event shall provide, at his/her own expense, at least one security officer, approved by the chief of police, or his designee, at each special outdoor cafe area approved for the consumption of beer and/or wine. (12)  Every area where beer and/or wine is consumed shall be conspicuously posted at all times at each point of entrance/exit with signs stating the following: "The possession of alcoholic beverages beyond this point is prohibited." The letters of such signs shall not be less than three inches in height and one-half inch in width and shall be in black letters on a contrasting light background. (13)  It shall be unlawful for patrons of any area(s) of a special event in which beer and/or wine is permitted to bring into or take outside the designated area(s) any alcoholic beverage or to furnish any alcoholic beverage to any person outside the designated area where beer and/or wine is permitted. Provided, however, that participants in and sponsors of home-brew special events may transport malt beverages to a home-brew special event in a special outdoor cafe in accordance with applicable law. (14)  The application for a special event at which beer and/or wine is permitted shall include, in addition to the map identifying the outermost boundaries of the event, a map no smaller than 8½ × 11 inches in size, clearly identifying the area(s), including all public streets and sidewalks within and adjacent to the area(s), where the consumption of beer and/or wine is proposed. However, no areas designated for the consumption of beer and/or wine shall encroach within the designated public circulation areas described in section 6-5-2(d). (15)  The application for a permit for a special event at which beer and/or wine is permitted shall include a description of the area(s), including the size and the number of seats proposed for such area(s). The application also shall contain a description of the method and structures that will be used to secure and separate such area(s) from other public areas as required in subsection (4) above. (16)  The fee for a permit to dispense and/or consume beer and/or wine at a special event shall be $300.00 for an area designated for up to 300 persons and $150.00 for each area designated for up to 150 persons, payable to Athens-Clarke County, and shall be paid in addition to and remitted at the same time as any other fees provided for in section 6-5-9. (17)  Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, any person dispensing and/or consuming beer and/or wine in accordance with this section shall comply with all other laws and ordinances pertaining to the sale, possession and consumption of alcoholic beverages. (Ord. of 9-1-92; § 1; Ord. of 3-1-94, § 4; Ord. of 5-7-2013, § 2; Ord. of 11-4-2014, §§ 1—3 ; Ord. of 10-6-2015(3), § 1 ) 
Sec. 6-5-13. - Glass containers prohibited.     The use of glass containers within the area of any special event shall be prohibited. (Ord. of 9-1-92, § 1) 
Sec. 6-5-14. - Police services.     Traffic and crowd control shall be provided by the Athens-Clarke County Police Department and the number of officers and/or special arrangements shall be determined by the chief of police. (Ord. of 9-1-92, § 1) 
Sec. 6-5-15. - Toilet facilities.     The producer of a special event shall be required to provide temporary outdoor toilet facilities at any event at which 200 or more persons are expected to be in attendance. The number of toilets and their locations shall be determined by the director of the building inspection department. (Ord. of 9-1-92, § 1) 
Sec. 6-5-16. - Entertainment.     Musical entertainment shall be provided in a manner consistent with the peace and good order of the community. The producer of the event shall be responsible for full compliance with the noise ordinance. (Ord. of 9-1-92, § 1) 
Sec. 6-5-17. - Fireworks.     Any producer of an event desiring to conduct a public exhibition or display of fireworks shall first obtain a permit from the judge of probate court in accordance with the provisions set forth under state law. (Ord. of 9-1-92, § 1) 
Sec. 6-5-18. - Tents, stages, etc.     Tents, arbors, stages, grandstands or other temporary facilities constructed or erected as a part of a special event shall be approved by the director of the building inspection department. (Ord. of 9-1-92, § 1) 
Sec. 6-5-19. - Street closing and parking restrictions. (a)  The complete or partial closure of any street, sidewalk or other public way as a part of a special event shall be approved by the traffic engineer in consultation with the chief of police. (b)  It shall be a violation of this chapter for any motor vehicle to be located on any street or other area that has been closed to parking for a special event. Designated parking spaces in such areas closed shall be clearly marked as such, and such marking shall be posted not less than 12 hours prior to the effective date and time of such closure and shall contain the statement, "No parking after (date & time). Unauthorized vehicles present after that time are subject to towing and impoundment." The manager or the manager's designee may have vehicles illegally parked in violation of this section immediately towed and impounded at the expense of the owner or other person responsible for such vehicle pursuant to the provisions of chapter 3-3 of this code. The fine for violation of this section shall be $50.00. (Ord. of 9-1-92, § 1 ; Ord. of 9-6-2016(1), § 7 ) 
Sec. 6-5-20. - Banners, signs, etc.     Temporary, noncommercial banners or signs may be permitted overhead across public streets for the purpose of designating "starting" and "finish" lines for a race. Small banners, pennants, signs or other decorations which do not interfere with vehicular or pedestrian traffic, and which do not damage or deface any tree or public structure, may be allowed as part of a special event. Approval of the building inspection department shall be obtained by the event producer for any banners or signs permitted in this section. The producer of the event shall be responsible for the removal of such banners, pennants or decorations within 48 hours after the close of the event. (Ord. of 9-1-92, § 1) 
Sec. 6-5-21. - Duration of permit.     No permit issued under this chapter shall be valid prior to or past the date of the special event for which it is issued. (Ord. of 9-1-92, § 1) 
Sec. 6-5-22. - Cessation of activities.     The safety, health, welfare and good order of all citizens and the community shall be first and foremost and every special event shall be conducted in such manner. The chief of police may terminate any activity, whether a part of or the entire event, which does not meet this community standard. Upon notification of the event producer in person by the chief of police to cease any activity, it shall be unlawful for such producer and/or any participants to permit such activity to continue. (Ord. of 9-1-92, § 1) 
Sec. 6-5-23. - Picketing and demonstrations, etc.     Any person, group or organization engaged in any picketing, demonstrations, assembly, gathering, procession or other activity protected by the U.S. Constitution shall be prohibited from blocking the ingress and egress of any public or private place. Any person, group or organization engaged in such activities is required to make application as set forth in section 6-5-3(a). However, any such person, group or organization shall be exempt from the permit requirement in section 6-5-2 and the fees set forth in section 6-5-3(c) and section 6-5-9. (Ord. of 9-1-92, § 1) 
Sec. 6-5-24. - Funeral processions.     The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any parade or procession conducted under the supervision and direction of a funeral director in conjunction with any funeral. (Ord. of 9-1-92, § 1) 
Sec. 6-5-25. - Sidewalk cafes; displays.     The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any sidewalk cafes or displays as regulated by other laws or ordinances. (Ord. of 9-1-92, § 1) 
CHAPTER 6-6. - SPECIAL SALES[5] Sec. 6-6-1. Definitions. Sec. 6-6-2. Administration. Sec. 6-6-3. Display of permit and identification. Sec. 6-6-4. Exemption of fee. Sec. 6-6-5. Special temporary permits. Sec. 6-6-6. Street sales—Generally. Sec. 6-6-7. Street sales—Assigned locations. Sec. 6-6-8. Sales on Baldwin Street, Baxter Street and Jackson Street; Farmers Market Assigned Locations; Mobile Food Vendor Units. Sec. 6-6-9. Charitable solicitations. Sec. 6-6-10. Sales on certain streets prohibited. Sec. 6-6-11. Sidewalk sales and displays of merchandise. Sec. 6-6-12. False registration. Sec. 6-6-13. Suspension or revocation of permit. Sec. 6-6-14. Suspension or revocation; appeal. Sec. 6-6-15. Penalty. Footnotes: --- (5) --- Editor's note— An ordinance of Dec. 5, 1995, amended the Code by repealing Ch. 6-6, which pertained to vendors, and derived from ordinances of April 7, 1992, and Aug. 11, 1992. Said Dec. 5, 1995, ordinance substituted provisions set out above as a new Ch. 6-6. 
Sec. 6-6-1. - Definitions.     The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter:     Athens Downtown Tax District: The area within the legal boundaries described in Georgia-Laws 1977, p. 3534, as amended, and may hereafter be referred to as the "district."     Baldwin Street: For the purposes of this chapter, Baldwin Street shall be that portion of Baldwin Street, including all adjacent public right-of-way, between South Lumpkin Street and Jackson Street.     Baxter Street: For the purposes of this chapter, Baxter Street shall be that portion of Baxter Street, including all adjacent public right-of-way, between South Lumpkin Street and Hull Street.     Business: Any person who in Athens-Clarke County engages in, causes to be engaged in, or represents to be engaged in special sales with the object of gain, benefit or advantage, either directly or indirectly.     Cart: A nonmotorized, but mobile, pushcart which may be moved without the assistance of a motor, or a pedal-driven cart, used for the displaying, storing or transporting of goods or merchandise offered for sale by a street merchant, and any such cart shall be constructed in accordance with the size, design, quality and all other regulations of this chapter.     College Square: The 100 block of College Avenue between Broad Street and Clayton Street in the Athens Downtown Tax District.     Display: Any cart, stall, table, rack or other similar equipment used for the display of goods, merchandise or services.     Farmers Market assigned locations: For the purposes of this chapter, Farmers Market assigned locations shall mean that portion of the north side of East Washington Street between College Avenue and North Lumpkin Street and that portion of the west side of College Avenue between East Hancock Avenue and East Washington Street, including all adjacent public right-of-way.     Itinerant merchant: Any person or persons who engages in the sale of any goods, merchandise or services to the public on private property, whether in a commercial or residential area, on a temporary itinerant basis.     Itinerant sales: Engaging in any of the activities described for an itinerant merchant.     Jackson Street: For the purposes of this chapter, Jackson Street shall be that portion of Jackson Street, including all adjacent public right-of-way, between Broad Street and Baldwin Street.     Manager: The manager of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia, or his designee which may be a person, department, agency, committee or other entity so designated by the manager.     Mobile food vendor: Any person or persons selling food or beverages from a mobile food vendor unit.     Mobile food vendor unit: A motorized vehicle or trailer licensed to travel on public roads that is used for selling food and/or non-alcoholic beverage items to the general public from within the designated vehicle parking spaces along that portion of the south side of East Hancock Avenue between College Avenue and North Lumpkin Street and that portion of the west side of College Avenue between East Hancock Avenue and East Washington Street, or from any other designated public area as determined by the manager, or on private property when approved by the property owner.     Other designated assigned area: Any area or location as may be designated and assigned by the manager for the activities defined for a street merchant-assigned location for a temporary period of time.     Sidewalk sales: A special temporary sale to the public of any goods, merchandise or services by any retail or wholesale business, which sale is conducted on a public sidewalk.     Stand: Any table, which shall be skirted on at least three (3) sides, or any other structure, and which table or structure is movable and used for the purpose of displaying, goods, merchandise or services to the public. Any such stand shall be constructed in accordance with the size, design, quality and all other regulations of this chapter.     Street merchant-assigned location: Any person or persons in an assigned designated location on the public right-of-way, either in the Athens Downtown Tax District, on Baldwin Street, Jackson Street, or Baxter Street, Farmers Market assigned locations, mobile food vendor unit designated locations, or any other designated public area, who engages in the sale of any goods, merchandise or services to the public.     Street sales: Engaging in any of the activities described for a street merchant-assigned location. (Ord. of 12-5-95, § 1; Ord. of 2-6-96, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 5-1-2012, § 1; Ord. of 11-3-2015(2), §§ 1—3 ; Ord. of 9-4-2018(2), §§ 1, 2 ) 
Sec. 6-6-2. - Administration. (a)  Authority of manager. The manager of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia, shall have the authority to administer the provisions of this chapter and to promulgate reasonable administrative rules and procedures compatible with the public interest. (b)  Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person, group, business or other organization to engage in street sales or itinerant sales activities without having obtained a valid permit for each separate business and each separate location for the specific category of sales activity to be conducted. The permit required under this section shall be in addition to any other license, permit or certificate required by other laws and regulations, including the occupation tax ordinance set forth in title 6, chapter 1 of this Code. (c)  Sales only from assigned locations permitted. Except as otherwise provided for mobile food vendor units, it shall be unlawful for any person, group, business or other organization to engage in street sales at any location other than an assigned location as provided for in this chapter. (d)  Application . Application for a permit to engage in any activity regulated by this chapter shall be made on a form prescribed by the manager. Applications for street merchant-assigned locations shall be made at the Central Services Department and applications for itinerant merchants shall be made at the Finance Department. All applicable fees for such permits shall be paid prior to the issuance of any permits. (e)  Identification required. Every person engaged in street sales or itinerant sales, whether the principal or an employee, shall be required to obtain from the government a valid individual identification badge. However, persons conducting sidewalk sales as provided for in this chapter shall not be required to obtain an individual identification badge. (f)  Duration of permit: (1)  Except as otherwise provided for Farmers Market assigned locations and mobile food vendor units, a permit to engage in street sales shall be issued on a trimester basis, beginning on January 1, May 1, and September 1 of each year. No permit shall be issued for more than one trimester at one time. A permit shall expire on the last day of the last month of the trimester for which it was issued. (2)  A permit to engage in street sales for Farmers Market assigned locations shall be issued on an annual basis, for one day of each week for the months of April through October. No permit shall be issued for more than one year at one time. A permit shall begin on April 1 each year and expire October 31 each year. (3)  A permit shall not be transferable and a transfer of ownership shall be considered as the termination of such business and the establishment of a new business. A new permit shall be required for each new owner of the business. (4)  A permit for a mobile food vendor unit to engage in street sales shall be issued on an annual basis. No permit shall be issued for more than one year at one time. A permit shall expire on December 31 each year. A permit shall also authorize the holder to engage in sales of food and/or non-alcoholic beverage items to the general public on private property from such unit without otherwise being required to obtain an itinerant merchant permit. (g)  Fees. Permit fees for street sales are based on the cost of regulation and/or additional charge for the use of public right-of-way. Permit fees for itinerant merchants and sidewalk sales are regulatory fees only. The fee for a permit is set forth below. Said permit shall not be prorated or refundable: Type of Permit Fee Farmers Market assigned locations $100.00 Mobile food vendor unit 515.00 Street merchant-assigned location not otherwise specified 100.00 Itinerant merchant (includes mobile food vendors operating solely on private property) 75.00 Sidewalk sale 25.00 Individual merchant identification/ badge 20.00 Replacement merchant identification/badge 15.00  (h)  Federal and state tax identification required. In addition to any other information required by the manager, every application for a permit to conduct street sales or itinerant sales shall contain the current federal and state tax identification numbers issued to the applicant for such business. (i)  Exemption . Any business located in Athens-Clarke County having a current Athens-Clarke County occupation tax certificate and which applies for one or more permits for street merchant-assigned location as an extension of the same business and under the same name as the primary business, shall be exempt from the requirement to obtain a separate occupation tax certificate for each assigned location. (Ord. of 12-5-95, § 1; Ord. of 2-6-96, §§ 3, 4; Ord. of 5-7-96, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 5-1-2012, §§ 2, 3; Ord. of 11-3-2015(2), § 4 ; Ord. of 1-3-2017(1), § 1 ; Ord. of 9-4-2018(2), §§ 3, 4 ) 
Sec. 6-6-3. - Display of permit and identification. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in street sales or itinerant sales to fail to have said permit prominently displayed in such a location and in such a manner so as to be conspicuous and visible at all times while engaged in the permitted activity. In addition thereto, any street merchant engaged in the sale of food or food products regulated by the health department shall be required to display such food permit in the same manner. (b)  It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in street sales or itinerant sales to fail to have the individual identification badge prominently displayed on the permittee's person in such a manner so as to be conspicuous and clearly visible at all times while engaged in the permitted activity. (Ord. of 12-5-95, § 1) 
Sec. 6-6-4. - Exemption of fee.     The following persons, groups or organizations shall be exempt from paying the required permit fees provided for in this chapter: (1)  Any person or group acting on behalf of an established religious, charitable or fraternal organization, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 43-17, and which is not engaged in daily selling of goods or services to the public in competition with persons taxed by virtue of the provisions of this or other ordinances. No person or business shall be exempt from the payment of fees on the grounds that the business is operated for a charitable purpose unless 50 percent or more of the gross receipts from the business are devoted to a charitable purpose. (2)  Any person, group or organization as defined in subsection (1) of this section that is participating in a permitted special event and authorized to conduct such activity by the producer of the event. (Ord. of 12-5-95, § 1) 
Sec. 6-6-5. - Special temporary permits.     A bona fide nonprofit charitable organization may be issued a special temporary permit to solicit donations or to sell goods or merchandise for the purpose of such charity for a period not to exceed seven (7) consecutive days. The manager may assign appropriate space and conditions for such activity even though they may conflict with provisions of this chapter. Any such charitable organization shall obtain a permit for the activity as is required for other street sales. (Ord. of 12-5-95, § 1) 
Sec. 6-6-6. - Street sales—Generally. (a)  Parking for the purpose of conducting street sales. Except as otherwise provided for in this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale any goods, merchandise or services from a parked vehicle or from any other conveyance located on the public right-of-way or other property owned by Athens-Clarke County. This is not intended to prohibit the sale of merchandise or services to a resident from a vehicle parked in the street near the residence, but does prohibit the parking of a vehicle in the street or on the right-of-way with the intent to sell to the motoring public or to passing pedestrians. (b)  Occupation of public rights-of-way. Except as otherwise provided for in this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person engaged in street sales to occupy the public rights-of-way in any manner that will cause the open pedestrian passageway to be less than five (5) feet in width, or to locate within 20 feet of any intersection, crosswalk, driveway or bus stop. (c)  Loud noises and speaking devices. It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in street sales, itinerant sales, or other sales activities as defined in this chapter to cause any noise that violates the noise control ordinance, either from his or her person or from any device, instrument or equipment for the purpose of attracting attention to any goods or services for sale or distribution. (d)  Use of public benches, utility poles, other structures prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in street sales, itinerant sales or other sales activities as defined in this chapter to block the use of any public bench or to use any public utility pole, tree or shrub, or any other public structure for displaying or promoting the sale of any goods or service. (e)  Display of merchandise on ground prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in street sales to display goods or merchandise on the ground, or on any cloth, plastic or similar ground covering on any street, sidewalk or other public right-of-way. (f)  Unattended displays. It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in street sales to leave a display unattended on the public right-of-way for longer than 30 minutes. (g)  Endangerment of safety, health and/or welfare prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in street sales to display any goods or merchandise in any manner which would endanger the safety, health and/or welfare of the public. (h)  Relocation. It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in street sales to fail or refuse to comply with a request from the manager or a police officer to move or relocate a display when such request is made to safeguard the health, safety and welfare of the public. (i)  Every street merchant shall be responsible for removing all litter and other trash from all locations and surrounding area at the close of business each day. Sidewalk trash receptacles shall not be used to discard boxes and other large containers used for packaging merchandise. (Ord. of 12-5-95, § 1; Ord. of 5-1-2012, § 4) 
Sec. 6-6-7. - Street sales—Assigned locations. (a)  Intent . The Commission of Athens-Clarke County finds and declares that a regulatory scheme for street sales by street merchants in the Athens Downtown Tax District, Farmers Market assigned locations, mobile food vendor unit designated areas, and on certain sections of Baldwin Street, Jackson Street, Baxter Street or other designated assigned areas would promote the public interest in that: (1)  The Athens Downtown Tax District, particularly the area of College Avenue known as College Square, is a major public investment which revitalizes an important part of downtown Athens-Clarke County and that street merchants, subject to specific regulations, would contribute to furthering an attractive business and pedestrian environment for the general welfare of Athens-Clarke County. (2)  The sections of Baldwin Street, Jackson Street and Baxter Street, as defined in this chapter, are located adjacent to an area of the University of Georgia that is heavily traveled by pedestrians and vehicles; that street merchants in that area provide a wholesome service to students and others seeking food or other goods offered by such merchants; and that additional specific regulations and restrictions for street merchants on Baldwin Street and Jackson Street would further promote the safety and welfare of persons in those areas. (3)  The Farmers Market assigned locations, as defined in this chapter, are located in the Athens Downtown Tax District adjacent to City Hall in an area that is central to the downtown area; the Farmers Market in that area will provide a service to the public seeking raw or certain processed agricultural products, including fruits, vegetables, herbs, jams, jellies, meats, eggs, dairy products, etc.; and that additional specific regulations and restrictions for street merchants in the Farmers Market assigned locations would further promote the safety and welfare of persons in those areas. (4)  Regulations, restrictions or prohibitions on street sales activities would promote the public health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of Athens-Clarke County by abating acts, omissions or conditions detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of its citizens and the peace and dignity of Athens-Clarke County. (5)  The mobile food vendor unit designated areas on public property, as defined in this chapter, are located in the Athens Downtown Tax District adjacent to City Hall in an area that is central to the downtown area, and at other designated public areas, that have frequent pedestrian activity; mobile food vendors in those areas will provide a service to the public seeking additional wholesome food and beverage options; and that specific regulations and restrictions for mobile food vendor units would further promote the safety and welfare of persons in those areas. (b)  Approval locations. Street sales at assigned locations shall be permitted within the Athens Downtown Tax District, on Baldwin Street, Jackson Street and Baxter Street only at designated marked locations as determined by the manager. The manager shall be authorized to determine the locations where street sales may be conducted in the best interest of the public health, safety and welfare and such locations shall be submitted to the Commission of Athens-Clarke County for approval. A current list of all such approved locations shall be appended by reference to this ordinance and may be revised from time to time as locations may be added, removed or altered by the commission. (c)  Assignment of locations. The assignment of locations for street merchants shall be compatible with the public interest and use of sidewalk areas and public rights-of-ways and shall take into consideration the proximity of existing public and private property (benches, bus stop, loading zones, telephone booths, building entrances, display windows, vehicular and pedestrian traffic patterns, etc.), proximity to other assigned street merchant locations, and the like, in order to ensure that there will not be pedestrian and street congestion or obstruction and in order to contribute as effectively as possible to the intent of this section. (d)  Assignment of other designated areas. The manager may from time to time designate assigned street merchant locations on property owned by Athens-Clarke County as special temporary circumstances may deem appropriate. Such additional locations may be assigned for periods not to exceed 21 days and each street merchant assigned such temporary location shall obtain a permit as required of any street merchant-assigned location. (e)  No property rights conveyed. The assignment of an approved location for street sales pursuant to this section shall not be construed or interpreted to convey any property rights or any lease holder rights to any person. (f)  Display; cart, stands, skirted tables: (1)  Street sales permitted under this section shall not be conducted from any conveyance or in any mode other than from an approved mobile food vendor unit, cart, stand or skirted table as prescribed in this section. Grocery carts and wood or cardboard boxes are prohibited from being used as displays. (2)  Any cart, stand or skirted table shall not be larger than four feet wide by six feet long and seven feet high, including all attachments, extensions and merchandise, except for Farmers Market assigned locations which must remain completely within their assigned area. (3)  The total weight of a display, plus merchandise, shall not exceed 125 pounds per square foot. (g)  Abandonment: (1)  No assigned location may be left unoccupied by the permitted street merchant for more than 30 consecutive calendar days without the street merchant giving prior notification to the manager that such location will be vacant, the reason for such vacancy and for what period of time. Failure to provide such notice may cause the assigned location to be declared abandoned and assigned to another street merchant. (2)  In the event that the manager has evidence that an assigned location has been abandoned, he shall give ten working days' notice to the street merchant, to the address on the street merchant's application, for a hearing before the administrative hearing officer to determine whether there has been an abandonment of the assigned location. (h)  Street sales during special events. A street merchant at an assigned location in the district, including Farmers Market assigned locations, or on Baldwin Street, Baxter Street, or Jackson Street shall be provided the opportunity to remain at the assigned location and conduct business during any approved special event or festival. To ensure the public safety and welfare, any street merchant may be requested to relocate or adjust business operations to within a close reasonable proximity of the assigned location to accommodate any logistical or technical necessity. It shall be unlawful for a street merchant to refuse or fail to comply with such a request from the manager or a law enforcement officer. (i)  Limitation of permits. No permit for street merchant-assigned location shall be issued to the same business or to the same individual for more than one location within the same block, including intersections with other streets, on College Avenue, Clayton Street, Lumpkin Street, or Washington Street in the Athens Downtown Tax District, or on Baldwin Street, Baxter Street or Jackson Street. Permits for contiguous locations may be issued to the same entity for Farmers Market assigned locations. (j)  Liability and insurance. (1)  Except for actions arising out of Athens-Clarke County's sole negligence, the permittee agrees to indemnify, defend, save, and hold harmless the Athens-Clarke County Government, its officers and employees, from any and all claims, liability, damages, and causes of action which may arise out of the permit or the permittee's activity. Proof of such waiver shall be filed with, and made a part of, the permit application form. (2)  The permittee agrees to meet and maintain for the entire permit period, at its own expense, the following requirements: (i)  Commercial general liability insurance in an amount to be determined by the manager for bodily injury and property damage. The Athens-Clarke County Government must be named as an additional insured on this policy, and an endorsement must be issued as part of the policy reflecting compliance with this requirement. (ii)  The Athens-Clarke County Government must receive 30 days written notice prior to any cancellation, non-renewal, or material change in the coverage provided. (3)  The permittee must provide an original certificate of insurance as evidence that the above requirements have been met prior to issuance of a permit. (k)  It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in street sales to sell or offer for sale any goods, merchandise or services, or otherwise occupy the public right-of-way, within 150 feet of an active polling place as determined by state law or the Superintendent of Elections and Voter Registration. (Ord. of 12-5-95, § 1; Ord. 5-7-96, § 3; Ord. of 5-1-2012, §§ 5—8; Ord. of 11-3-2015(2), § 5 ; Ord. of 9-4-2018(2), § 5 ) 
Sec. 6-6-8. - Sales on Baldwin Street, Baxter Street and Jackson Street; Farmers Market Assigned Locations; Mobile Food Vendor Units. A.  Sales on Baldwin Street, Baxter Street and Jackson Street. In addition to the provision regulating all street sales, street merchants may operate only from marked assigned locations on Baldwin Street, Baxter Street and Jackson Street subject to the following additional restrictions: (1)  No street merchant shall operate from more than one location on Baldwin Street, Baxter Street or Jackson Street. (2)  The maximum square footage permitted for a display, plus the space for the merchant, shall be 36 square feet measured from the edge of the sidewalk or public right-of-way farthest from the curb. (3)  The maximum width permitted for a display, measured parallel to the street, shall be eight feet. (4)  The maximum depth permitted for a display shall be one-half the width of the sidewalk. (5)  It shall be unlawful to park a vehicle on the sidewalk or to block the sidewalk in any way while loading or unloading merchandise or equipment in a manner that would force pedestrians into the street. (6)  It shall be unlawful for any street merchant to locate within 20 feet of a street, intersection, crosswalk, bus stop, or offset street parking area; or to block any steps or entrances to any building; or to conduct street sales in any area other than a marked assigned location for which a permit has been issued. B.  Farmers Market assigned locations. In addition to the provision regulating all street sales, street merchants may operate only from designated Farmers Market assigned locations on College Avenue and Washington Street subject to the following additional restrictions: (1)  The manager will designate two permit locations on College Avenue and three permit locations on Washington Street, as more specifically described in the attachment hereto, which is incorporated herein by reference, and available for public review at the Clerk's Office. (2)  Special sales at Farmers Market assigned locations shall be allowed on Sunday through Wednesday, beginning at 3:00 p.m. and ending at 8:00 p.m. By 8:00 p.m. all areas used for the special sales shall be completely vacated and cleaned. (3)  Applications will be accepted only from organizations that are registered with the Georgia Secretary of State as non-profit corporations. Each vendor organization shall be issued permits for one day per week only. The manager shall provide a list of products that may be sold by vendors at the Farmers Market assigned locations. Any permittee who allows the sale of any other products at the assigned locations shall subject its permit to revocation. (4)  Tables or carts must be placed on the sidewalk. Tables, carts, supplies or any other materials shall not be allowed on the street surface which includes vehicle parking spaces and no parking zones. (5)  It shall be unlawful to park a vehicle on the sidewalk or to block the sidewalk in any way while loading or unloading merchandise or equipment in a manner that would force pedestrians into the street. (6)  It shall be unlawful for any street merchant to locate within ten feet of an intersection, crosswalk, or bus stop; or to block any steps or entrances to any building; or to obstruct any handicap ramp, designated handicap parking, or handicap path; or to conduct street sales in any area other than the assigned location for which a permit has been issued. (7)  Amplified music that is compliant with the noise control ordinance shall be allowed only between 5:00 p.m. and 7:00 p.m. at Farmers Market assigned locations as part of a permitted Farmers Market activity. C.  Mobile food vendor units. In addition to the provision regulating all street sales, mobile food vendors may operate only from designated mobile food vendor unit area on College Avenue and East Hancock Avenue, the park and ride lot on Lexington Road at Loop 10, and other public areas designated by the manager, subject to the following additional restrictions when operating in such public areas: (1)  A mobile food vendor unit permit shall authorize a mobile food vendor to operate in all designated areas as provided in this Chapter without any guarantee of the availability of a specific location. (2)  Mobile food vendor units on College Avenue and East Hancock Avenue shall only be permitted to operate between 7:00 a.m. on Thursday and 2:30 a.m. on Friday, between 11:00 p.m. on Friday and 2:00 a.m. on Saturday, and between 11:00 p.m. on Saturday and 2:00 a.m. on Sunday, except during special events permitted under Chapter 6-5. Mobile food vendor units can operate within the permitted boundaries of a special event if allowed by the special event producer and the special event permit. Mobile food vendor units in other designated public areas shall only be permitted to operate during hours that the designated public area is open to the public and in accordance with any other rules and regulations applicable to that area. (3)  Mobile food vendor units on College Avenue and East Hancock Avenue shall remain on the street surface within designated vehicle parking spaces; shall not block or occupy handicap parking spaces, loading zones, or other marked no parking areas; and shall vend only from the side of the mobile food vendor unit directly facing the sidewalk. (4)  Free standing signs and signs attached to the mobile food vendor unit protruding more than six inches are prohibited. (5)  Each mobile food vendor must provide at least one trash receptacle and one container for recyclable materials for use by its customers. The mobile food vendor is responsible for disposal of trash and recyclables in its containers and shall not use the public receptacles for this purpose. The permit fee covers the charge for solid waste collection, and the mobile food vendor is required to purchase approved bags for disposal and will leave its solid waste on the sidewalk for pickup. Each mobile food vendor is required to have a Commercial Recycling Form on file with the Solid Waste Department. The mobile food vendor shall keep the area clean and free of trash and debris at all times. (6)  No tables, benches, chairs, displays, or other items not attached to the mobile food vendor unit are permitted except for the required trash receptacle, recyclables container, and one table for condiments not exceeding a size of three feet by six feet. All such items shall be removed prior to the mobile food vendor unit departing the area. (7)  Mobile food vendor units shall be operated in accordance with all applicable Health Department rules and regulations. (Ord. of 12-5-95, § 1; Ord. of 5-1-2012, § 9; Ord. of 11-3-2015(2), § 6 ; Ord. of 9-4-2018(2), § 6 ; Ord. of 10-2-2018(2), § 1 ) 
Sec. 6-6-9. - Charitable solicitations.     It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the soliciting of donations for any charitable organization unless that person has complied with the provision set forth in O.C.G.A § 43-17 et seq. (Ord. of 12-5-95, § 1) 
Sec. 6-6-10. - Sales on certain streets prohibited.     It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in street sales on the south side of East Broad Street between Lumpkin Street and Jackson Street or on the east side of South Lumpkin Street between Baldwin Street and Cedar Street. (Ord. of 12-5-95, § 1) 
Sec. 6-6-11. - Sidewalk sales and displays of merchandise. (a)  Sidewalk special temporary sales. A special temporary sale conducted on a public sidewalk by a retail or wholesale business is permitted under the following conditions: (1)  Except as otherwise provided for in the Downtown Tax District in paragraph (b) below, it shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a sidewalk sale without a permit. The application for a permit shall contain such identifying and descriptive information of the sale as the manager may prescribe. (2)  Only one sidewalk sale shall be permitted during any one trimester and the period of the special sale shall be limited to 14 consecutive days. (3)  The fee for a permit to conduct a sidewalk sale shall be $25.00. (4)  Any display of merchandise by a business in a sidewalk special temporary sale shall meet the following requirements: A.  The display shall be situated so as to abut the front wall of the building in which the business selling the displayed merchandise is located; B.  The display shall not exceed a size of 12 feet by four feet (12' × 4'); however, such display shall not extend beyond either end of the front exterior wall of said business; and C.  The displayed merchandise shall be items regularly sold as a part of the business displaying the merchandise. D.  The provision of paragraph (4) above notwithstanding, an area of not less than five feet of unobstructed pedestrian passageway shall be maintained at all times between any display and the nearest curb, tree, pole or other public structure. E.  All displays and/or merchandise displayed in a sidewalk sale as provided for in this section shall be removed from the sidewalk during any time when the business conducting such sale is closed to customers. F.  All final sales transactions between business and customer shall be conducted within the business establishment, not on the sidewalk. G.  Any person or business conducting a sidewalk sale shall not cause any loud or offensive noise, either from his or her person or from any device, instrument or equipment for the purpose of attracting attention to any goods or services for sale or distribution. H.  No person or business conducting a sidewalk sale shall display goods or merchandise on the ground, or on any cloth, plastic or similar ground covering on any sidewalk or other public right-of-way. All displays shall be set up so that the displays are easily detectable by the visually impaired. (5)  No sale on a public sidewalk as described in this paragraph shall be permitted on the same sidewalk or portion of a sidewalk where a permitted special event is occurring, unless the producer of the special event agrees in writing to such sidewalk sale. A copy of such an agreement shall be filed with the office of the manager or his/her designee. (b)  Sidewalk displays of merchandise in the Athens Downtown Tax District. A sidewalk display of merchandise may be conducted on a public sidewalk by a retail or wholesale business in the Downtown Tax District without a permit under the following conditions: (1)  The display shall be situated so as to abut the front wall of the building in which the business selling the displayed merchandise is located and shall not obstruct building entrances, fire exits, utility meters, cellar entrances, or standpipes or other safety equipment; (2)  The display shall not exceed a size of 12 inches in depth, 36 inches in width and 60 inches in height; alternatively, displays consisting solely of newspapers, periodicals or other publications shall not exceed a size of 27 inches in depth, 48 inches in width and 60 inches in height. In no event shall a display extend beyond either end of the front exterior wall of said business; (3)  The provision of paragraph (2) above notwithstanding, an area of not less than five feet of unobstructed pedestrian passageway shall be maintained at all times between any display and the nearest curb, tree, pole or other permanent object situate in the right-of-way; (4)  The display shall consist only of fungible merchandise regularly sold in the ordinary course of the business displaying the merchandise; and no signs, advertisements or other written or graphic material (except such merchandise sold in the ordinary course of the business maintaining the display) may be posted or placed on a sidewalk display; (5)  The following items are prohibited in any display: tobacco products, alcoholic beverages, obscene material as defined by O.C.G.A. section 16-12-80, weapons, live animals or pawned items; (6)  All sidewalk displays as provided for in this section shall be removed from the sidewalk during any time when the business displaying such merchandise is closed to customers; (7)  All final sales transactions between business and customer shall be conducted within the business establishment, not on the sidewalk; (8)  Any person or business conducting sidewalk displays shall not cause any loud or offensive noise, either from his or her person or from any device, instrument or equipment for the purpose of attracting attention to such display or to the sale of any goods or merchandise; and (9)  No person or business shall display goods or merchandise directly on the ground, or on any cloth, plastic or similar ground covering on any sidewalk or other public right-of-way. All displays must be stabilized with no risk of overturning due to wind or incidental contact. All displays must either extend to the ground or have a two-inch wide rubberized strip at all bottom edges to be easily detectable by the visually impaired. (c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision of this section. (Ord. of 12-5-95, § 1; Ord. of 6-7-2005, § 1) 
Sec. 6-6-12. - False registration.     It shall be unlawful for any person or business regulated by the provisions of this chapter to make a false registration for such business or to file, or direct the filing, of any false information with respect to the fees due under the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. of 12-5-95, § 1) 
Sec. 6-6-13. - Suspension or revocation of permit.     In addition to any other penalties provided for in this chapter, the manager may suspend for a period of time or revoke a permit issued under this chapter for the following causes: (1)  Violating any federal, state or local law or regulation. (2)  Failing to permit any lawfully requested inspection by health officials or to comply with any lawful request of a police officer or the manager. (3)  Failing to possess and properly display at all times the permits and identification required under this chapter. (4)  Having a display that is not in compliance with these regulations. (5)  Conducting sales permitted for an authorized location in any area other than the space designated by the permit unless approved by the manager. (6)  Leaving any display overnight on any street or sidewalk or failing to remove any display during the hours which it is unattended for more than 30 minutes. (7)  Failure to keep the sales locations, whether assigned or unassigned, clear of trash or debris or failing to pick up, remove and dispose of all trash or refuse remaining at the location at the close of business each day. (8)  Offering for sale any goods, merchandise or services other than those approved and identified on the permit. (9)  Allowing any items relating to the operation of the business to be stored or placed anywhere other than in, on or under the display. (10)  Keeping animals of any kind near the sales location. This prohibition shall not apply to seeing-eye dogs. (11)  Using a motorized vehicle for the purpose of street sales. (12)  Using parking meters, utility poles, trees, shrubs, benches, or other public property other than the approved display to advertise or promote the sale of goods, merchandise or services. (13)  Misrepresenting any information required on any application for a permit; failing to provide the information required by this chapter; or failing to provide any relevant information sought by the manager in the administration of this chapter. (14)  Violating any provision of this chapter. (Ord. of 12-5-95, § 1) 
Sec. 6-6-14. - Suspension or revocation; appeal.     If a permit is suspended or revoked, the permittee shall have the right to appeal the suspension or revocation to the administrative hearing officer within ten working days of the suspension or revocation. The decision of the administrative hearing officer shall be final. (Ord. of 12-5-95, § 1) 
Sec. 6-6-15. - Penalty.     Any person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this chapter may be punished as provided in section 1-1-5 of this Code. (Ord. of 12-5-95, § 1) 
CHAPTER 6-7. - Coin Operated Amusement Machines Sec. 6-7-1. Coin operated amusement machines. Sec. 6-7-2. Violations. 
Sec. 6-7-1. - Coin operated amusement machines.     Pursuant to O.C.G.A. Section 48-17-15 (b)(2), a business owner or business operator, as defined by O.C.G.A. Section 48-17-1(2.1), may provide more than nine (9) Class B bona fide coin operated amusement machines, as defined in O.C.G.A. Sections 48-17-1(2) and (2.3), in a business location, as defined in O.C.G.A. Section 48-17-15(2); provided, however, that these Class B bona fide coin operated amusement machines meet the following criteria: (i) it rewards the player or players with tickets, tokens, or other non-cash representations of value redeemable for merchandise prizes; (ii) the outcome of the game involves some skill in its operation; (iii) the award of tickets, tokens or other non-cash representations of value is based solely on the players achieving the object of the game or player's score; (iv) only merchandise prizes are awarded; (v) the average wholesale value of the prizes awarded in lieu of tickets or tokens for a single play of the machine does not exceed Five Dollars ($5.00); and (vi) the redemption value of each ticket, token or other non-cash representation of value that may be accumulated by a player or players to redeem prizes of greater value does not exceed the cost of a single play of the machine. (Ord. of 11-3-2010, § 1) 
Sec. 6-7-2. - Violations.     It is unlawful for any person to operate any business in violation of the requirements of Section 6-7-1. (Ord. of 11-3-2010, § 1) 
CHAPTER 6-8. - MASSAGE PARLORS[6] Article 1. In General Sec. 6-8-1. Definitions. Sec. 6-8-2. Violation and penalty. Sec. 6-8-3. Exemptions. Sec. 6-8-4. Inspection required. Sec. 6-8-5. Register of employees. Sec. 6-8-6. Operating requirements. Sec. 6-8-7. Minors. Sec. 6-8-8. Alcoholic beverages. Sec. 6-8-9. Hours. Sec. 6-8-10. Unlawful acts. Secs. 6-8-11—6-8-25. Reserved. Article 2. Business License; Massagist's Permit Sec. 6-8-26. General control by Athens-Clarke County. Sec. 6-8-27. Employment of massagist. Sec. 6-8-28. Application for license. Sec. 6-8-29. Application for permit. Sec. 6-8-30. Grounds for denial—Generally. Sec. 6-8-31. Same—Facilities. Sec. 6-8-32. Waiver of application requirements. Sec. 6-8-33. Time of approval, duration. Sec. 6-8-34. Issuance of massage business license. Sec. 6-8-35. Multiple massage establishments. Sec. 6-8-36. Posting of permit and license. Sec. 6-8-37. Name and place of business. Sec. 6-8-38. Transfer of license generally. Sec. 6-8-39. Sale or transfer or change of location. Sec. 6-8-40. Revocation or suspension of license. Sec. 6-8-41. Revocation of masseur or masseuse permit. Footnotes: --- (6) --- State Law reference— Giving of massages in place used for lewdness, prostitution, etc., O.C.G.A. § 16-6-17; license, occupation or professional tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5. 
ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 6-8-1. - Definitions.     For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:     Employee: Any person over 18 years of age, other than a massagist, who renders any service in conjunction with the operation of a massage business and receives compensation from the operator of the business or patrons.     Licensee: The person to whom a license has been issued to own or operate a massage establishment as defined herein.     Massage: Any method of pressure on or friction against or stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating or stimulating of the external parts of the human body with the hands or with the aid of any mechanical electrical apparatus or appliance with or without such supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol, liniments, antiseptics, oils, powders, creams, lotions, ointments or other such similar preparations commonly used in the practice of massage under such circumstances that it is reasonably expected that the person to whom the treatment is provided or some third person on his or her behalf will pay money or give any other consideration or any gratuity therefor.     Massage establishment: Any commercial establishment having a source of income or compensation derived from the practice of massage, as defined in this section, and which has a fixed place of business where any person, firm, association or corporation engages in or carries on any of the activities defined as "massage."     Massagist, masseur or masseuse: Any person who, for any consideration whatsoever, engages in the practice of massage as defined in this section.     Outcall massage service: Any business, the function of which is to engage in or carry on massages at a location designated by the customer or client rather than at a massage establishment as defined in this section.     Patron: Any person over 18 years of age who receives a massage under such circumstances that it is reasonably expected that he or she will pay money or give consideration therefor.     Permittee: The person to whom a permit has been issued to act in the capacity of a massagist (masseur or masseuse) as herein defined.     Recognized school: Any school or educational institution licensed to do business as a school or educational institution in the state in which it is located, or any school recognized or approved by or affiliated with the American Massage and Therapy Association, Inc., and which has for its purpose the teaching of the theory, method, profession or work of massage, which school requires a resident course of study not less than 70 hours before the student shall be furnished with a diploma or certificate of graduation from such school or institution or learning following the successful completion of such course of study or learning.     Sexual or genital area: Genitals, pubic area, anus or perineum of any person, or the vulva or breasts of a female. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 12) 
Sec. 6-8-2. - Violation and penalty.     Except those persons who are specifically exempted by this chapter, every person, whether acting as an individual owner, employee of the owner or operator or whether acting as a mere agent or independent contractor for the owner, employee or operator, or whether acting as a participant or worker, in any way directly or indirectly, who gives massages or operates a massage establishment or any of the services defined in this chapter without first obtaining a license or permit from the Athens-Clarke County Director of Finance or who shall violate any provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an offense hereunder. Upon conviction such person shall be punished pursuant to the provisions of section 1-1-5 of the Code of Athens-Clarke County. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 12; Ord. of 8-7-2001, § 1) 
Sec. 6-8-3. - Exemptions.     This chapter shall not apply to the following individuals while engaged in the personal performance of the duties of their respective professions: (1)  Physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, osteopaths or physical therapists who are duly licensed to practice their respective professions in this state; (2)  Nurses who are registered under the laws of the state; (3)  Barbers and beauticians who are duly licensed under the laws of this state, except that this exemption shall apply solely to the massaging of the neck, face, scalp, and hair of the customer or client for cosmetic or beautifying purposes; and (4)  Nonprofit, eleemosynary and/or charitable organizations or the employees thereof. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 12) 
Sec. 6-8-4. - Inspection required.     The chief of police, or designee, shall from time to time make inspections during regular business hours of each massage business establishment for the purposes of determining that the provisions of this chapter are fully complied with. It shall be unlawful for any permittee or licensee hereunder to fail to allow the inspection officer access to the premises or to hinder the officer in any manner. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 12) 
Sec. 6-8-5. - Register of employees.     The licensee or person designated by the licensee of a massage establishment shall maintain a register of all persons employed at any time as masseurs or masseuses and their permit numbers. The register shall be made available at the massage establishment to representatives of Athens-Clarke County during regular business hours. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 12) 
Sec. 6-8-6. - Operating requirements. (a)  Cleanliness. Every portion of the massage establishment, including appliances and apparatuses, shall be kept clean and operated in a sanitary condition. (b)  Price rates displayed. Price rates for all services shall be prominently posted in the reception area in a location available to all prospective customers. (c)  Garments and dressing rooms. All employees, including masseurs and masseuses, shall be clean and wear clean, nontransparent outer garments, whose use is restricted to the massage establishment, covering the sexual and genital areas. A separate dressing room for each sex must be available on the premises with individual lockers for each employee. Doors to such dressing room shall open inward and shall be self-closing. (d)  Sheets and towels. All massage establishments shall be provided with clean, laundered sheets and towels in sufficient quantity and shall be laundered after each use thereof and stored in a sanitary manner. (e)  Advertisement. No massage establishment granted a license under the provisions of this chapter shall place, publish or distribute or cause to be placed, published or distributed any advertisement, picture or statement which is known or through the exercise of reasonable care should be known to be false, deceptive or misleading in order to induce any person to purchase or utilize any professional massage services. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 12) 
Sec. 6-8-7. - Minors.     No person shall permit any person under the age of 18 years to come or remain on the premises of any massage business establishment as masseur, employee or patron unless that person is on the premises on lawful business or with a doctor's written request. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 12) 
Sec. 6-8-8. - Alcoholic beverages.     No person shall sell, give, dispense, provide or keep or cause to be sold, given, dispensed, provided or kept any alcoholic beverages on the premises of any massage business. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 12) Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, Ch. 6-3. 
Sec. 6-8-9. - Hours.     No massage business shall be kept open for any purpose between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 12) 
Sec. 6-8-10. - Unlawful acts. (a)  Treatment of opposite sex. It shall be unlawful for any person holding a permit under this chapter to treat a person of the opposite sex except upon the signed order of a licensed physician, osteopath, chiropractor or registered physical therapist, which order shall be dated and shall specifically state the number of treatments to be acknowledged. The date and hour of each treatment given and the name of the operator shall be entered on the order by the establishment where such treatments are given and shall be subject to inspection by the police pursuant to section 6-8-4. The requirements of this subsection shall not apply to treatments given in the residence of a patient, the office of a licensed physician, osteopath or registered physical therapist, chiropractor or in a regularly established and licensed hospital or sanitarium. (b)  Touching or fondling genital areas. It shall be unlawful for any person in a massage parlor to place his or her hand or hands upon, to touch with any part of his or her body, to fondle in any manner, or to massage a sexual or genital area, as defined in this chapter, of any person. (c)  Responsibility of owners, operators or managers. It shall be unlawful for any person owning, operating or managing a massage parlor knowingly to cause, allow or permit in or about such massage parlor any agent, employee or any other person under his or her control or supervision to perform such acts prohibited in subsections (a) or (b) of this section. (d)  Outcall services. It shall be unlawful for any permittee under this chapter to participate in an outcall massage service as defined in section 6-8-1. Such person shall administer massage solely within an establishment licensed to carry on such business under this chapter. Any violation of these provisions shall be deemed grounds for revocation of the permit granted hereunder. The restriction on outcall massage shall not apply to a permittee who performs outcall massage as defined herein upon a customer or client who, because of reason of physical defects or incapacities or due to illness, is physically unable to travel to the massage establishment. If any outcall massage is performed under this exception, a record of the date and hour of each treatment, and the name and address of the customer or client, and the name of the employee administering such treatment and the type of treatment administered, as well as the nature of the physical defect, incapacity or illness of the client or customer shall be kept by the licensee or person or employee designated by the licensee. Such records shall be open to inspection by officials charged with the enforcement of this chapter. The information furnished or secured as a result of any such inspection shall be confidential. Any unauthorized disclosure or use of such information by an employee of the business or Athens-Clarke County shall be unlawful. (e)  Cubicles, rooms, booths. It shall be unlawful for any massage service to be carried on within any cubicle, room, booth or any area within a massage establishment which is fitted with a door capable of being locked. All doors or doorway coverings within a massage establishment shall have an unobstructed opening six inches by six inches (6″ × 6″) in size capable of clear two-way viewing into and out of all cubicles, rooms or booths. The opening shall be not less than 4½ feet from the floor of the establishment nor more than 5½ feet from the floor. Toilets and cubicles used solely for the application of liquid and vapor baths shall have such opening on the exterior door or curtain of the cubicle, room or booth. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to eliminate other requirements of statute or ordinance concerning the maintenance of premises, nor to preclude authorized inspection thereof, whenever such inspection is deemed necessary by the police or health departments. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 12) 
Secs. 6-8-11—6-8-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 2. - BUSINESS LICENSE; MASSAGIST'S PERMIT 
Sec. 6-8-26. - General control by Athens-Clarke County. (a)  Business license. No person shall engage in or carry on the business of massage unless he has a valid massage business license issued by Athens-Clarke County pursuant to the provisions of this chapter for each separate office or place of business conducted by that person. No license shall be issued for such office or place of business except in the Industrial (I) District as shown on the official zoning map of Athens-Clarke County or as a home occupation as defined under the zoning ordinance. (b)  Permit. No person shall practice massage as a massagist, employee or otherwise unless he has a valid and existing massagist's permit issued to him or her by Athens-Clarke County pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 12; Ord. of 12-5-2000, § 2) 
Sec. 6-8-27. - Employment of massagist.     No person shall employee as a massagist any person unless the employee has obtained and has in effect a permit issued pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 12) 
Sec. 6-8-28. - Application for license.     Every applicant for a license to maintain, operate or conduct a massage establishment shall file an application under oath with Athens-Clarke County upon a form provided by the business license office and pay a nonrefundable annual license fee, which shall be as provided for in title 6-1 of this Code. Copies of the application shall within five (5) days be referred to the chief building official, fire department and the police department. These departments shall within 30 days inspect the premises proposed to be operated as a massage establishment and shall make written verification to the finance director, or designee, concerning compliance with the codes of Athens-Clarke County that they administer. The police department shall also make an investigation of the applicant's character and qualifications. Each application shall contain the following information: (1)  A definition of service to be provided. (2)  The location, mailing address and all telephone numbers where the business is to be conducted. (3)  The name and residence address of each applicant (hereinafter all provisions which refer to applicant also include an applicant which may be a corporation or partnership): a.  If the applicant is a corporation, the names and addresses of each of the officers and director of the corporation and of each stockholder owning more than 10 percent of the stock of the corporation itself, if different from the address of the massage establishment; b.  If applicant is a partnership, the names and residence addresses of each of the partners including limited partners, and the address of the partnership itself, if different from the address of the massage establishment; (4)  The two previous addresses immediately prior to the present address of the applicant, including stockholders and partners if applicable. (5)  Proof that the applicant is at least 18 years of age, including stockholders and partners if applicable. (6)  Individual or partnership applicant's height, weight, color of eyes and hair and sex. (7)  Copy of identification, such as driver's license and social security card, including stockholders and partners if applicable. (8)  One (1) portrait photograph of the applicant at least two inches by two inches (2″ × 2″) and a complete set of the applicant's fingerprints which shall be taken by the chief of police or designee. If the applicant is a corporation, one (1) portrait photograph at least two inches by two inches (2″ × 2″) of all officers and managing agents of the corporation and a complete set of the same officers' and agents' fingerprints which shall be taken by the chief of police or designee. If the applicant is a partnership, one (1) front-face portrait photograph at least two inches by two inches (2″ × 2″) in size of each partner, including a limited partner in the partnership, and a complete set of each partner or limited partner's fingerprints which shall be taken by the chief of police or designee. (9)  Business, occupation or employment of the applicant for the three (3) years immediately preceding the date of the application, including stockholders and partners if applicable. (10)  The massage or similar business license history of the applicant; whether such person in previously operating in this or another city or state has had a business license revoked or suspended, the reason therefor and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation. (11)  All criminal convictions other than misdemeanor traffic violations, including the dates of convictions, nature of the crimes and place convicted. (12)  The name and address of each massagist who is or will be employed in the establishment. (13)  Applicant must furnish a diploma or certificate of graduation from a recognized school or other institution of learning wherein the method, profession and work of massage is taught; provided, however, that if the applicant will not himself engage in the practice of massage as defined herein, he need not possess such diploma or certificate of graduation from a recognized school or other institution of learning where the method, profession and work of massage is taught. (14)  The name and address of any massage business or other establishment owned or operated by any person whose name is required to be given in subparagraph (3) wherein the business or profession of massage is carried on. (15)  A description of any other business to be operated on the same premises or on adjoining premises owned or controlled by the applicant. (16)  Authorization for Athens-Clarke County, its agents and employees to seek information and conduct an investigation into the truth of the statements set forth in the application and the qualifications of the applicant for the permit. (17)  The names, current addresses and written statements of at least three (3) bona fide permanent residents of the United States that the applicant is of good moral character. In the application above, the statement must first be furnished from persons other than relatives and business associates. Upon completion of the above-provided form and the furnishing of all foregoing information, the finance director, or designee, shall accept the application for the necessary investigations. (18)  Such other identification and information necessary to discover the truth of the matter hereinabove specified as required to be set forth in the application. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 12) 
Sec. 6-8-29. - Application for permit.     The holder of a massage establishment license shall notify the finance director, or designee, of each change in any of the data required to be furnished by this section within 10 days after such change occurs. An application for a massagist's permit shall be made to the finance director, or designee, in the same manner as provided above for massage establishment licenses. The application shall contain, but not be limited to, the following: (1)  The business address and all telephone numbers where the massage is to be practiced. (2)  Name and residence address, and all names, nicknames and aliases by which the applicant has been known, including the two (2) previous addresses immediately prior to the present address of the applicant. (3)  Social security number, driver's license number, if any, and date of birth. (4)  Applicant's weight, height, color of hair and eyes, and sex. (5)  Written evidence that the applicant is at least 18 years of age. (6)  A complete statement of all convictions of the applicant for any felony or misdemeanors or violation of a local ordinance, except misdemeanor traffic violations. (7)  Fingerprints of the applicant taken by the police department. (8)  Two (2) front-face portrait photographs taken within 30 days of the date of application and at least two inches by two inches (2″ × 2″) in size. (9)  The name and address of the recognized school attended, the dates attended and a copy of the diploma or certificate of graduation awarded the applicant showing that the applicant has completed not less than 70 hours of instruction. (10)  The massage or similar business history and experience 10 years prior to the date of application, including, but not limited to, whether or not such person in previously operating in this or another city or state under license or permit has had such license or permit denied, revoked or suspended and the reasons therefor, and the business activities or occupations subsequent to such action of denial, suspension or revocation. (11)  The names, current addresses and written statements of at least five (5) bona fide permanent residents other than relatives of the United States that the applicant is of good moral character. If the applicant is able, the statement must first be furnished from residents of Athens-Clarke County, then the state and lastly from the rest of the United States. (12)  Authorization for Athens-Clarke County, its agents and employees to seek information and conduct an investigation into the truth of the statements set forth in the application and the qualifications of the applicant for the permit. (13)  Written declaration by the applicant, under penalty or perjury, in which he or she swears that the foregoing information contained in the application is true and correct, such declaration being duly dated and signed in Athens-Clarke County. (14)  A medical certificate signed by a physician, licensed to practice in the state, within seven (7) days of the date of the application. The certificate shall state that the applicant was examined by the certifying physician and that the applicant is free of communicable disease. The additional information required by this subparagraph shall be provided at the applicant's expense. (15)  Such other information, identification and physical examination of the person deemed necessary by the chief of police in order to discover the truth of the matters hereinabove required to be set forth in the application. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 12) 
Sec. 6-8-30. - Grounds for denial—Generally.     The finance director, or designee, shall issue a license for a massage establishment or a permit for a masseur or masseuse if all requirements for a massage establishment or massagist permit described in this chapter are met unless he or she finds that: (1)  The correct permit or license fee has not been tendered to Athens-Clarke County and, in the case of a check or bank draft, honored with payment upon presentation. (2)  The operation, as proposed by the applicant, if permitted, would not comply with all applicable laws, including, but not limited to, Athens-Clarke County's building, zoning and health regulations. (3)  The applicant (if an individual) or any of the stockholders holding more than 10 percent of the stock of the corporation, or any of the officers and directors (if the applicant is a corporation), or any of the partners (including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership), or the holder of any lien of any nature upon the business and/or equipment used therein and the manager or other person principally in charge of the operation of the business have been convicted of an offense without the state that would have constituted any of the following offenses if committed within the state: a.  An offense involving the use or threat of force and violence upon the person of another; b.  An offense involving sexual misconduct; or c.  An offense involving illegal drugs or the unlawful use of weapons. Athens-Clarke County may issue a license or permit to any person convicted of any of the crimes described in items a. b. or c. of this subparagraph if it finds that such conviction occurred at least five (5) years prior to the date of the application and the applicant has had no subsequent convictions for crime mentioned in this section. (4)  The applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of fact in the permit application or in any document required by Athens-Clarke County in conjunction therewith; (5)  The applicant has had a massage business, masseur or other similar permit or license denied, revoked or suspended by Athens-Clarke County or any other state or local agency within five (5) years prior to the date of the application. (6)  The applicant (if an individual) or any of the officers and directors (if the applicant is a corporation) or any of the partners (including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership) and the manager or other person principally in charge of the operation of the business is not over the age of 18 years. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 12) 
Sec. 6-8-31. - Same—Facilities.     No license to conduct a massage establishment shall be issued unless an inspection by Athens-Clarke County reveals that the establishment complies with each of the following minimum requirements: (1)  Construction of rooms used for toilets, tubs, steam baths and showers shall be made waterproof with approved waterproofed materials and shall be installed in accordance with the Athens-Clarke County Building Code. Plumbing fixtures shall be installed in accordance with the Athens-Clarke County Plumbing Code: a.  Steam rooms and shower compartments shall have waterproof floors, walls and ceilings approved by the chief building official; b.  Floors of wet and dry heat rooms shall be adequately pitched to one (1) or more drains properly connected to the sewer (exception: Dry heat room with wooden floors need not be provided with pitched floors and floor drains); c.  A source of hot water must be available within the immediate vicinity of dry and wet heat rooms to facilitate cleaning. (2)  The premises shall have adequate equipment for disinfecting and sterilizing nondisposable instruments and materials used in administering massages. Such nondisposable instruments and materials shall be disinfected after each use on each patron. (3)  Separate storage areas shall be provided and used for the storage of clean linen, towels and other materials used in connection with administering massages. All soiled linen, towels and other materials shall be kept in properly covered containers or cabinets, which containers or cabinets shall be kept separate from the clean storage areas. (4)  Toilet facilities shall be provided in convenient locations. When employees and patrons of different sexes are on the premises at the same time, separate toilet facilities shall be provided for each sex. Urinals may be substituted for waterclosets after one (1) watercloset has been provided. Toilet facilities shall be designated as to the sex accommodated therein. (5)  Lavatories or wash basins provided with hot and cold running water shall be installed in either the toilet room or a vestibule. Lavatories or wash basins shall be provided with soap and a dispenser and with sanitary towels. (6)  All electrical equipment shall be installed in accordance with the requirements of Athens-Clarke County Electrical Code. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 12) 
Sec. 6-8-32. - Waiver of application requirements.     Athens-Clarke County shall waive the requirements of section 6-8-29(9) if the applicant furnished satisfactory evidence that he or she attended not less than 70 hours of instruction in a school within the United States that provides education substantially equal to or in excess of the educational requirements of this chapter. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 12) 
Sec. 6-8-33. - Time of approval, duration.     The finance director, or designee, shall act to approve or deny an application for a license or permit under this chapter within a reasonable period of time and in no event shall Athens-Clarke County act to approve or deny the license or permit later than 90 days from the date that the application was accepted by the finance director or designee. Every license or permit issued pursuant to this chapter will terminate on December 31 of each year unless sooner suspended or revoked. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 12) 
Sec. 6-8-34. - Issuance of massage business license.     Upon the payment of the fee for professionals provided in title 6 of this Code for each massagist in the establishment, the finance director shall issue the license for the massage establishment. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 12) 
Sec. 6-8-35. - Multiple massage establishments.     Should any massage business have more than one (1) location where the business of massage is pursued, then a license, stating both the address of the principal place of business and of the other location or locations, shall be issued by the finance director, or designee, upon the tender of the license fees. Licenses issued for other locations shall terminate on the same date as that of the principal place of business, regardless of the date of issuance. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 12) 
Sec. 6-8-36. - Posting of permit and license. (a)  Every massagist shall post the permit required by this chapter in his or her work area. (b)  Every person licensed under this chapter to operate a massage establishment shall display such license in a prominent place. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 12) 
Sec. 6-8-37. - Name and place of business.     No person granted a license pursuant to this chapter shall operate a massage establishment under a name not specified in his license, nor shall he conduct business under any designation or location not specified in his license. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 12) 
Sec. 6-8-38. - Transfer of license generally.     Except as provided in section 6-8-39, no license or permit shall be transferable except with the consent of the finance director or designee. An application for such transfer shall be in writing and shall be accompanied by any applicable fees. The written application for such transfer shall contain the same information as requested herein for initial application for the license or permit. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 12) 
Sec. 6-8-39. - Sale or transfer or change of location.     Upon sale, transfer or relocation of a massage establishment, the license therefor shall be null and void; provided, however, that upon the death or incapacity of the licensee or any colicensee of the massage establishment, any heir or devisee of a deceased licensee may continue the business of the massage establishment for a reasonable period of time not to exceed 60 days to allow for an orderly transfer of the license. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 12) 
Sec. 6-8-40. - Revocation or suspension of license.     Any license issued for a massage establishment may be revoked or suspended by the finance director, or designee, after notice and a hearing, for good cause, or in any case where any of the provisions of this chapter are violated or where any employee of the licensee, including a masseur or masseuse, is engaged in any conduct which violates any of the state or local laws or ordinances, including, but not limited to, health, sanitation and safety, at the licensee's place of business and the licensee has actual or constructive knowledge by due diligence. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 12) 
Sec. 6-8-41. - Revocation of masseur or masseuse permit.     A masseur or masseuse permit issued by the finance director, or designee, shall be revoked or suspended where it appears that the masseur or masseuse has been convicted of any offense which would be cause for denial of a permit upon an original application, has made a false statement on an application for a permit, or has committed an act in violation of this chapter. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 12) 
CHAPTER 6-9. - PAWNBROKERS AND DEALERS IN PRECIOUS METALS OR GEMS[7] Article 1. General Provisions that Apply to All Articles in Chapter Sec. 6-9-1. Definitions. Sec. 6-9-2. Responsibility for Enforcement. Sec. 6-9-3. Daily Electronic Reporting. Sec. 6-9-4. Penalties. Sec. 6-9-5. Requirements of this Chapter in addition to Requirements of Chapter 6-1. Sec. 6-9-6. Compliance with State Law. Secs. 6-9-7—6-9-11. Reserved. Article 2. Pawnbrokers Sec. 6-9-12. Premises open to police. Sec. 6-9-13. Inspection of pledges and purchases and records. Sec. 6-9-14. Recordkeeping Requirements. Sec. 6-9-15. Daily accurate report; false statements. Sec. 6-9-16. Minors. Sec. 6-9-17. Goods held for 30 days; Police holds. Secs. 6-9-18, 6-9-19. Reserved. Article 3. Dealers in Precious Metals or Gems Sec. 6-9-20. Registration and Regulatory Permit Required. Sec. 6-9-21. Recordkeeping Requirements. Sec. 6-9-22. Daily electronic reporting required. Sec. 6-9-23. Unlawful activities. Sec. 6-9-24. Applicability of Article. Secs. 6-9-25—6-9-29. Reserved. Article 4. Itinerant Dealers in Precious Metals or Gems Sec. 6-9-30. Applicability. Sec. 6-9-31. Notice of intent to conduct business. Sec. 6-9-32. Records. Sec. 6-9-33. Daily Accurate Report to police. Sec. 6-9-34. Surrender of stolen property. Sec. 6-9-35. Holding period. Sec. 6-9-36. Unlawful to purchase from person under 17 years. Footnotes: --- (7) --- Editor's note— Ord. of Apr. 6, 2010, § 1, deleted the former Ch. 6-9, §§ 6-9-1—6-9-10, and enacted a new Ch. 6-9 as set out herein. The former Ch. 6-9 pertained to pawnbrokers and derived from Ord. of 4-7-92, § 13. State Law reference— Dealers in used watches, O.C.G.A. § 43-49-1 et seq.; pawnbrokers, O.C.G.A. § 44-12-130 et seq.; liens of pawnbrokers, O.C.G.A. §§ 44-14-400 et seq., 44-14-103; satisfaction of liens, O.C.G.A. §§ 44-14-108, 44-14-550; supervision of pawnbrokers by municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 44-12-136. 
ARTICLE 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS THAT APPLY TO ALL ARTICLES IN CHAPTER 
Sec. 6-9-1. - Definitions.     For the purpose of this chapter the words below shall have the following definitions:     Dealer in precious metals or gems means any person engaged at a permanent location in Athens-Clarke County in the business of purchasing precious metals or gems or goods made from precious metals or gems from persons or sources other than manufacturers, manufacturers' representatives, or other dealers in precious metals or gems; or any person engaged in any other business if, in conjunction with such business, precious metals or gems or goods made from precious metals or gems are purchased from persons or sources other than manufacturers, manufacturers' representatives, or other dealers in precious metals or gems where such purchase is for resale in its original form or as changed by remounting, melting, re-forming, remolding, or recasting or for resale as scrap or in bulk.     Electronic Reporting System means a computer based system, as specified by the chief of police and approved by the Manager, which is designed to record and transmit data and information electronically.     Gems means any precious or semiprecious stone which is cut and polished.     Itinerant Dealer in Precious Metals or Gems means a person who, due to the temporary manner in which the business is operated, is not required to have an occupation tax certificate to operate a business in Athens-Clarke County and who enters Athens-Clarke County on a temporary, itinerant basis for a period of time not more than 15 days and advertises by any form of media communication to the public that it will buy, sell or otherwise trade in and receive precious metals or gems at a nonpermanent location within Athens-Clarke County.     Nonpermanent location means any location designated to be used to conduct a business engaged in dealing in precious metals or gems by an itinerant merchant, in any temporary place, including but not limited to hotels or motels, any movable vehicle, or other temporary or movable structure to be used to conduct such business for a limited or specific time.     Numismatic coins means coins whose value as collectors' items exceeds the value of the content of the precious metals in the coins.     Pawnbroker means any person engaged in whole or in part in the business of lending money on the security of pledged goods, or in the business of purchasing tangible personal property on the condition that it may be redeemed or repurchased by the seller for a fixed price within a fixed period of time, or in the business of purchasing tangible personal property from persons or sources other than manufacturers or licensed dealers as a part of or in conjunction with the business activities described in this section.     Pawn or pledge means a bailment of personal property as security for any debt or engagement, redeemable upon certain terms and with the power of sale on default.     Pawnshop means any business wherein a substantial part thereof is to take or receive, by way of pledge, pawn, consignment or exchange, any goods, wares, merchandise, or any kind of personal property whatever, as security for the repayment of money lent thereon.     Pawnshop transaction means to take or receive any article of property or, from any customer, by pawning, pledging, trading, exchanging, purchasing, or other means.     Person means an individual, partnership, corporation, joint venture, trust, association, or any other legal entity however organized.     Precious metals means gold, silver, or platinum or any alloy containing gold, silver, or platinum.     Proper identification means any one of the following: (1)  A Georgia driver's license which was properly issued by the appropriate state agency; (2)  A valid Georgia voter identification card or other valid identification card issued by a branch, department, agency, or entity of the State of Georgia, any other state, or the United States authorized by law to issue personal identification, provided that such identification card contains a photograph of the customer; (3)  A valid United States passport; (4)  A valid employee identification card containing a photograph of the customer and issued by any branch, department, agency, or entity of the United States government, this state, or any county, municipality, board, authority, or other entity of this state; (5)  A valid United States military identification card, provided that such identification card contains a photograph of the customer; or (6)  A valid tribal identification card containing a photograph of the customer.     Third party administrator means any individual, business or corporation designated by the chief of police to administer the reporting requirements of this chapter. (Ord. of 4-6-2010, § 1) 
Sec. 6-9-2. - Responsibility for Enforcement.     The Athens-Clarke County police department shall have the responsibility for the enforcement of this chapter. Sworn officers of the Athens-Clarke County police department and civilian employees designated by the chief of police shall have the authority to inspect establishments licensed under this chapter during the hours in which the premises are open for business. These inspections shall be made for the purpose of verifying compliance with the requirements of this chapter and state law. This section is not intended to limit the authority of any other Athens-Clarke County officer or employee to conduct inspections authorized by other provisions of the Athens-Clarke County Code. (Ord. of 4-6-2010, § 1) 
Sec. 6-9-3. - Daily Electronic Reporting. (a)  All businesses regulated by this chapter shall make correct and truthful entries of information as required by the applicable article as soon after the transaction as possible and in no event more than one hour after the applicable time set for closing of the business. The daily electronic reporting shall be by an electronic reporting system required by the Chief of Police with the approval of the Manager. Every pawnshop shall enter each transaction as it occurs into the electronic reporting system via the internet to the administrator of the electronic reporting system. The administrator of the electronic reporting system will electronically transmit all transactions to the police department. (b)  In the event that the electronic reporting system becomes temporarily or permanently disabled, businesses will be notified as soon as possible by the police department. In this event, the businesses will be required to make records of transactions in paper form as prescribed by the police department. Such paper forms must include all information required under the applicable article related to the business. Businesses shall be responsible for maintaining an adequate inventory of these forms. (c)  The chief of police with the approval of the Manager shall select and designate the required electronic reporting system and required equipment needed. (Ord. of 4-6-2010, § 1) 
Sec. 6-9-4. - Penalties. (a)  Any person running a pawnshop, or any employee or agent thereof, shall be punished as provided by section 1-1-5, and, in addition, by the revocation of the regulatory permit of the pawnbroker violating the provisions of any law or ordinance pertaining to pawnbrokers. (b)  Any person running a business dealing in precious metals or gems, or any employee or agent thereof, violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punished as provided by section 1-1-5, and, in addition, by the revocation of the regulatory permit of the dealer in precious metals or gems violating the provisions of any law or ordinance pertaining to dealers in precious metals or gems. (c)  Any person running a business as an itinerant merchant dealing in precious metals or gems, or any employee or agent thereof, violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punished as provided by section 1-1-5, and, in addition, by the revocation of the regulatory permit of the itinerant merchant dealing in precious metals or gems violating the provisions of any law or ordinance pertaining to dealers in precious metals or gems. (d)  If any regulatory permit required by any article herein is denied, suspended or revoked, the permitee shall have the right to appeal the denial, suspension or revocation to the administrative hearing officer pursuant to section 1-5-1 within 30 days of the denial, suspension or revocation. The decision of the administrative hearing officer shall be final decision by Athens-Clarke County. (Ord. of 4-6-2010, § 1) 
Sec. 6-9-5. - Requirements of this Chapter in addition to Requirements of Chapter 6-1.     The provisions of this chapter are intended to augment and be in addition to the provisions of Chapter 6-1 (Occupation Taxes and Regulatory Fees for Businesses, Professionals, and Occupations). Where this chapter imposes a greater restriction upon persons, premises, businesses or practices than is imposed by Chapter 6-1, this chapter shall control. (Ord. of 4-6-2010, § 1) 
Sec. 6-9-6. - Compliance with State Law.     Nothing in this chapter shall relieve pawnbrokers or dealers in precious metals or gems from the necessity of complying with state law. (Ord. of 4-6-2010, § 1) 
Secs. 6-9-7—6-9-11. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 2. - PAWNBROKERS 
Sec. 6-9-12. - Premises open to police.     Every pawnbroker shall admit to his premises any police officer, or designated civilian employee of the police department, who in the performance of official lawful duties as prescribed by the Chief of Police may desire at any time to search for articles missing or stolen, or to make any inspection authorized by this chapter, without the formality of a search warrant. (Ord. of 4-6-2010, § 1) 
Sec. 6-9-13. - Inspection of pledges and purchases and records.     All articles pledged or sold to pawnbrokers shall, at all times, be subject to inspection and examination by the police. All records required to be kept by this chapter or by policies of the Chief of Police shall be subject to inspection and examination by the police. (Ord. of 4-6-2010, § 1) 
Sec. 6-9-14. - Recordkeeping Requirements.     All pawnbrokers shall maintain records documenting all pawnshop transactions as follows: (a)  At the time of the actual transaction pawnbrokers shall complete the transaction form designated by the chief of police. A pawnbroker shall maintain a copy of the completed transaction form on the licensed premises for at least one year after the date of the transaction. However, the pawnbroker shall maintain a copy of the transaction form either on premise or off premise at a location within Athens-Clarke County approved by the Chief of Police for not less than four years. Such records may be kept electronically as long as a copy of the electronic records can be provided to the Athens-Clarke County police or other law enforcement agency upon demand. (b)  The record required above shall contain: (1)  The time, date, and place of the transaction. (2)  A complete and accurate description of the goods acquired, including the following information, if applicable: a.  Brand name. b.  Model number. c.  Manufacturer's serial number. d.  Size. e.  Color, as apparent to the untrained eye. f.  Precious metal type, weight, and content if known, as well as a digital photograph. g.  Gemstone description, including the number of stones, if applicable, as well as a digital photograph. h.  In the case of firearms, the type of action, caliber or gauge, number of barrels, barrel length, and finish. i.  Any other unique identifying marks, numbers, or letters. (3)  The pawnbroker shall require verification of identification of the person from whom the goods are acquired by accepting only proper identification as defined in Article 1 herein, as well as a description of the person including: a.  Full name, current residential address, workplace, and home and work phone numbers. b.  Height, weight, date of birth, race, gender, hair color, eye color, and any other identifying marks. (4)  The record shall contain the type of identification exhibited, the issuing agency, and the number thereon. (5)  The seller shall sign a statement verifying that the seller is the rightful owner of the goods or is entitled to sell, consign, or trade the goods. (6)  Any other information required by the format designated by the chief of police and approved by the Manager. (Ord. of 4-6-2010, § 1) 
Sec. 6-9-15. - Daily accurate report; false statements. (a)  Every pawnbroker, his employees or agents, shall make correct and truthful entries of the above-required information in the daily electronic reporting required in section 6-9-3. (b)  It shall be unlawful for person engaged in the business of pawnbroker to make any false entry in any report. Any person making any willfully false or misleading statements in the report shall be punished as provided in section 6-9-4. (Ord. of 4-6-2010, § 1) 
Sec. 6-9-16. - Minors.     It is unlawful for any pawnbroker, or agent or employee thereof to receive any article in pawn or purchase any article for resale from any person under 17 years of age. (Ord. of 4-6-2010, § 1) 
Sec. 6-9-17. - Goods held for 30 days; Police holds. (a)  Any pawnbroker or person operating under a pawnbroker's license who takes goods on pawn or buys goods, taking full title thereto, the word "goods" being used in the broadest sense and including all kinds of personal property, shall hold the goods so taken in pawn or purchase for at least 30 days before disposing of the goods by sale, transfer, shipment or otherwise. (b)  The Athens-Clarke County police department has the authority to place property that is the subject of police investigation on "police hold." In that event, the Athens-Clarke County police department shall notify the pawnbroker of the need for a police hold and identify all property subject to the police hold. Upon notification, it shall be the responsibility of the pawnbroker to maintain the subject property until such time as the property is released from police hold status or the property is confiscated as evidence. (Ord. of 4-6-2010, § 1) 
Secs. 6-9-18, 6-9-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 3. - DEALERS IN PRECIOUS METALS OR GEMS 
Sec. 6-9-20. - Registration and Regulatory Permit Required. (a)  No person shall engage in business as a dealer in precious metals or gems until he has registered as a dealer in precious metals or gems for each separate place of business with the Athens-Clarke County Chief of Police and has applied for a regulatory permit to operate said business in Athens-Clarke County. The registration and permit application shall be in writing and shall be sworn to or affirmed by the dealer in precious metals or gems on a form as prescribed by the Chief of Police. (b)  The registration and permit application shall contain the full name, business address, home address and date of birth of the dealer together with the full names, home addresses, and dates of birth of all other persons having an ownership interest or actually employed in the business other than publicly held corporations. In the case of a corporation, this list shall include full names, dates of birth and titles of corporate officers and owners of ten or more percent of the common or preferred stock. (c)  No person shall be eligible for a regulatory permit or to register as a dealer in precious metals or gems if any owner, manager, employee or stockholder, other than stockholders owning less than ten percent of the outstanding shares of a publicly held corporation, has been convicted of a felony under the laws of this state or any other state or the United States. This subsection shall not apply to any person who has been convicted of a felony after ten years have expired from the date of completion of the felony sentence. Prior to the issuance of an occupation tax certificate and the regulatory permit, a background investigation shall be required for the stockholders, owner(s), manager(s), and employee(s). If the eligibility requirements are met, then the occupation tax certificate and the regulatory permit shall be issued, and the registration allowed. (d)  Such occupation tax certificate and regulatory permit shall be for the calendar year and must be renewed prior to the expiration date. All independent contractors must have the certificates and permits required by this chapter. In addition, each applicant shall pay an initial registration fee to the Athens-Clarke County Police Department of $25.00 to cover the cost of registering such persons. The registration shall be renewed annually upon presentation of a current tax certificate and regulatory permit by the dealer. (e)  It shall be the responsibility of the Athens-Clarke County Finance Department to issue and receive payment for the occupation tax certificate. (f)  It shall be the responsibility of the chief of police or designee to issue and receive payment for the regulatory permit. The cost of the regulatory permit shall be $25.00 for each individual listed on the application and shall be used to cover the cost of the criminal history(s) and background investigation of the applicant(s) investigation in addition to any fees charged by the State. The Director of Finance or his designated representative shall submit the application after filing to the police department. Each applicant authorizes Athens-Clarke County and its agents to secure from any court, law enforcement agency, or other public agency his criminal history and the criminal history of all individuals required to be listed on the application, including but not limited to sole proprietor, partners, members, corporate officers, stockholders, and managers, and authorizes Athens-Clarke County to use such information in determining whether the license applied for shall be issued. Each applicant waives any right that he would otherwise have to preclude Athens-Clarke County or its agents from obtaining and using such information and each applicant further waives any liability of Athens-Clarke County or its agents for obtaining and using such information, and agrees to indemnify and hold Athens-Clarke County harmless against the claims of any person listed by the applicant on the application and by doing so has authorized Athens-Clarke County to investigate. The police department shall make an arrest and conviction investigation concerning any applicants hereunder and all individuals required to be listed on the application, including but not limited to sole proprietor, partners, LLC members, corporate officers, corporate stockholders, and managers. The police department shall submit the results of the investigation to the Director of Finance or his designated representative within 30 days of submission. (g)  All applications shall contain the address of the premises upon which the business is conducted and the zoning and planning classification of the premises. (h)  Each dealer shall be required to notify the Athens-Clarke County Police Department in writing within seven calendar days of any change of address of the dealer or business or any change of ownership in the business. A copy of the change of address or ownership in the business shall be transmitted to the sheriff of the county within seven days of the notification. (Ord. of 4-6-2010, § 1) 
Sec. 6-9-21. - Recordkeeping Requirements. (a)  Every dealer in precious metals or gems shall maintain a record, in permanent form, in which shall be entered at the time of each purchase of precious metals or gems or goods made from precious metals or gems the following: (1)  The date and time of the purchase; (2)  The name of the person making the purchase from the seller; (3)  The name, age, and address of the seller of the items purchased and the distinctive number from such seller's driver's license or other proper identification as defined in Article 1, containing a photo of the seller; (4)  A clear and accurate identification and description of the purchased goods, including the serial, model, or other number, and all identifying marks inscribed thereon as well as a digital photograph. If a criminal investigation occurs, the dealer in precious metals and gems shall, upon request, provide a clear and legible copy of the image to the appropriate law enforcement agency; (5)  The price paid for the goods purchased; (6)  The number of the check issued for the purchase price, if payment is made by check; and (7)  The signature of the seller. (b)  The permanent record required by this Code section shall be in legible English. Entries shall appear in chronological order. No blank lines may be left between entries. No obliterations, alterations, or erasures may be made. Corrections shall be made by striking through the entry without destroying its legibility. The record shall be maintained for each purchase of precious metals or gems or goods made from precious metals or gems for at least one year on-site or for at least two years off-site at a location within Athens-Clarke County approved by the Chief of Police. Such records may be kept electronically as long as a copy of the electronic records can be provided to the Athens-Clarke County police or other law enforcement agency upon demand. The record shall be open to the inspection of any duly authorized law enforcement officer or designated civilian employee of the police department during the ordinary hours of business or at any reasonable time. (c)  Dealers exclusively engaged in buying or exchanging for merchandise scrap dental gold and silver from licensed dentists by registered or certified mail or statutory overnight delivery may record the post office record of the mailed parcel in lieu of the seller's age and proper identification as required in paragraph (3) of subsection (a) of this Code section and in lieu of the seller's signature as required in paragraph (7) of subsection (a) of this Code section. (Ord. of 4-6-2010, § 1) 
Sec. 6-9-22. - Daily electronic reporting required. (a)  Every dealer in precious metals or gems shall comply with the requirements for daily electronic reporting as set forth in section 6-9-3. The daily electronic reports shall contain the information required in section 6-9-21(a)(1)—(5) in a form approved or prescribed by the Chief of Police of all precious metals or gems or goods made from precious metals or gems purchased on the day of the report. (b)  All reports shall be maintained in a secure location under the direct supervision of the appropriate police officer. All reports shall be available for inspection only for law enforcement purposes as provided in O.C.G.A. Section 43-37-4(b). (c)  Any Athens-Clarke County police officer may, in his discretion, authorize any person who demonstrates theft of precious metals or gems by the presenting of an incident report or other similar document to inspect the reports at the Athens-Clarke County Police Department in an effort to locate stolen property. (Ord. of 4-6-2010, § 1) 
Sec. 6-9-23. - Unlawful activities. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any dealer in precious metals or gems or any agent or employee of a dealer in precious metals or gems who makes purchases of precious metals or gems or of goods made from precious metals or gems to: (1)  Make any false statement in the permit application and registration provided for in section 6-9-20; (2)  Fail to maintain and make entries in the permanent record as required by section 6-9-21; (3)  Make any false entry in such permanent record; (4)  Falsify, obliterate, destroy, or remove from the place of business such permanent record; (5)  Refuse to allow any duly authorized law enforcement officer or designated civilian employee of the police department to inspect such permanent record, or any precious metals or gems or goods made from precious metals or gems in his possession, during the ordinary hours of business or at any reasonable time; (6)  Sell, exchange, or remove from the legal possession of the buyer, or to alter the form of, any precious metals or gems or goods made from precious metals or gems purchased by remounting, melting, cutting up, or otherwise altering the original form until at least ten calendar days have elapsed from the time of purchase or acquisition; (7)  Fail to make the report as required in this article; or (8)  Purchase any precious metals or gems from any person under 17 years of age. (b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to advertise or transact business as a dealer in precious metals or gems without first registering and obtaining the regulatory permit pursuant to the requirements of this chapter. (c)  It shall be unlawful for any dealer in precious metals or gems to purchase precious metals in a melted or smelted state unless the purchase is from a registered dealer in precious metals or gems. (d)  If any Athens-Clarke County police officer has probable cause to believe that precious metals or gems have been stolen, he may give notice in writing to the dealer to retain the precious metals or gems for an additional 15 days; and it shall be unlawful for the dealer to dispose of the property unless the notice is revoked in writing within the 15 day period. (Ord. of 4-6-2010, § 1) 
Sec. 6-9-24. - Applicability of Article. (a)  This article shall not apply to any precious metals or gems containing precious metals or gems obtained from industrial producers, manufacturers, licensed dealers, or distributors. (b)  This article shall not apply to dealers exclusively engaged in the sale or exchange of numismatic coins or to transactions exclusively involving numismatic coins or other coinage. (c)  This article shall not apply to pawnbrokers regulated under Article 2. (Ord. of 4-6-2010, § 1) 
Secs. 6-9-25—6-9-29. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 4. - ITINERANT DEALERS IN PRECIOUS METALS OR GEMS 
Sec. 6-9-30. - Applicability.     This article shall be applicable to all itinerant dealers of precious metals or gems, whether their sales, trades and purchases are at retail or wholesale or by any form of pawn. Specifically excluded are wholesalers, buyers and sellers who sell, trade and deal only with mercantile establishments or purchase precious metals or gems from manufacturers, manufacturer's representatives, or other dealers in precious metals or gems. (Ord. of 4-6-2010, § 1) 
Sec. 6-9-31. - Notice of intent to conduct business. (a)  Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in activities as an itinerant dealer in precious metals or gems in Athens-Clarke County without having obtained a valid permit for each separate location and for each person engaging in said activities. Prior to advertising any buying, selling, trading or otherwise dealing in precious metals or gems, an itinerant dealer shall, at least three business days prior to the initial advertising, file with the chief of police an application for a regulatory permit to conduct the business of itinerant dealer in precious metals or gems in Athens-Clarke County. (b)  Such application shall include the following: (1)  Full name of the person, group or association, and its address; (2)  The name of the person who will be conducting business in Athens-Clarke County and his home address, including proper identification as defined in Article 1; (3)  The length of the stay in Athens-Clarke County, including the dates of opening and closing, at each fixed location not to exceed 15 days; (4)  The fingerprints of the person or persons who will be conducting such business in Athens-Clarke County; and (5)  Where the business will be conducted, and during what hours; except that no itinerant dealers in precious metals or gems shall operate at any location in Athens-Clarke County between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. Monday through Saturday or during any hours on Sunday. (c)  No person who has been convicted of a felony under the laws of this state or any other state or the United States shall be eligible to receive a regulatory permit to conduct business as an itinerant merchant of precious metals or gems within Athens-Clarke County. This paragraph shall not apply to any person who has been convicted of a felony after ten years have expired from the date of completion of the felony sentence. Prior to the issuance of the regulatory permit, a background investigation shall be required for each person who will be conducting business in Athens-Clarke County. If the eligibility requirements are met, then the regulatory permit shall be issued for each person meeting the requirements. The provisions of section 6-9-20(f) shall apply to the background investigation required herein. (d)  Each regulatory permit issued pursuant to this section shall be nontransferable and valid for period of time listed by the applicant in response to paragraph (b)(3) above, not to exceed 15 days. (e)  Every itinerant dealer shall admit to the premises where business is being conducted any police officer, or designated civilian employee of the police department, who in the performance of official lawful duties as prescribed by the Chief of Police, may desire at any time to search for articles missing or stolen, or to make any inspection of records authorized by this chapter, without the formality of a search warrant. (Ord. of 4-6-2010, § 1) 
Sec. 6-9-32. - Records.     All itinerant dealers, both salesmen and buyers, of precious metals or gems shall keep records wherein shall be entered an accurate description of all property pledged, traded or sold by them. Such description shall include to the extent possible the name or the make of the article, any identifying mark or number, and a statement of the kind of material of which it is made. In such records there shall be entered also the full name and address of the person by whom same was deposited or sold, and the time when the same was done, and the name, address, date of birth and drivers' license number of seller. In the event the seller does not have a drivers' license, other proper identification as defined in Article 1 shall be required. These entries shall be made as soon after the transaction as is possible but in no event more than one hour after the time given for daily close of business in section 6-9-31(b)(5) above. Such records may be kept electronically as long as a copy of the electronic records can be provided to the Athens-Clarke County police or other law enforcement agency upon demand. (Ord. of 4-6-2010, § 1) 
Sec. 6-9-33. - Daily Accurate Report to police.     Every traveling and itinerant dealer shall make a report to the police department, as required in section 6-9-3 (Daily Electronic Reporting). The report shall be in such form as may be prescribed by the chief of police, of all property pledged, traded, bought or sold during the period of operation in Athens-Clarke County, and shall show the name and address of any person who bought, sold, traded or otherwise disposed of or received any item; the date and time of the transaction; the amount paid or advanced, or the item traded; the full description of articles, including kind, style, material, color, design, kind and number of stones in jewelry; and all identifying names, ranks, and numbers; and a description of persons trading, buying, selling or pawning, including the name, address, race, weight, height and thumbprint of said person. (Ord. of 4-6-2010, § 1) 
Sec. 6-9-34. - Surrender of stolen property.     In the event it is determined that any item bought, sold or traded to, or received by the itinerant dealer, salesman or buyer is the subject of any theft or crime, the dealer, salesman or itinerant buyer shall upon demand of the chief of police surrender the same to the police department. (Ord. of 4-6-2010, § 1) 
Sec. 6-9-35. - Holding period.     Every item covered by this Article which is purchased from one seller shall be separately packaged, or kept separately, and not intermingled or confused with items purchased from another seller, for a period of 30 days following the purchase of such item. No person engaging in the purchase of precious metals or items as defined in this chapter shall sell or otherwise dispose, permit the sale or disposal, remove or permit to be removed from the license holder's place of business, intermingle with other jewelry or stones, alter, change, deface or permit the same of any such precious metals or stones purchased, until after the expiration of 30 days from the date of purchase. (Ord. of 4-6-2010, § 1) 
Sec. 6-9-36. - Unlawful to purchase from person under 17 years.     It is unlawful for any itinerant dealer of precious metals or gems to purchase any precious metals or gems from any person under 17 years of age. (Ord. of 4-6-2010, § 1) 
CHAPTER 6-10. - SIDEWALK CAFES[8] Sec. 6-10-1. Purpose. Sec. 6-10-2. Definitions. Sec. 6-10-3. Permit. Sec. 6-10-4. Application. Sec. 6-10-5. Issuance of permit. Sec. 6-10-6. Permit fee. Sec. 6-10-7. Regulations generally. Sec. 6-10-8. Sidewalk cafes on College Square. Sec. 6-10-9. Liability and insurance. Sec. 6-10-10. Revocation or suspension of permit. Sec. 6-10-11. Fines for violators. Sec. 6-10-12. Americans with Disabilities Act. Sec. 6-10-13. Severability of part of Code. Footnotes: --- (8) --- Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Nov. 4, 2003, deleted former Ch. 6-10 in its entirety and added new provisions as Ch. 6-10 as herein set out. Former Ch. 6-10, §§ 6-10-1—6-10-6, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from § 1 of an ordinance adopted Nov. 4, 2003. 
Sec. 6-10-1. - Purpose.     This chapter shall apply to the establishment, operation, and maintenance of all outdoor cafes within Athens-Clarke County on public sidewalks. The purpose of this chapter is to promote the general economic development and atmosphere of Athens-Clarke County for the benefit of businesses and citizens located there, and no vested property right of individuals or individual businesses is created herein, and to create an aesthetic ambiance which will attract tourists to the Athens area. Further, this chapter is designed to maintain the efficiency, accessibility and safety of the pedestrian path. (Ord. of 11-4-2003, § 1; Ord. of 4-7-2015(2), § 1 ) 
Sec. 6-10-2. - Definitions. (a)  Sidewalk cafe. The term "sidewalk cafe" shall mean the location and possible use of furnishings which shall be limited to dividers, tables, umbrellas and/or chairs on the public sidewalk as permitted in this chapter and operated as an extension of a food or beverage establishment and which sidewalk cafe shall be an incidental activity of the establishment. (b)  College Square. The term "College Square" shall mean that portion of College Avenue between East Broad Street and East Clayton Street, including all public rights-of-way within such area. (c)  Manager. The term "manager" shall mean the Manager of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia, or his designee. (d)  Common area sidewalk cafe. The term "common area sidewalk cafe" shall mean the location and use of tables, umbrellas and chairs only in the paved brick areas of College Square which are not abutting the fronts of businesses. (e)  Permittee . The term "permittee" shall mean the recipient of a sidewalk cafe permit under the terms and provisions of this chapter. (f)  Downtown Athens District. The term "Downtown Athens District" shall mean that area of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia, defined as "the Downtown Athens Area" as set forth in Section 2 of Georgia Laws 1977, page 3533, pages 3534—3535 (entitled "Downtown Athens Development Authority Created"). (Ord. of 11-4-2003, § 1; Ord. of 7-5-2011, § 1; Ord. of 4-7-2015(2), § 2 ) 
Sec. 6-10-3. - Permit.     It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a sidewalk cafe except as permitted in this Chapter. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a sidewalk cafe as described in this ordinance without a permit issued by the manager, or to fail to comply with all sections of the sidewalk cafe ordinance. Such permit may be renewed annually at a time to be designated by the manager.     The issuance of a sidewalk cafe permit shall not be construed or interpreted to convey any vested property rights or any leasehold rights or interests to any person or business. The holder of a permit shall have the right to enforce trespass laws within a sidewalk cafe area. Permittee's use of the sidewalk cafe area is subject to the rights of utility companies pursuant to franchise or easement. Prior to acceptance of a permit, a permittee shall acknowledge that permittee has inspected the sidewalk area and determined that the area is suitable for its purposes and that it assumes all risks associated with its use of such area. The provisions of this chapter are subject to change and amendment by the mayor and commission from time to time.     Sidewalk cafe permits are non-transferable. Permits will expire upon the earlier of transfer of ownership, change in use of the establishment, and December 31 of each year. (Ord. of 11-4-2003, § 1; Ord. of 4-7-2015(2), § 3 ) 
Sec. 6-10-4. - Application.     Any person desiring to operate a sidewalk cafe shall submit an application, on a form prescribed by the manager, to the central services department. The application shall include, but not be limited to, the following: (1)  Name of applicant; (2)  Name, address, and telephone number of establishment; (3)  A copy of a valid Athens-Clarke County occupational tax certificate for the establishment of which the sidewalk cafe will be an incidental activity; (4)  A copy of a current certificate of insurance in the amounts and categories required by section 6-10-9 of this chapter; (5)  A sketch identifying the perimeter area, the dimensions of the area, the dimensions from perimeter to curb or nearest obstacle, and the proposed design and materials of the cafe railing system. (Ord. of 11-4-2003, § 1; Ord. of 4-7-2015(2), § 4 ) 
Sec. 6-10-5. - Issuance of permit.     Applicant shall be notified within two weeks of application submission of approval/denial of permit. If permit is denied, applicant shall be provided an explanation of the denial. (Ord. of 11-4-2003, § 1) 
Sec. 6-10-6. - Permit fee.     The annual permit fee to operate a sidewalk cafe shall be $100.00 plus $1.00 per square foot for the approved/permitted area.     Prior to issuance or renewal of a sidewalk cafe permit, the government's finance department shall verify that there are no outstanding debts, taxes, fines or fees owed to the government by the person or entity requesting a sidewalk cafe permit. A sidewalk cafe permit will not be issued until all outstanding debts, taxes, fines or fees to the Unified Government of Athens-Clarke County are paid in full. Any permit that is renewed pursuant to this Chapter shall be subject to any of the enforcement actions and imposition of any of the remedies provided in section 6-10-10 of this Chapter even though conduct that is the basis of such enforcement action may have occurred in a previous permit year or an administrative hearing pursuant to section 1-5-1 of this Code with respect to such permit may have been initiated in a prior permit year. In the event that a permit has been revoked by the administrative hearing officer, and the permittee has appealed such revocation to the Superior Court, or the time for filing such an appeal has not expired, consideration or issuance of any application for renewal of such permit for a subsequent year shall be suspended until final judgment in the appeal has been entered by the Court or the revocation has become final with no appeal being filed. (Ord. of 11-4-2003, § 1; Ord. of 4-7-2015(2), § 5 ) 
Sec. 6-10-7. - Regulations generally.     Except as otherwise provided in section 6-10-8 herein, a sidewalk cafe shall comply with the following regulations: (1)  Limitations on area. The area in which a sidewalk cafe is operated shall abut the outside front wall of the establishment of which it is an extension and shall not extend parallel in either direction beyond the outside front wall of the establishment. The area permitted for a sidewalk cafe shall not extend more than 50% of the minimum sidewalk width, measured from the back of the curb to the face of the building or the property line, whichever is less, measured perpendicular from the outside wall of the establishment; however, a minimum width of five feet shall be provided at all times for continuous unobstructed pedestrian traffic on the sidewalk between the sidewalk cafe area and the edge of sidewalk pavement or fixed obstacles. (2)  Divider required. The area permitted for a sidewalk cafe shall be separated from the remaining sidewalk area by a system of connected rigid metal rails and posts, or other fixed physical features at the manager's discretion, that would serve to contain crowds and maintain the boundaries of the cafe. The system shall be designed and constructed such that it resists movement and can be disassembled and removed if necessary. The design must be included in the application and must be approved by the manager prior to issuance of a permit. Such divider shall not be less than three feet nor more than four feet in height. All furnishings shall be located totally within the limits of the divider. It shall be the responsibility of the permittee to maintain the divider in its exact/approved location at all times and to ensure that all furnishings remain within the area permitted. (3)  Sanitation . It shall be the responsibility and duty of the establishment to which the sidewalk cafe permit is issued to maintain the area covered by the permit in a clean, neat, and orderly manner at all times. The area shall be cleared of all debris at all times. Pressure washing by permittee shall be conducted using water only. The use of cleaning agents is prohibited. All furnishings are to be kept clean, sanitary, safe, and in structurally sound condition at all times. (4)  Removal of furnishings. All tables, chairs, umbrellas and dividers of a sidewalk cafe shall be removed from the public sidewalk area as notified by the solid waste department for sidewalk cleaning. (5)  Suspension or modification of operation. The manager shall have the authority to require any sidewalk cafe operating in an area created by this section to suspend operation and clear such area, or to move or modify the location or operation of the sidewalk cafe, for reasons such as, but not limited to: a.  Any permitted special event; b.  Any street, sidewalk, or utility construction; c.  Any emergency situation; or d.  The protection of the health, safety, and welfare of the public. (6)  The sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages within sidewalk cafes that abut the establishment's building may be allowed in accordance with Chapter 6-3 of this Code. (7)  Section 3-12-23 of this Code prohibits the possession of any open glass container for the consumption of any beverage on the public sidewalks within Athens-Clarke County. (8)  Alcoholic beverages are prohibited in the common area sidewalk cafe areas. (9)  No items, materials (other than furnishings used in the normal operation of the sidewalk cafe), or trash shall be stored, kept, or maintained within the sidewalk cafe area. (Ord. of 11-4-2003, § 1; Ord. of 7-5-2011, § 2; Ord. of 4-7-2015(2), § 6 ) 
Sec. 6-10-8. - Exceptions. (a)  Common area sidewalk cafes on College Square are exempt from paragraph (2) of section 6-10-7, which requires the installation of cafe dividers. Such dividers are prohibited within common area sidewalk cafes. In addition to all other provisions applicable to sidewalk cafes as provided for in section 6-10-7 herein, the following additional provisions shall apply to common area sidewalk cafes: (1)  Common area sidewalk cafes may be provided within the paved brick areas at the four corners of College Square located on either side of College Avenue at its intersections with East Clayton Street and with East Broad Street. (2)  Common area sidewalk cafes may be designated in the six paved brick areas between the large concrete planters on either side of College Square parallel to the public concrete sidewalk. (3)  The outer limits of each such area provided for in paragraphs (1) and (2) above shall be clearly marked as prescribed by the manager. Furnishings shall not extend beyond such limits. A minimum of two feet of unobstructed space shall be maintained at all times around any permanent public fixture within or adjacent to the designated area. (4)  Any eligible establishment fronting on College Square and located at any corner of College Square shall be granted the right of first refusal to operate a common area sidewalk cafe that fronts their business. Upon any such refusal, the immediately adjacent eligible businesses shall have the next right of refusal on a first come first served basis. (5)  Each table may be equipped with an umbrella that, when open, shall extend to at least the same diameter as the table it serves and shall be anchored with a weighted base. Any umbrella protruding into public space shall be positioned at a minimum height of seven feet. An umbrella may display the name or logo of the restaurant operating the sidewalk cafe and/or advertise a product. Each umbrella shall be maintained in good, clean, and operable condition. (b)  Sidewalk cafes operated outside of the Downtown Athens District are exempt from paragraph (2) of section 6-10-7, which requires the installation of cafe dividers. Cafe dividers are optional outside of the Downtown Athens District. If installed, cafe dividers must comply with the requirements of paragraph (2) of section 6-10-7 and must be approved as part of the sidewalk cafe permit. In addition to all other provisions applicable to sidewalk cafes as provided for in section 6-10-7 herein, the following additional provisions shall apply to sidewalk cafes operated outside of the Downtown Athens District: (1)  Establishments located on the corner of two streets may apply for a sidewalk cafe permit that includes both street faces of the establishment. (2)  The permittee shall have the responsibility to ensure that patrons are informed that open containers of alcohol, if otherwise permitted, are not allowed outside of the permitted sidewalk cafe area when no cafe dividers are present. (Ord. of 11-4-2003, § 1; Ord. of 4-7-2015(2), § 7 ) 
Sec. 6-10-9. - Liability and insurance. (a)  Except for actions arising out of Athens-Clarke County's sole negligence, the permittee shall indemnify, defend, save, and hold harmless the Unified Government of Athens-Clarke County, its officers and employees, from any and all claims, liability, damages, and causes of action which may arise out of the permit or the permittee's activity on the premises. (b)  The permittee shall meet and maintain for the entire permit period, at its own expense, the following requirements: (1)  Commercial general liability in the amount of $1,000,000.00 per occurrence for bodily injury and property damage. The Unified Government of Athens-Clarke County must be named as an additional insured on this policy, and an endorsement must be issued as part of the policy reflecting compliance with this requirement. (2)  The Unified Government of Athens-Clarke County must receive 30 days written notice prior to any cancellation, non-renewal, or material change in the coverage provided. (3)  The permittee must provide an original certificate of insurance as evidence that the above requirements have been met prior to issuance of a permit. (Ord. of 11-4-2003, § 1; Ord. of 4-7-2015(2), § 8 ) 
Sec. 6-10-10. - Revocation or suspension of permit.     The approval of a sidewalk cafe permit is conditional at all times. A sidewalk cafe permit may be revoked or suspended by the administrative hearing officer pursuant to the provisions of section 1-5-1 if it is found that: (1)  Any necessary business or health permit or license has been suspended, revoked, or cancelled. (2)  The permittee does not have insurance which is correct and effective in the minimum amounts described in section 6-10-9. (3)  The permittee has failed to correct violations of this chapter or any other ordinance within 48 hours of receipt of the manager's notice of same delivered in writing to the permittee. (4)  The permittee has a history of violations of this chapter of three or more within a two-year period, or immediately upon any violation depending upon severity of the violation. (5)  Permits may be suspended for a period up to 12 months depending upon history and severity of violations. (Ord. of 11-4-2003, § 1; Ord. of 4-7-2015(2), § 9 ) 
Sec. 6-10-11. - Civil fines for violators.     The Administrative Hearing Officer may impose the following minimum civil fines for violations of this chapter: (1)  First violation: $100.00 civil fine. (2)  Second violation (within one-year period): $250.00 civil fine. (3)  Third violation (within one-year period): $500.00 civil fine. (Ord. of 11-4-2003, § 1; Ord. of 4-7-2015(2), § 10 ) 
Sec. 6-10-12. - Americans with Disabilities Act.     Any person or entity receiving a permit hereunder agrees to fully comply with all requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act as currently existing or as may be hereafter amended. (Ord. of 11-4-2003, § 1) 
Sec. 6-10-13. - Severability of part of Code.     It is hereby declared to be the intention of the mayor and commission that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, and phrases of this chapter are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, or section of this chapter shall be declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs, and sections of this chapter, since the same would have been enacted by the mayor and commission without the incorporation in this chapter of any such invalid phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, or section. (Ord. of 11-4-2003, § 1) 
CHAPTER 6-11. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS Sec. 6-11-1. Purpose. Sec. 6-11-2. Definitions. Sec. 6-11-3. Regulations. Sec. 6-11-4. Certain activities prohibited. Sec. 6-11-5. Adult entertainment establishment license required. Sec. 6-11-6. Operation of unregulated premises unlawful. Sec. 6-11-7. Admission of minors unlawful. Sec. 6-11-8. Sales to minors unlawful. Sec. 6-11-9. Location. Sec. 6-11-10. Adult entertainment establishment employees. Sec. 6-11-11. Application for adult entertainment establishment license. Sec. 6-11-12. Application contents. Sec. 6-11-13. Application—Investigation. Sec. 6-11-14. Persons prohibited as licensees. Sec. 6-11-15. Adult entertainment establishment license refusal, appeal. Sec. 6-11-16. Adult entertainment establishment license; renewal. Sec. 6-11-17. Adult entertainment establishment license nontransferable. Sec. 6-11-18. Change of location or name. Sec. 6-11-19. Penalty for violation. Sec. 6-11-20. Unlawful operation declared nuisance. Sec. 6-11-21. Alcoholic beverages—Prohibition, exceptions. Sec. 6-11-22. Revocation and appeal. 
Sec. 6-11-1. - Purpose.     The purpose of this chapter is to regulate certain types of businesses, including, but not limited to, adult entertainment establishments to the end that the many types of criminal activities frequently engendered by such businesses will be curtailed. However, it is recognized that such regulation cannot defacto approach prohibition. Otherwise a protected form of expression would vanish. As to adult dance establishments, this chapter represents a balancing of competing interests: Reduced criminal activity and protection of neighborhoods through the regulation of adult entertainment establishments versus the protected rights of adult entertainment establishments and patrons. (Ord. of 11-4-97, § 2) 
Sec. 6-11-2. - Definitions.     The following definitions shall apply to this chapter:     Adult entertainment establishments: The following terms used in this chapter defining adult entertainment establishments shall have the meanings indicated below for adult bookstore, adult business, adult dancing establishment, adult motion picture theater, adult mini-motion picture theater, adult hotel or motel, adult motion picture arcade, adult video store, erotic dance establishment, encounter center or rap establishment, escort bureau or introduction services, or adult store.     Adult bookstore means an establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines or other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising 20 percent of its net sales consisting of printed material which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.     Adult business means either: (1)  Any business other than those expressly specified in this article, where employees or patrons expose specified anatomical areas or engage in specified sexual activities; or (2)  Any other business or establishment which offers its patrons services or entertainment characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, discussing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.     Adult dancing establishment means a business that features dancers displaying or exposing specified anatomical areas.     Adult hotel or motel means a hotel or motel wherein material is presented which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.     Adult mini-motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity for less than 50 persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein.     Adult motion picture arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.     Adult motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons, used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein.     Adult store means a commercial establishment or other establishment which has a significant or substantial portion of its stock in trade (20 percent or more) or derives a significant or substantial portion (20 percent or more) of its revenues or devotes a significant or substantial portion (20 percent or more) of its interior business or advertising to the sale, rental or any form of consideration of any instruments, devices, paraphernalia, products, article or articles which are designed, sold or viewed for use in connection with "specified sexual activities" as defined herein, or which are sold or marketed primarily for stimulation of human genital organs.     Adult video store means any establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, video tapes or movies or other reproductions, whether for sale or rent, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising five percent of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such material or which derives more than five percent its net sales from videos which are characterized or distinguished or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.     Encounter center or rap establishment means any business, agency or person who, for any form of consideration or gratuity, provides a place where two or more persons may congregate, assemble or associate for the primary purpose of engaging in, describing or discussing specified sexual activities, or exposing specified anatomical areas.     Erotic dance establishment means a nightclub, theater or other establishment which features live performances by topless and/or bottomless dancers, go-go dancers, strippers or similar entertainers, where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.     Escort bureau or introduction services means any business, agency or person who, for a fee, commission, hire, reward or profit furnishes or offers to furnish names of persons, or who introduces, furnishes or arranges for persons who may accompany other persons to or about social affairs, entertainments or places of amusement, or who may consort with others about any place of public resort or within any private quarters.     Church means a temple or building consecrated to the honor of God or other supreme being and religion; or an assembly of persons united by the profession of the same religious faith, meeting together routinely for religious worship.     Good moral character means a person is of good moral character according to this chapter if that person has not been convicted of a drug-related or alcohol-related felony or sex-related crime in the past five years.     Minor means any person who has not attained the age of 18 years.     School means any school building or educational building on a college campus, including governmental or church school buildings and to all other buildings at such other schools as teach the subjects commonly taught in the schools of this state; and also including day care centers and child care facilities.     Specified sexual activities shall include any of the following: (1)  Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relations, and any of the following sexually oriented acts or conduct: anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, zooerasty; or (2)  Clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; or (3)  Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus, or masturbation; or (4)  Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breasts; or (5)  Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the inflicting of pain; or (6)  Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexual contact with an animal by a human being; or (7)  Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation.     Specified anatomical areas shall include any of the following: (1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region; buttock; or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or (2)  Human male genitalia in a discernible turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. (Ord. of 11-4-97, § 2) 
Sec. 6-11-3. - Regulations. (a)  No person, firm, partnership, corporation, or other entity shall advertise, or cause to be advertised, an adult entertainment establishment, as defined in this chapter, without a valid adult entertainment establishment license issued pursuant to this chapter. (b)  Applicant must also comply with the requirements of section 6-1-20 of the Code of Athens-Clarke County. (c)  An adult entertainment establishment applicant shall maintain and retain for a period of two years the names, addresses, and ages of all persons employed. (d)  No adult entertainment establishment applicant shall employ or contract with a dancer a person under the age of 18 years or a person not licensed pursuant to this chapter. (e)  No person under the age of 18 years shall be admitted to an adult entertainment establishment. (f)  An adult entertainment establishment, as defined in this chapter, shall be closed between 2:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. (g)  No employee or agent of any adult entertainment establishment shall fondle or caress any patron and no patron shall fondle or caress any dancer or any other employee or agent of any adult entertainment establishment. Nor shall the manager or owner of the adult entertainment establishment allow such activity. (h)  If any portion, or subparagraph, of this section of this chapter or its application to any person or circumstance, is held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of application to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected. (Ord. of 11-4-97, § 2) 
Sec. 6-11-4. - Certain activities prohibited.     No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall publicly display or expose or allow the public display or exposure, with less than a full opaque covering, of any portion of a person's genitals, pubic area or buttocks in a lewd and obscene fashion. (Ord. of 11-4-97, § 2) 
Sec. 6-11-5. - Adult entertainment establishment license required.     It is unlawful for any person, association, partnership or corporation or other entity to engage in, conduct or carry on, in or upon any premises within Athens-Clarke County any of the adult entertainment establishments, as defined in this chapter, without an adult entertainment establishment license so to do. No adult entertainment establishment license so issued shall condone or make legal any activity thereunder if the same is deemed illegal or unlawful under the laws of the State of Georgia or the United States. (Ord. of 11-4-97, § 2) 
Sec. 6-11-6. - Operation of unregulated premises unlawful.     It is unlawful for any person to operate an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, adult minimotion picture theater, adult video store, adult hotel or motel, adult motion picture arcade, encounter center or rap establishment, escort bureau or introduction service, adult business, adult store, adult dancing establishment or erotic dance establishment unless such business shall have a currently valid adult entertainment establishment license or shall have made proper application for renewal within the time required thereof under this chapter, which adult entertainment establishment license shall not be under suspension or permanently or conditionally revoked. (Ord. of 11-4-97, § 2) 
Sec. 6-11-7. - Admission of minors unlawful.     It is unlawful for an applicant to admit or permit the admission of minors within a regulated premises. (Ord. of 11-4-97, § 2) 
Sec. 6-11-8. - Sales to minors unlawful.     It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, barter or give, to any minor any service, material, device or thing sold or offered for sale by an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, adult massage parlor or adult dancing establishment or other adult entertainment facility. (Ord. of 11-4-97, § 2) 
Sec. 6-11-9. - Location.     No adult business or use restricted hereunder shall be located: (a)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land which is zoned for multifamily or single-family uses or purposes. The phrase "multifamily or single-family uses or purposes" does not include the Industrial (I) District, as shown on the official zoning map of Athens-Clarke County on file with the clerk of commission of Athens-Clarke County. (b)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which a church, school, governmental building simultaneously owned and occupied by such government, library, civic center, neighborhood public park or neighborhood playground is located. (c)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which another establishment regulated or defined hereunder is located. (d)  Within the Commercial Downtown (CD) District of Athens-Clarke County, as defined in Athens-Clarke County Zoning Ordinance. (e)  Within any zoning category other than the Industrial (I) District as shown on the official zoning map of Athens-Clarke County. (f)  Within any Athens-Clarke County Historical District, per map on file with the planning department. (g)  Within 50 feet of any parcel of land upon which an establishment is licensed to sell any form of alcoholic beverages.     For the purpose of this section, distance shall be measured from property line to property line using the closest property lines of the parcels of land involved. (Ord. of 11-4-97, § 2; Ord. of 12-5-2000, §§ 3—5) 
Sec. 6-11-10. - Adult entertainment establishment employees. (a)  Qualifications. Employees of an adult entertainment establishment shall be not less than 18 years of age. Every employee must be of good moral character as defined in this chapter. Any employee who is convicted of a sex-related crime, or drug-related or alcohol-related felony while employed as an adult entertainment establishment employee shall not thereafter work on any premises requiring licenses under this chapter for a period of five years from the date of such conviction, unless a longer time is ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction. The term convicted shall include an adjudication of guilt or a plea of guilty. (b)  Approval for employment. Before any person may work on a regulated premises, he shall file a notice with the chief of police of Athens-Clarke County of his intended employment on forms that require the information set forth in provision (a) of this section. Athens-Clarke County Police Department shall have 15 days to investigate the information required by the employee. If the employee is found to be of good moral character, the chief of police shall grant approval of employment. Upon approval, the employee may begin working on the regulated premises. If approval is denied, the prospective employee may, within ten days of said denial, apply to the chief of police for a hearing. The decision of the chief of police after hearing may be appealed within ten days thereafter to the Athens-Clarke County Administrative Hearing Officer pursuant to the provisions of section 1-5-1 of the Code of Athens-Clarke County. An investigation fee of $50.00 shall accompany the notice of intended employment, or a receipt of the chief of police evidencing the payment of such fee at the time the notice is filed. (c)  Suspension; revocation of permit. Conviction of violating the provisions of this Code, the ordinance[s] of Athens-Clarke County, laws and regulations of the State of Georgia, or the rules and regulations of Athens-Clarke County shall subject an employee to suspension or revocation of permit. (d)  Independent contractor. For the purpose of this chapter, all independent contractors, except those who are licensed in a trade or profession which is not involved in serving or entertaining customers at adult entertainment establishments, shall be considered as employees and shall be qualified as employees, regardless of the business relationship with the owner or applicant of any adult entertainment establishment. (Ord. of 11-4-97, § 2) 
Sec. 6-11-11. - Application for adult entertainment establishment license. (a)  Any person, association, partnership, corporation, or other entity desiring to obtain an adult entertainment establishment license to operate, engage in, conduct, or carry on any adult entertainment establishment shall make application to the Athens-Clarke County Finance Director, or his designated representative. Prior to submitting such application, a fee of $500.00 shall be paid to the Athens-Clarke County Finance Department to defray, in part, the cost of investigation and regulation required by this chapter. The finance director shall issue a receipt showing that such regulatory fee has been paid. (b)  The application for a license does not authorize the engaging in, operation of, conduct of or carrying on of any adult entertainment establishment. (Ord. of 11-4-97, § 2) 
Sec. 6-11-12. - Application contents.     Each applicant for an adult entertainment establishment license shall contain the following information: (a)  The applicant's full true name. (b)  The present address and telephone number of the applicant. (c)  Acceptable written proof that the applicant is at least 18 years of age. (d)  Business, occupation or employment history of the applicant for the five years immediately preceding the date of application. Business or employment records of the applicant, partners in a partnership, directors and officers of a corporation or other entity shall be furnished. (e)  The business license or occupation tax history of the applicant and whether such applicant, in previous operations in this or any other city, state or territory under license, has had such license for an adult entertainment business or similar type of business revoked or suspended, the reason therefor, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation. (f)  If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation or charter, together with the place and date of incorporation, and the names and addresses of each of its current officers and directors. If the applicant is a partnership, the applicant shall set forth the name, residence address and dates of birth of the partners. If the applicant is a limited partnership, it shall furnish a copy of its certificate of limited partnership filed with the Clerk of Superior Court. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this subsection pertaining to corporations shall apply. The applicant corporation or partnership shall designate one of its officers or general partners to act as its responsible managing officer. Such designated persons shall complete and sign all application forms required of an individual applicant under this chapter, but only one application fee shall be charged. (g)  If the applicant, any partners or any corporate officers or directors (if the applicant is a corporation) have been convicted of any crime involving good moral character in the past five years and, if so, a complete description of any such crime including date of violation, date of conviction, jurisdiction and any disposition, including any fine or sentence imposed and whether terms of disposition have been fully completed. (h)  If applicant is a person, corporation, partnership or other entity doing business under a trade name, a copy of the trade name properly recorded. If the applicant is a corporation, a copy of the authority to do business in Georgia, including articles of incorporation, trade name affidavit (if any), and current annual report filed with the Georgia Secretary of State. (i)  At least three character references from individuals who are in no way related to the applicant or individual shareholders, officers or directors of a corporation and who are not or will not benefit financially in any way from the application if the adult entertainment establishment license is granted and who have not been convicted of any crime involving moral character. The finance director shall prepare forms consistent with the provisions of this subsection for the applicant who shall submit all character references on such forms. (j)  Address of the premises to be regulated. (k)  Whether the premises are owned or rented by applicant. (l)  A certified plat by a registered engineer, licensed by the State of Georgia, showing the location of the proposed premises complies with the provisions contained in section 6-11-9 which provide that no adult business or use restricted shall be located within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land which is zoned for multifamily or single-family use or purposes; within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which a church, school, governmental building simultaneously owned and occupied by such government, library, civic center, neighborhood public park or neighborhood playground is located; within 1,000 feet of any parcel upon which another establishment regulated or defined hereunder is located; within the Commercial Downtown (CD) District of Athens-Clarke County as shown on the official zoning map of Athens-Clarke County; within any zoning category other than Industrial (I) District as shown on the official zoning map of Athens-Clarke County; or within any Athens-Clarke County historical district or within 50 feet of any parcel of land upon which an establishment is licensed to sell any form of alcoholic beverages. (m)  Such further information as may be required to review the applicant. (n)  Each applicant for an adult entertainment establishment license shall be verified and acknowledged under oath to be true and correct by: 1.  If the applicant is an individual, the individual; 2.  If by a partnership, by the manager or general partner; 3.  If a corporation, by the president of the corporation; 4.  If any other entity, organization or association, by the chief administrative official. (Ord. of 11-4-97, § 2; Ord. of 12-5-2000, § 6) 
Sec. 6-11-13. - Application—Investigation.     The director of finance of Athens-Clarke County shall refer the application to the Athens-Clarke County Police Department for investigation; the police department shall have up to 21 days to investigate the application and the background of the applicant. Upon completion of the investigation and after a investigative report by the chief of police is furnished to the finance director, the finance director shall grant the adult entertainment establishment license if he finds: (a)  The required fee has been paid. (b)  Application conforms in all respects to the provisions of this chapter. (c)  The applicant has not knowingly made a material misrepresentation in the application. (d)  The applicant has fully cooperated in the investigation of his application. (e)  The applicant, if an individual, or any officers or directors, if the applicant is a corporation, or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership, has not been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of an offense involving a sex-related crime or drug-related or alcohol-related felony or convicted of an attempt to commit any of the above-mentioned offenses, or convicted in any state of any offense which if committed or attempted in this state, would have been punishable as one or more of the above-mentioned offenses. (f)  Applicant has not had an adult entertainment establishment license, or other similar license or permit denied or revoked for cause involving moral character in this city or any other city or county located in or out of this state prior to the date of application. (g)  The building, structure, equipment, or location of such business, as proposed by applicant, would comply with all applicable zoning and distance laws. (h)  The applicant is at least 18 years of age. (i)  That the applicant, his or her employee, agent, partner, director, officer, or manager has not within five years of this date of the application knowingly allowed or permitted any of the specified sexual activities as defined herein to be committed or allowed in or upon the premises where such adult entertainment establishments is to be located, or to be used as a place in which solicitations for the specified sexual activities as defined herein openly occur. (j)  That on the date the business for which an adult entertainment establishment license is required herein commences, and thereafter, there will be a responsible person on the premises to act as manager at all times during which the business is open. (k)  That the proposed premises shall not be located within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land which is zoned for multifamily or single-family uses or purposes; within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which a church, school, governmental building simultaneously owned and occupied by such government, library, civic center, neighborhood public park or neighborhood playground is located; within 1,000 feet of any parcel upon which another establishment regulated or defined hereunder is located; within the Commercial Downtown (CD) District of Athens-Clarke County as shown on the official zoning map of Athens-Clarke County; within any zoning category other than Industrial (I) District as shown on the official zoning map of Athens-Clarke County; or within any Athens-Clarke County historical district; or within 50 feet of any parcel of land upon which an establishment is licensed to sell any form of alcoholic beverages. (l)  That the grant of such adult entertainment establishment license will not cause a violation of this chapter or any other ordinance or regulation of Athens-Clarke County, State of Georgia, or the United States. (m)  In the event that no action by the director of finance to either approve or deny a pending license application has been taken within 60 days of receipt of the application by the Athens-Clarke County Finance Department, then the adult entertainment license shall be deemed issued. (Ord. of 11-4-97, § 2; Ord. of 12-5-2000, § 7; Ord. of 1-6-2004, § 1) 
Sec. 6-11-14. - Persons prohibited as licensees. (a)  No adult entertainment establishment license provided for by this chapter shall be issued to or held by: (1)  An applicant who has not paid all required fees and taxes for a business at that location or property taxes. (2)  Any person who is not of good moral character. (3)  Any corporation, any of whose directors are not of good moral character. (4)  Any partnership, association, or other entity, any of whose partners or members are not of good moral character. (5)  Any applicant who is not qualified to hold and conduct business according to the laws of the United States, State of Georgia or Athens-Clarke County. (Ord. of 11-4-97, § 2) 
Sec. 6-11-15. - Adult entertainment establishment license refusal, appeal.     If the director of finance, following review of the application and receipt of the investigative report from the police department, deems that the applicant does not fulfill the requirements as set forth in this chapter, he shall notify the applicant of such opinion and, within 45 days of the date of application, provide copies of the investigation report and written reason for the denial to the applicant by certified mail. Any applicant who is denied an adult entertainment establishment license may appeal such denial to the administrative hearing officer pursuant to the provisions of section 1-5-1 of the Code of Athens-Clarke County by filing a written notice of appeal within ten days of the receipt of notice from the finance director. A hearing before the administrative hearing officer shall be scheduled within 45 days of such notice. (Ord. of 11-4-97, § 2) 
Sec. 6-11-16. - Adult entertainment establishment license; renewal.     Adult entertainment establishment license may be renewed on a calendar year basis provided that the renewal application contains the same information required in the original application and that applicants continue to meet the requirements set out in this chapter. The renewal fee of $500.00 for the adult entertainment establishment license shall be based on an amount needed to defray the costs of regulating adult entertainment establishments and enforcement of this chapter. Renewal applications shall be due by November 1 of the calendar year prior to the year for which such license is requested. The adult entertainment establishment license shall be for a calendar year period or for a remainder of a calendar year if issued after January 1 of any calendar year. (Ord. of 11-4-97, § 2) 
Sec. 6-11-17. - Adult entertainment establishment license nontransferable.     No adult entertainment establishment license may be sold, transferred, or assigned by a permittee, or by operation of law, to any other person or persons. Any such sale, transfer or assignment, or attempted sale, transfer or assignment, shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of such permit and such permit shall thereafter be null and void; provided and excepting, however, that if the applicant is a partnership and one or more of the partners should die, one or more of the surviving partners may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, the interest of the deceased partner or partners without effecting a surrender or termination of such adult entertainment establishment license, and in such case, the adult entertainment establishment license upon notification to the Athens-Clarke County Finance Department, shall be placed in the name of the surviving partner. An adult entertainment establishment license issued to a corporation shall be deemed terminated and void when either any outstanding stock of the corporation is sold, transferred or assigned after the issuance of a license, or any stock authorized but not issued at the time of the granting of an adult entertainment establishment license is thereafter issued and sold, transferred or assigned. (Ord. of 11-4-97, § 2) 
Sec. 6-11-18. - Change of location or name. (a)  No adult entertainment establishment shall move from the location specified on its adult entertainment establishment license until a new application pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, has been filed with the Athens-Clarke County Finance Department, and approval has been obtained from the director of finance of Athens-Clarke County. Such approval shall not be given unless all requirements and regulations, as contained in the Code of Athens-Clarke County, have been met. (b)  No applicant shall operate, conduct, manage, engage in, or carry on an adult entertainment establishment under any name other than his name and the name of the business as specified on his adult entertainment establishment license. (c)  Any application for an extension or expansion of a building or other place of business where an adult entertainment establishment is located shall require inspection and shall comply with the provisions and regulations of this chapter. (Ord. of 11-4-97, § 2) 
Sec. 6-11-19. - Penalty for violation. (a)  Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be punished as set forth in section 1-1-5 of the Code of Athens-Clarke County. (b)  Violations of this chapter shall also be grounds for suspension or revocation of the adult entertainment establishment license issued hereunder after hearing before the administrative hearing officer pursuant to the provisions of section 1-5-1 of the Code of Athens-Clarke County. (Ord. of 11-4-97, § 2) 
Sec. 6-11-20. - Unlawful operation declared nuisance.     Any adult business establishment operated, conducted, or maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall be and the same is declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. Athens-Clarke County may, in addition to, or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings for abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof, in the manner provided by law. It shall take such other steps and shall apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such adult entertainment establishment and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining an adult entertainment establishment contrary to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. of 11-4-97, § 2) 
Sec. 6-11-21. - Alcoholic beverages—Prohibition, exceptions. (a)  No person, association, partnership, corporation, or other entity licensed under chapter 6-11 (section 6-11-1 et seq.) of the Code of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia, after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section shall serve, sell, distribute or suffer the consumption or possession of any intoxicating liquor, beer or wine or controlled substance upon the premises of any licensee. Any licensee whose license was granted prior to the adoption of this amendment shall not be subject to the amendment until January 1, 1998, at which time all licensees within Athens-Clarke County shall be subject to this provision, including those licensees licensed before the effective date hereof. (b)  This section shall not apply to nor prohibit the live performance of legitimate plays, operas, ballets at mainstream theaters, concert halls, museums or educational institutions holding a license, which derive less than 20 percent of its gross receipts from the sale of alcoholic beverages. (Ord. of 11-4-97, § 2) 
Sec. 6-11-22. - Revocation and appeal. (a)  The chief of police shall be authorized to suspend or revoke an adult entertainment establishment license previously granted herein. In the event the chief of police seeks to suspend or to revoke an adult entertainment establishment license, the chief of police shall give written notice to the licensee of such action and such notice shall contain a specification of the violation or violations upon which the suspension or revocation is based, shall state the time and place of the hearing and shall be served upon the licensee by certified mail or by personal service at least five days prior to the time set for the hearing before the administrative hearing officer as provided for by section 1-5-1 of the Code of Athens-Clarke County. (b)  The chief of police shall be authorized to suspend or revoke an adult entertainment establishment license in the event of any of one or more of the following: (1)  A licensee gave false or misleading information in the original or renewal application process; (2)  A licensee has knowingly allowed possession, use or sale of controlled substances on the premises and/or knowingly allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances to a minor on the premises; (3)  A licensee has knowingly allowed the violation of an ordinance of Athens-Clarke County or a violation of any criminal law of the State of Georgia to occur on the premises; (4)  A licensee has violated any of the provisions of this chapter; (5)  A licensee has been convicted of any drug-related, alcohol related crime by the State of Georgia or by Athens-Clarke County regarding an offense which was committed on the premises or which would otherwise violate the provisions of this chapter; and (6)  A licensee fails to pay any fee, occupation tax, fine, or other amount of money due to Athens-Clarke County under this chapter or any other taxing ordinance of Athens-Clarke County. (c)  In the event the chief of police shall suspend or revoke any adult entertainment establishment license hereunder, the suspension or revocation shall be for a period not less than one day nor more than 365 days, within the discretion of the chief of police. Provided, however, that the licensee shall be authorized to continue in business until that date of the hearing scheduled pursuant to section 1-5-1 of this Code. No applicant may apply for an adult entertainment establishment license during any period of suspension or revocation. In any hearing the administrative hearing officer shall consider, among other things, the severity of the allegations, the evidence submitted and the testimony presented, in making any decision on upholding, denying or modifying the suspension or revocation, and the duration of either. (Ord. of 11-4-97, § 2) 
CHAPTER 6-12. - TELEPHONE COMPANIES Sec. 6-12-1. Occupational license tax levied; payment. 
Sec. 6-12-1. - Occupational license tax levied; payment. (a)  Each telephone company operating in Athens-Clarke County shall pay an occupational license tax in the amount of three percent of the recurring local service revenues received by such company from subscribers located within Athens-Clarke County. The occupational license tax shall be paid in quarterly installments, each of which shall be due on or before the last day of the second month following the end of each calendar quarter and shall be based on recurring local service revenues billed during such calendar quarter. The first payment under this section shall be based on revenues billed between the effective date of this section and the end of the calendar quarter in which the effective date falls. Any amount of license tax previously paid and absorbed by a telephone company which is applicable to any period subsequent to the effective date of this section shall be credited against the amounts imposed herein or by subsequent ordinance. (b)  As used in this section, "recurring local service revenues" shall mean: (1)  Monthly charges for local exchange service, including: a.  Charges for additional listings and joint users; b.  Charges for local message rate service, including mobile service local messages; and c.  Subscriber station revenues from teletypewriter exchange service; (2)  Charges for Morse transmission, signaling, data transmission, remote metering and supervisory control, where both terminal points are within Athens-Clarke County; and (3)  All charges for local private line services (except audio and video program transmission services) where both terminals of the private line are within Athens-Clarke County.     Nothing in this definition shall preclude the charging of a separate franchise fee for the transmission of audio or video programs to customers by community antenna television companies. (Ord. 1-5-93 § 1) 
CHAPTER 6-13. - UTILITY COMPANIES GENERALLY Sec. 6-13-1. Levy of tax; amount. Sec. 6-13-2. Return; execution. Sec. 6-13-3. Penalty. 
Sec. 6-13-1. - Levy of tax; amount. (a)  There is hereby levied and assessed a license or occupation tax on utility companies described in this section using Athens-Clarke County streets and ways for the conduct of their business in Athens-Clarke County, which under the laws of the state and Athens-Clarke County has authority to license and collect, such license or occupation tax to be in accordance with the following: Electric light and power companies, telephone companies or gas companies using Athens-Clarke County streets for the conduct of their business: $40,000.00 per annum. (b)  There shall be credited against the above license tax the amount paid by such companies to Athens-Clarke County during the preceding year, pursuant to any agreement between such company and Athens-Clarke County providing compensation to Athens-Clarke County for the use of the streets by such company. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1) 
Sec. 6-13-2. - Return; execution.     Unless otherwise specified, the license or occupation tax and return required by this chapter shall be filed and paid to the director of finance on or before the first day of April. The director of finance shall prescribe the form of the return and may adopt reasonable regulations to carry out the intent of this chapter. The director of finance shall issue an execution against every utility company which fails to pay the tax required by this chapter. Any execution so issued shall be levied and collected by the director of finance as in the case of other executions for Athens-Clarke County taxes. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1) 
Sec. 6-13-3. - Penalty.     Any person subject to the tax imposed by this chapter shall be subject to pay a penalty of five percent of the annual tax for failure to make return and penalty of one percent per month or portion thereof of the tax for failure to pay such tax when provided. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1) 
CHAPTER 6-14. - VEHICLES FOR HIRE[9] Article 1. In General Sec. 6-14-1. Definitions. Sec. 6-14-2. Enforcement. Sec. 6-14-3. Owner's compliance with chapter. Sec. 6-14-4. Overall 24-hour service required. Sec. 6-14-5. Rates of fare established by taxicab company; rate card required to be displayed in vehicle; maximum fares. Sec. 6-14-6. Advertising graphics. Sec. 6-14-7. Vehicle requirements. Sec. 6-14-8. Reserved. Sec. 6-14-9. Reserved. Sec. 6-14-10. Suspension of unsafe vehicles from operation. Sec. 6-14-11. Taximeter optional; operation, inspection. Sec. 6-14-12. Appeals. Secs. 6-14-13—6-14-30. Reserved. Article 2. Required to Operate Vehicle for Hire Taxicab Business Sec. 6-14-31. Athens-Clarke County vehicle for hire business permit required. Sec. 6-14-32. Application for vehicle for hire business permit. Sec. 6-14-33. Fixed place of business required. Sec. 6-14-34. Fees; occupation tax certificate to operate a taxicab business and a vehicle for hire business permit required. Sec. 6-14-35. Transfer. Sec. 6-14-36. Indemnity for benefit of Athens-Clarke County. Sec. 6-14-37. Liability insurance required. Sec. 6-14-38. Violations; penalties, corrections, suspension and revocation of applicable permits. Secs. 6-14-39—6-14-60. Reserved. Article 3. Reserved Secs. 6-14-61—6-24-90. Reserved. Article 4. Operating Regulations Sec. 6-14-91. Ability to provide receipts required; method of payment of fare. Sec. 6-14-92. Solicitation, acceptance and discharge of passengers. Sec. 6-14-93. Refusal to pay fare. Sec. 6-14-94. Daily dispatch manifest required. Sec. 6-14-95. Smoking. Sec. 6-14-96. Property left in taxicab. Sec. 6-14-97. Compliance with laws and ordinances; safety, etc. Sec. 6-14-98. Dress standards for drivers. Sec. 6-14-99. Use of scanner prohibited. Sec. 6-14-100. Alcohol prohibited. Secs. 6-14-101—6-14-115. Reserved. Article 5. Limousine Service Sec. 6-14-116. Business license required. Sec. 6-14-117. Driver's permits. Sec. 6-14-118. Liability insurance or bond. Sec. 6-14-119. Indemnity for benefit of Athens-Clarke County. Sec. 6-14-120. Cruising. Sec. 6-14-121. Solicitation of passengers. Sec. 6-14-122. Duty of drivers to obey laws. Sec. 6-14-123. Permit for business, etc., at airport; required. Footnotes: --- (9) --- Editor's note— Section 1 of an ordinance adopted March 2, 2004, deleted former ch. 6-14, Arts. 1—4, of the Code in its entirety and added new provisions as ch. 6-14, Arts. 1—4, as herein set out. Former ch. 6-14, Arts. 1—4, §§ 6-14-1—6-14-12, 6-14-31—6-14-38, 6-14-61—6-14-71, 6-14-91—6-14-97, pertained to vehicles for hire, and more specifically, taxicabs, and derived from an ordinance adopted Jan. 3, 1995, § 1; an ordinance adopted Oct. 7, 1997, §§ 1—17; and an ordinance adopted July 6, 1999, § 1. Cross reference— Taxicab zones, § 3-3-4; taxicab stands, § 3-3-34; restricted use of bus and taxicab stands, § 3-3-56; wrecker services, Ch. 6-15. State Constitution reference— Municipal ambulance and emergency rescue services, Art. 9, § 2, para. 3. State Law reference— Motor vehicle accident insurance, O.C.G.A. § 33-34-1 et seq.; liability of owner of licensed vehicle, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-207; "proof of financial responsibility" defined, O.C.G.A. § 40-9-2(5); insurance for person renting U-drive-it vehicle, O.C.G.A. § 40-9-102. 
ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 6-14-1. - Definitions.     The following words and phrases when used in this chapter shall have the meaning set out in this section:     A.M. Best Company, Standard & Poor's, Fitch, or Moody's: An independent insurance rating company that rates insurance companies according to their financial strength and ability to meet their policy holders needs based on a comprehensive, qualitative and quantitative evaluation of a company's balance sheet strength, operating performance and business profile.     Company: Any person, firm, partnership, corporation, or other legal entity that is a holder of an Athens-Clarke County vehicle for hire business permit which grants the privilege and authority to the holder to operate a taxicab business under the provisions of this chapter. See holder/owner/operator.     Cellular telephone : A wireless, personal telecommunication device that allows one person to talk with another while not connected to a telecommunication landline.     Driver: A person who has met the requirements set forth in this chapter.     Fleet: All vehicles operated as taxicabs and owned by or under the control of the holder. This term shall include vehicles operated by an independent contractor as agent for the holder pursuant to a written agreement.     Full view: A method of display that allows a clear and unobstructed view of the required document from any seat in the vehicle being used as a vehicle for hire.     Holder/owner/operator: The person to whom a vehicle for hire business permit has been issued who has been granted the privilege and the authority to operate a taxicab business under the provisions of this chapter, whether an individual, firm, partnership, corporation, or other legal entity.     Independent contract driver: A person who owns and operates one taxicab as an agent of the holder under the company name of the holder pursuant to a written agreement with the holder whereby the person agrees to abide by all of the policies of the holder and all of the requirements of this chapter governing vehicles and drivers and applicable law. The agreement must contain a provision that the hours of operation for the vehicle owned by the independent contract driver will be controlled by the holder.     Person: Any individual, firm, partnership, cooperative, nonprofit membership corporation, agency, joint venture, association, company, corporation, syndicate, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, fiduciary, or other group or combination acting as a unit whether public, private, or quasi-public.     Quarterly insurance validation decal: The decal issued on a quarterly basis by the chief of police or designee once the holder of an Athens-Clarke County occupation tax certificate and vehicle for hire business permit has provided to the chief of police or designee all required quarterly documentation showing the insurance requirements of this chapter have been met.     Street: Any street, alley, lane, avenue, court or public place in Athens-Clarke County.     Taxicab: A motor vehicle regularly engaged in the business of carrying passengers as a vehicle for hire, having a seating capacity of no more than 15 persons and not operated on a fixed route.     Taximeter : A meter, instrument or device, including without limitation a software application on a taxi driver's cellular telephone, present within a taxicab, which is utilized by the operator of a vehicle for hire for the purpose of calculating fares based upon distance, time, and mileage.     Taxi stand: A public place alongside the curb of a street or elsewhere which has been designated by Athens-Clarke County and reserved for the exclusive use of all taxicabs properly licensed within Athens-Clarke County.     Two-way radio: A device used to communicate between the taxicab company's headquarters and its drivers that uses radio waves or similar technology as it becomes available. A dual-capacity cellular telephone may meet the requirements of a two-way radio as required in this Code section.     Vehicle for hire: A motor vehicle regularly engaged in the business of carrying passengers for a profit, not on a fixed route, such as a taxicab or a limousine.     Vehicle for hire business permit: The written authority and privilege granted by Athens-Clarke County for the operation of a taxicab business incorporating the company's ownership and use of three or more taxicabs within Athens-Clarke County. Any person holding a valid 2003 Athens-Clarke County occupation tax certificate to operate a taxicab business at the time of the adoption of this chapter shall have until April 1, 2005 to meet the requirement that a holder must have at least three vehicles in the operation of the company. (Ord. of 3-2-2004, § 1; Ord. of 11-3-2010, § 1; Ord. of 7-7-2015, § 1 ; Ord. of 2-2-2016(2), §§ 1, 2 ) 
Sec. 6-14-2. - Enforcement.     The enforcement of this chapter shall be the responsibility of the Athens-Clarke County Police Department or other enforcement agency as designated by the Manager of Athens-Clarke County. (Ord. of 3-2-2004, § 1) 
Sec. 6-14-3. - Owner's compliance with chapter. (a)  It shall be unlawful for the holder of a vehicle for hire business permit, its agents or employees, to allow any vehicles to be used in the conveyance of passengers or property for hire unless such vehicle has met the requirements set forth in this chapter, and continues to meet to the requirements as set forth in this chapter. (b)  It shall be unlawful for the holder of a vehicle for hire business permit, its agents or employees, to allow any person to drive, use, or operate any vehicle as a vehicle for hire unless that person meets the requirements set forth in this chapter and applicable Georgia law. (c)  Each holder shall establish a written policy and take action to discourage, prevent, and correct violations of this chapter by drivers of taxicabs operating under the holder's grant of privilege. A copy of this written policy shall be submitted to the chief of police or designee. Failure of the holder to provide such written policy to the driver shall not be a defense to any prosecution or action taken against the driver for a violation of the provisions of this chapter. (d)  Each holder, his agents and employees, shall be subject to and comply with all provisions of this chapter. Upon the violation thereof by a holder, his agents or employees, any vehicle for hire business permit may, after a hearing before the administrative hearing officer, as provided by section 1-5-1, be revoked, suspended or put on probation under conditions. In addition, upon a violation of any provision of this chapter, each holder, his agents or employees shall be subject to the punishment prescribed under section 1-1-5, after hearing before the judge of municipal court. (e)  Any person holding a vehicle for hire business permit issued pursuant to this chapter or any employee or agent of such person who violates any provision of this chapter, or directs, consents to, permits, or acquiesces in such violation either directly or indirectly shall, by such conduct, subject the vehicle for hire business permit to suspension, revocation or probation upon conditions. In addition, a maximum civil fine of $1,000.00 may be imposed on the holder for each violation. In considering the amount of the civil fine, if any, the administrative hearing officer shall consider the following factors: (1)  The gravity of the violation; (2)  Any previous violations for which a fine was not assessed or for which the administrative hearing officer reduced an assessed fine; (3)  The costs to Athens-Clarke County related to compliance or enforcement efforts undertaken by Athens-Clarke County in pursuing the case; (4)  The costs incurred by Athens-Clarke County in order to mitigate a condition remaining as the result of the violation.     The imposition of a civil fine under the provisions of this section shall not prevent the suspension, revocation, or non-renewal of the vehicle for hire business permit or the taking of punitive or remedial action for any other violation of the ordinances of Athens-Clarke County or for subsequent violations of this section. No vehicle for hire business permit shall be renewed if any civil fines imposed pursuant to this section have not been paid by the holder prior to renewal.     For purposes of administering and enforcing this chapter, any act committed by an employee, agent or representative of a holder shall be deemed to be an act of such holder. (Ord. of 3-2-2004, § 1; Ord. of 2-7-2006, § 1; Ord. of 7-7-2015, § 2 ) 
Sec. 6-14-4. - Overall 24-hour service required. (a)  The holders operating under the provisions of this chapter shall render an overall service to the public desiring to use taxicabs. They shall maintain a central place of business that is accessible to the public between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday excluding holidays and with at least one dispatcher available by telephone 24 hours a day for the purpose of receiving calls for service and dispatching taxicabs. They shall answer all calls received at the advertised phone number, that shall also be held on record with the police department, for services in Athens-Clarke County in a timely and professional manner, and, if services cannot be rendered within a reasonable time, not to exceed 30 minutes, the holder, his agent or employee shall then notify the prospective passengers how long it will take before the call can be answered and provide a reason for the delay. (b)  Taxi drivers responding to any request for service received by personal cell phone, flag downs, or any other means other than notification by the dispatcher on duty shall, prior to commencing the trip, immediately notify the dispatcher of the pick-up location and destination. The dispatcher shall properly log each and every call for service. The dispatcher shall have strict accountability of all drivers on duty at all times. The chief of police or designee may approve an alternate system for dispatching, accounting of calls for service and documenting passenger trips that otherwise satisfies the requirements of this chapter. (c)  No company shall refuse to accept, without reasonable cause, a call for service anywhere in Athens-Clarke County at any time the company has available taxicabs or shall fail or refuse to give an overall service to the public. (d)  Every driver of a taxicab shall have the right to demand the payment of the regular fare before picking up a passenger and may refuse employment unless so paid; otherwise, no driver of a taxicab shall refuse or neglect to convey any person or persons upon request to any place within the city unless: (1)  The person is disorderly; (2)  The driver is engaged in answering a previous request for service; (3)  Another driver has answered the dispatched call and is en route; (4)  The driver has reason to believe that the person is engaged in unlawful conduct; or (5)  The driver is in reasonable fear of his personal safety. (Ord. of 3-2-2004, § 1; Ord. of 2-2-2016(2), § 3 ) 
Sec. 6-14-5. - Rates of fare established by taxicab company; rate card required to be displayed in vehicle; maximum fares. (a)  Each holder of a vehicle for hire business permit shall file quarterly on January 1, April 1, July 1, and October 1 of each year a current schedule of rates for the transportation of persons and property with the chief of police. The chief of police shall make such schedule of rates available to the public by written request. (b)  Every taxicab operated under this chapter shall have a rate card setting forth the rates of fare as prescribed in the schedule filed by the holder. The rate card shall be conspicuously displayed in such a place in the taxicab as to be in full view to all passengers. It is unlawful for any person operating a taxicab under this article to make any charge in excess of the charge prescribed in the schedule of rates for said taxicab, as described above. (c)  The maximum fares set forth hereinafter are established for passenger trips in vehicles for hire regulated pursuant to this article. Taxi operators may charge fares that are less than those prescribed herein. It is unlawful for any person operating a taxicab under this article to make any charge in excess of the maximum fares prescribed in this code section. (1)  For passenger trips originating from the Athens Ben Epps Airport in which the fare is established by a taximeter, the maximum per trip fare shall be $8.00 for the first one-eighth mile and $2.00 per mile for each additional mile thereafter. The maximum charge for each additional passenger per trip shall be $3.00. (2)  For all other passenger trips in which the fare is established by a taximeter, the maximum per trip fare shall be $4.00 for the first one-eighth mile and $2.00 per mile for each additional mile thereafter. The maximum charge for each additional passenger per trip shall be $3.00. (3)  There is hereby established a Taxi Flat-Rate Zone Map, dated January 4, 2016, prepared by the Athens-Clarke County Police Department, maintained in the Office of the Clerk of Commission of Athens-Clarke County, which is incorporated herein by reference. Such map designates three zones within Athens-Clarke County to be referenced for the purpose of establishing maximum flat-rate fares. A person operating a taxicab may charge a flat-rate fare, per passenger, for passenger trips originating in Zone 1 and terminating in Zone 1, Zone 2 or Zone 3. The maximum fare for an individual passenger trip originating in Zone 1 and terminating in Zone 1 shall be $5.00. The maximum fare for an individual passenger trip originating in Zone 1 and terminating in Zone 2 shall be $7.00. The maximum fare for an individual passenger trip originating in Zone 1 and terminating in Zone 3 shall be $10.00. Flat-rate fares may be charged only from Wednesdays at 6:00 p.m. to Sundays at 4:00 a.m. and on those other days in which a special event is occurring within Zone 1, the sponsor of which holds a special-events permit therefor issued pursuant to Chapter 6-5 of this Code. Taxi operators charging any flat-rate fare shall post a copy of the Taxi Flat-Rate Zone Map in a place within the vehicle that is visible to passengers. The taxi driver shall collect a flat-rate fare from a passenger prior to initiation of the passenger trip. It is unlawful for any person operating a taxicab under this article to initiate a passenger trip having a flat-rate fare without having first collected the flat-rate fare from the passenger. (Ord. of 3-2-2004, § 1; Ord. of 2-2-2016(2), § 4 ) 
Sec. 6-14-6. - Advertising graphics.     In addition to those graphics advertising the taxicab business itself and those graphics permitted in the top light, it is permissible under this chapter to affix or install advertising graphics on taxicabs only on the trunk or rear deck of the automobile. Such graphics shall be no larger than one foot by three feet and, in any event, shall not in any way obstruct the vision through the rear window. (Ord. of 3-2-2004, § 1) 
Sec. 6-14-7. - Vehicle requirements.     The holder of a vehicle for hire business permit shall ensure that all vehicles used by the holder as taxicabs within Athens-Clarke County meet the following criteria: (1)  Equipment. Every vehicle operated as a taxicab under the provisions of this chapter shall be either a built-for-the-purpose taxicab or a van or sedan type vehicle and shall be equipped with at least two doors for the entrance and exit of passengers. The vehicle shall also have at least one door which gives access to the driver's compartment. All doors must be functional. The vehicle shall be equipped with a rear view mirror in the driver's compartment and door mirrors on both sides of the vehicle so as to provide the driver with maximum view to the rear of the vehicle. The vehicle shall maintain compliance with O.C.G.A. § 40-8-1 et seq. regulating proper equipment to be maintained on a vehicle in the State of Georgia. Each taxicab shall conform to the vehicle's original manufacturer's standards including, but not limited to, seating, number of passengers, gross vehicle weight, and safety equipment. (2)  Vehicles must be owned or controlled by holder; independent or contract drivers permitted under the control of the vehicle for hire permit holder. All taxicabs operated by the holder of a vehicle for hire business permit shall be owned or controlled by the holder. If the vehicle is owned by the holder, then it must be insured in the name of the holder. If the vehicle is owned by an independent contractor as an agent of the holder, then it must be insured in the name of the independent contractor. No vehicle shall be operated as a taxicab until the requirements of this subsection have been met. The vehicle for hire permit holder may lease, assign, or contract with a person the use of the company name for the purpose of the person operating one vehicle as an agent for the taxicab company. The holder of a vehicle for hire business permit, its agents or employees, shall comply with the provisions of this chapter. The holder is responsible for ensuring compliance by its agents and employees with the provisions of this chapter. Each independent or contract driver shall be limited to contract with the holder for only one vehicle to be operated as a taxicab pursuant to the agreement with the holder. (3)  Removal of taxicab signs, markings, equipment. Whenever a taxicab is permanently removed from service or is no longer authorized to operate as a taxicab, the holder of a vehicle for hire business permit shall, within three days, remove from the vehicle all taxicab signs, markings, and equipment that would distinguish the vehicle as a taxicab, including but not limited to radios, toplights, meters, and decals. For the purposes of this paragraph, any company that discontinues operations or any taxicab removed from service of providing public transportation for hire for more than 60 consecutive days shall be considered permanently removed from service. (4)  Exterior requirements. a.  Top light required. Every taxicab operated on the streets of Athens-Clarke County shall have permanently installed as identification on the top of the vehicle a top light that states "taxi", "taxicab" or the name of the taxicab company. In addition, the words "for hire" may be displayed by the top light, and advertising graphics that do not exceed 25 percent of the space available for graphic display in the top light may be displayed by the top light. The top light shall be specifically designed as a permanent fixture that is capable of illumination at all times and shall be so wired as to have a functioning on/off switch in the driver's compartment so as to be able to indicate by the light being on or off that the cab is in or out of service. A top light that is turned off signals that a taxicab is unavailable for additional fares or is out-of-service. A top light that is turned on signals that the taxicab is in service and available for hire or is willing to accept additional fares if the vehicle is occupied. b.  Company logo and identification. 1.  Each holder of a vehicle for hire business permit shall, as of June 1, 2004, submit to the chief of police or designee, a company logo and color scheme that is unique to the taxi company and which shall not be the same or similar to any other taxi company. The color scheme and company logo shall apply to all new additions to the taxicab fleet after the effective date of this chapter. The chief of police or his designee shall have the power to deny approval of a color scheme or company logo where the color scheme or the company name is the same as or similar to the color scheme and/or name of another taxicab company so that the similarity would be confusing to the public as to the identity of different companies. 2.  The company logo shall list the full name of the taxicab company operating the vehicle and the current, publicly listed telephone number as filed with the chief of police or designee. The company logo shall be of a sharply contrasting color to the paint scheme of the vehicle and the lettering must be kept legible. The letters shall be at least four inches high and be permanently affixed by either painting or a permanent decal. Taxicab vehicles that are approved for use prior to June 1, 2004 are exempt from this subsection. 3.  Every taxicab operating on the streets of Athens-Clarke County shall have displayed on the front driver and passenger door and rear of the vehicle the company name as approved by the chief of police or designee. (5)  Appearance and aesthetics. The holder of a vehicle for hire business permit shall ensure that all vehicles used as taxicabs in their business fleet are properly painted so that at a minimum the taxicabs are painted consistent with insurance company standards for collision repair. Paint shall not be excessively damaged, and there shall be no rust or excessive deterioration of the paint caused by age or exposure to the elements. Lens covers must be intact. The grills of all taxicab vehicles must be in place and complete. There shall be no unrepaired body damage and no loose pieces such as fenders, bumpers, or trim hanging from the vehicle body. Any repairs to the body of the vehicle should have a smooth surface. The exterior of the vehicle shall be clean, without an excessive amount of dirt, mud, or other debris on the body or the windows of the vehicle. (6)  Mechanical and safety requirements. All mechanical and safety devices must be operable and in good working condition. Tire tread length shall be not less than 2/32 inch on an original or retreaded tire, with no cuts or breaks in the side wall. Engines should not give off excessive fumes/smoke or noise. (7)  Assigned vehicle for hire permit number. Every taxicab operating on the streets of Athens-Clarke County shall have displayed on the rear of the vehicle and on doors on both sides of the vehicle, the vehicle for hire permit number that is assigned to the holder of an Athens-Clarke County vehicle for hire business permit in letters and numbers no less than four inches in height. The lettering must be the same color as the approved company logo and be permanently affixed by either painting or of a permanent decal. (8)  Magnetic signs not allowed. For the purpose of this subsection, no signage of the magnetic type shall be utilized by any holder of a vehicle for hire business permit on any vehicle in their fleet of taxicabs. It is unlawful for any person to affix or cause to be affixed magnetic signage of any type to a taxicab. (9)  Obstruction of view not allowed. Every taxicab operating on the streets of Athens-Clarke County shall not be equipped with any window tint as to obscure the driver or passengers from view from the exterior of the vehicle, nor shall there be a curtain or shade that obscures the driver from view of the passengers. The exception to this subsection is for vehicles that come directly from the manufacturer with pre-installed window tint as standard for that particular make/model of vehicle. (10)  Interior requirements. a.  The interior of each taxicab shall be maintained in clean and sanitary condition. There shall be no accumulation of litter in the vehicle interior or the trunk. The seats shall be kept reasonably clean and shall not have holes in the seat covering. No tape to repair damages is allowed on any interior part of the vehicle, including seats, arm rests, dashboard, or headliners. b.  Carpet remnants cannot be used to cover holes in the carpet or the floorboard. The carpet must be kept clean; if cleaning does not remove spots, then the carpet must be replaced. Any holes in the carpet will require the carpet to be repaired or replaced. No staples or thumbtacks will be allowed to repair and/or replace headliners. c.  Each taxicab shall be equipped with a working jack and a working fire extinguisher, and the spare tire shall be securely attached and in proper serviceable condition. d.  All hood, trunk, and door latches on each taxicab shall be intact and in proper working order. (11)  Functional means of communication required . Every taxi vehicle shall contain a functional means of communication between the company headquarters and the driver. (12)  Quarterly inspections of vehicles by holders. It shall be a requirement of this Code section that every taxicab vehicle in the holder's fleet shall be inspected once each quarter by the holder, agent, or employee for compliance with this ordinance. Records of these inspections shall be kept at the company location and available for review by Athens-Clarke County police. Each vehicle in the fleet shall be inspected before January 1, April 1, July 1, and October 1 in order to make certain that every taxicab that is owned, controlled, and operated by the holder meets the minimum standards of serviceability and safety set forth herein. (13)  Inspections. a.  Any vehicle suspected of being operated in violation of this chapter may be the subject of an inspection conducted by any Athens-Clarke County police officer or by authorized Athens-Clarke County personnel at such officer's direction without the necessity of obtaining a warrant to permit such inspection. In the event that the inspection reveals violations of this chapter or applicable state law, the officer is authorized to issue appropriate citations and to report the violation to the chief of police or designee. In cases where an officer directs that the vehicle be inspected by Athens-Clarke County personnel, the fee for such inspection shall be $25.00 per inspection. No vehicle shall be permitted to enter or return to service without such fee first being paid. b.  Violations of this chapter found during such inspections or otherwise observed by Athens-Clarke County personnel or reported by members of the public shall be reported to the chief of police or designee. The chief of police or designee shall notify the holder of the violation and may institute appropriate administrative proceedings in accordance with this chapter. (Ord. of 3-2-2004, § 1; Ord. of 7-7-2015, § 3 ; Ord. of 2-2-2016(2), § 5 ) 
Sec. 6-14-8. - Reserved. 
Sec. 6-14-9. - Reserved. 
Sec. 6-14-10. - Suspension of unsafe vehicles from operation. (a)  The chief of police or designee may suspend from operation any taxicab found to have a mechanical deficiency that adversely affects the safety of the vehicle while it is in operation. Any vehicle so suspended shall not be operated again until it has been repaired and then inspected and approved by an Athens-Clarke County designated inspector as provided in 6-14-7(13). (b)  Any vehicle that has an expired quarterly insurance validation decal shall not be operated as a vehicle for hire and shall remain out of service until the requirements set forth in section 6-14-37 have been met. (c)  It is unlawful to operate any vehicle that has been suspended from operation under this section after receiving notice to cease operation of the vehicle. (Ord. of 3-2-2004, § 1; Ord. of 7-7-2015, § 4 ) 
Sec. 6-14-11. - Taximeter optional; operation, inspection.     Effective July 1, 2016, all taxicabs operated under the authority of this chapter must utilize taximeters for passenger trips that are not subject to zone-based rates. For trips where a taximeter is utilized, the driver must display the taximeter to the passenger at the beginning and conclusion of each trip, and the taximeter shall be displayed and in operation during each trip. The taximeter shall be of a design and type approved in advance by the chief of police or designee and may be integrated with an alternate system for dispatching, accounting of calls for service and passenger trips that otherwise satisfies the requirements of this chapter. Any taximeter shall be subject to inspection at any time by the chief of police or designee, and upon discovery of any noncompliance with the provisions hereof, the chief of police shall notify the operator of the taxicab to cease operation immediately, which action shall be taken. The taxicab shall be kept out of service until the working condition of the taximeter is restored. (Ord. of 3-2-2004, § 1; Ord. of 7-7-2015, § 5 ; Ord. of 2-2-2016(2), § 6 ) 
Sec. 6-14-12. - Appeals.     An appeal to the administrative hearing officer from a decision of the chief of police, or designee, shall be made within ten days of the date of notice of the decision. (Ord. of 3-2-2004, § 1) 
Secs. 6-14-13—6-14-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 2. - REQUIRED TO OPERATE VEHICLE FOR HIRE TAXICAB BUSINESS 
Sec. 6-14-31. - Athens-Clarke County vehicle for hire business permit required. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a business involving the use of one or more taxicabs on the streets of Athens-Clarke County without first obtaining a vehicle for hire business permit granted by the chief of police or designee. Said permit shall be effective only for the calendar year stated in the permit, unless suspended or revoked sooner as provided by this chapter. (b)  No application for a vehicle for hire business permit shall be accepted or considered for the remainder of the calendar year if the holder's vehicle for hire business permit has been revoked within the current calendar year. (Ord. of 3-2-2004, § 1) 
Sec. 6-14-32. - Application for vehicle for hire business permit. (a)  Requirements. The application for a vehicle for hire business permit shall be in writing, under oath, addressed to and filed with the chief of police or designee. In addition thereto, the applicant shall provide the name and address of the agent for the company, who shall be the individual who does in fact have regular, managerial and supervisory authority over the company. Said named manager shall also be an agent for service on the company in addition to all other methods allowed for service of process under the laws of Georgia. Should the applicant for a vehicle for hire business permit be a corporation, limited liability company, partnership or other legal entity, the officers and directors of the corporation, the manager(s) of a limited liability company, or if a partnership or other legal entity, the partners or persons with 20 percent or more proprietary interest in the company shall possess all of the requirements set out in this section. No person shall be issued a vehicle for hire business permit without completing the application as provided by the chief of police or designee that shall contain the following requirements and information: (1)  The full name and address of the applicant(s); (2)  If the applicant is a corporation or other legal entity, the names and addresses of its officers and directors or manager(s); if a partnership, the names and addresses of all partners, and percentage ownership interest of each; (3)  Applicant must be at least 18 years of age; (4)  Provide documentation that applicant is a citizen of the United States or an alien admitted for permanent residence or otherwise granted employment authorization by the United States Immigration and Naturalization Service; (5)  Be a resident, for at least one year immediately preceding the date of application, of the State of Georgia; (6)  Provide a copy of the lease or proof of ownership for the location within Athens-Clarke County from which the business shall be operated; (7)  Provide a letter from the Athens-Clarke County Planning Department that the proposed location meets all of the applicable zoning requirements; (8)  Possess and maintain holder-owned vehicles or independent contract vehicles or both, at all times, a minimum number of three vehicles that have been approved by the chief of police or designee and that meet the requirements of these Code sections and are registered to the business for use as vehicles for hire or taxicabs; or present proof that the applicant had a valid 2003 Athens-Clarke County occupation tax certificate for the operation of a taxicab business and therefore is exempt until June 1, 2005 from the requirement to have at least three vehicles; (9)  The make, model, year, VIN and tag of all vehicles to be used by the company; (10)  The maximum numbers of passengers each vehicle is manufactured to carry; (11)  The color scheme of the vehicles and the company logo or insignia to be used to designate the vehicles of the applicant; (12)  A full list of all unpaid judgments against the applicant which shall include the name and address of the owner of the judgment and the amount of the judgment; and, if the applicant is a corporation, a full list of any unpaid judgments against any of the officers and directors, which shall include the name and address of the owner of the judgment and the nature of the transaction or acts giving rise to such judgments; (13)  A full and complete list of all of the applicant's assets and liabilities; (14)  Full information pertaining to the extent, quality, and character of the service the applicant proposes to render. This shall include, but not be limited to, the communication system, frequencies, dispatch staffing and procedures, vehicle maintenance, driver training, safety programs, procedures for handling customer complaints or lost items, and company policies; (15)  The experience of the applicant in the transportation of passengers; (16)  The name and street address of the individual who does in fact have regular, managerial and supervisory authority over the company. Said named manager shall also be an agent for service on the company in addition to all other methods allowed for service of process under the laws of Georgia; (17)  Prior to issuance of the vehicle for hire business permit, the applicant will certify that the applicant has been furnished with a copy of chapter 6-14 of the Code of Athens-Clarke County by the Athens-Clarke County Police Department and that the applicant has read and understands the requirements of said chapter; (18)  Further information which is reasonably related to a vehicle for hire business as may be required by the chief of police or designee. (b)  Investigation of application; factors to be considered prior to issuance. After receiving any application for a vehicle for hire business permit as provided above, the chief of police shall initiate an investigation as necessary to determine whether or not the applicant is qualified and able to efficiently conduct such business and render such service to the public. In determining whether or not the grant of privilege should be made, the chief shall consider, among other things, the following items: (1)  Probable permanency and quality of the service offered by the applicant, the experience of the applicant in rendering such service or similar service elsewhere, and the past record and experience of the applicant in adjusting claims and paying judgments, if any, to claimants. (2)  The financial ability of the applicant to provide the service described, and to respond to claims or judgments arising by reason of business operations, injury to persons or damage to property resulting from operation of a taxicab service. (3)  The character and condition of the taxicabs to be used. All vehicles to be used as taxicabs must have been inspected by a designated Athens-Clarke County inspector within six months of the date of application. (4)  If the applicant is a corporation or other legal entity, the qualification of the officers, directors and persons with an economic interest making such application, and each of the above enumerated items as applied to each of the stockholders, officers, and directors with at least 20 percent ownership interest in the company. The application must be made under oath by the chief executive officer of the corporation or by the person with the greatest proprietary interest in the company. (5)  The character and past record of the applicant; and, if the applicant is a corporation or other legal entity, of its officers, directors, and stockholders. Applicants shall meet the minimum criminal history requirements as specified for a taxicab driver's permit in section 6-14-69. (6)  If the applicant has met all of the requirements of this article and if the application is complete. (7)  If the information provided is true and correct. (Ord. of 3-2-2004, § 1) 
Sec. 6-14-33. - Fixed place of business required.     Each taxicab company as a condition for holding an Athens-Clarke County vehicle for hire business permit under the provisions of this article shall establish and maintain a fixed headquarters on private property for the operation of the company's business. The headquarters shall conform to the requirements of the applicable zoning ordinances of Athens-Clarke County and shall provide adequate off-street parking space for all taxicabs not in service. The headquarters shall have the same name of the taxicab company as on the vehicle for hire business permit, phone number as on file with the police department, and street number readily visible to the public. Said headquarters shall also be easily visible from a public street to the passing public. Such company headquarters shall not be moved without notifying the chief of police or designee 30 days in advance of the move, and then only by the approval of the chief of police or designee of the transfer of the company's Athens-Clarke County vehicle for hire business permit to another location. (Ord. of 3-2-2004, § 1) 
Sec. 6-14-34. - Fees; occupation tax certificate to operate a taxicab business and a vehicle for hire business permit required. (a)  No vehicle for hire business permit referred to in this article shall be issued or continued in effect unless the applicant for or holder of said permit has paid for an Athens-Clarke County occupation tax certificate pursuant to the requirements of chapter 6-1 of the Code of Athens-Clarke County and has paid a regulatory fee for the vehicle for hire business permit pursuant to this article. Such occupation tax certificate and regulatory permit shall be for the calendar year and must be renewed prior to the expiration date. All independent contractors must have an occupation tax certificate to operate a taxicab. (b)  It shall be the responsibility of the Athens-Clarke County Finance Department to issue and receive payment for the occupation tax certificate. (c)  It shall be the responsibility of the chief of police or designee to issue and receive payment for the vehicle for hire business permit. The cost of the vehicle for hire business permit shall be $25.00 for each individual listed on the application and shall be used to cover the cost of the criminal history(s) and background investigation of the applicant(s). (d)  The provisions of this chapter are intended to augment and be in addition to the provisions of title 6, chapter 1. Where this chapter imposes a greater restriction upon persons, premises, businesses or practices than is imposed by title 6, chapter 1, this chapter shall control. (Ord. of 3-2-2004, § 1) 
Sec. 6-14-35. - Transfer.     No Athens-Clarke County vehicle for hire business permit issued under this article may be sold, assigned, mortgaged, leased or otherwise transferred to any other person, corporation or entity. If a holder desires to sell, assign, mortgage, lease or otherwise transfer the business to any other person, corporation or entity, then the proposed transferee shall be required to submit a new application pursuant to section 6-14-32 and to meet all requirements of this article. (Ord. of 3-2-2004, § 1) 
Sec. 6-14-36. - Indemnity for benefit of Athens-Clarke County.     Any taxicab company operating under this article shall hold Athens-Clarke County, its agents and employees, harmless against any and all liability, loss, cost, damage or expense which may accrue to Athens-Clarke County by reason of the negligence, default or misconduct of the company, its agents or employees, to the extent allowed by law, in connection with the privileges granted to such company hereunder. Nothing in this article shall be considered to make Athens-Clarke County liable for damages because of any negligent act or omission or commission by any taxicab company, its servants, agents, drivers or other employees during the operation by the company of the taxicab business or service, either in respect to injuries to persons or with respect to damage to property which may be sustained. (Ord. of 3-2-2004, § 1) 
Sec. 6-14-37. - Liability insurance required. (a)  Except as otherwise provided below for vehicles owned and insured by independent contractors, any person to whom the chief of police or designee grants a vehicle for hire business permit shall, before operating a vehicle for hire, file with the chief of police a certified copy of the fleet vehicle liability insurance policy(s) the business intends to use that has been issued by a good and reliable insurance company with authority to do business as such in the State of Georgia, subject to all of the insurance laws and regulations of the State of Georgia. The insurance must provide specific coverage for a vehicle used in the business of transporting passengers. Self-insurance programs approved for commercial vehicles by the state insurance commissioner shall satisfy this requirement. The amount of liability insurance for each taxicab shall at a minimum be as follows or until increased by the State of Georgia: (1)  An amount not less than $25,000.00 for one person injured; (2)  An amount not less than $50,000.00 for more than one person injured; (3)  Not less than the sum of $25,000.00 for all property damaged in any one accident. (b)  Such policy must be in the form of a fleet vehicle insurance policy issued by an insurance company that has a B+ or better Financial Stability Rating by the A.M. Best Company, Standard & Poor's, Fitch, or Moody's unless self-insured pursuant to the requirements for self-insurance under state law. No taxicab company shall possess more than two separate fleet insurance policies. All policies in force shall list all of the vehicles owned by the company and in operation in accordance with the laws of the State of Georgia. (c)  For each vehicle operated as a taxicab under an independent contract, an independent or contract driver must provide liability insurance, issued by a good and reliable insurance company with authority to do business as such in the State of Georgia, subject to all of the insurance laws and regulations of the State of Georgia, in an amount equal to the coverage of the vehicle for hire permit holder on file with the chief of police. Proof of said insurance on each vehicle must be provided to the holder and to the chief of police. The insurance on each vehicle must provide specific coverage for a vehicle used in the business of transporting passengers. Such policy of insurance must be issued by an insurance company that has a B+ or better financial stability rating by the A.M. Best Company unless self-insured pursuant to the requirements for self-insurance under state law. The independent contract driver shall also be subject to the same requirements as holders in subparagraph (h) below. (d)  Every taxicab operating under the requirements of this chapter shall have conspicuously placed in full view a copy of the vehicle's insurance card or certification of said insurance as provided by the issuer of the insurance policy. (e)  It shall be unlawful for the holder, its agents or employees, to operate or cause to be operated, or drive or cause to be driven, on the streets of Athens-Clarke County any taxicab unless the required liability insurance policy has been filed and displayed as herein provided. (f)  The holder shall, on a quarterly basis (January 1, April 1, July 1, October 1), provide the chief of police or designee a certified copy of the current automobile insurance policy(s) that is in force as required by section 6-14-37. Once this requirement has been met, the chief of police or designee will issue a quarterly insurance validation decal to be affixed to the right side of the rear window. (g)  It shall be unlawful for any holder of a vehicle for hire business permit, its agents or employees, to allow the operation of a taxicab or for any taxicab driver to operate a taxicab in Athens-Clarke County that does not have a valid and current Athens-Clarke County quarterly insurance validation decal. Vehicles without the quarterly insurance validation decal will be subject to being suspended from service and/or towed per section 6-14-10 of this chapter, and the holder shall be subject to a fine, suspension, or revocation of their Athens-Clarke County vehicle for hire business permit by the administrative hearing officer pursuant to section 1-5-1 of the Code of Athens-Clarke County. (h)  No cancellation, non-renewal or lapse in coverage of insurance shall be effective until the expiration of 30 days notice of intended cancellation, non-renewal or lapse in coverage has been given in writing to the chief of police by registered mail or personal delivery of the notice by the holder of the Athens-Clarke County vehicle for hire business permit. It shall be a requirement under this chapter that notification of changes or additions to the policy shall be a provision of and a part of any insurance policy and that the chief of police or designee be listed as an agent of notification on the policy. (Ord. of 3-2-2004, § 1; Ord. of 11-3-2010, § 2) 
Sec. 6-14-38. - Violations; penalties, corrections, suspension and revocation of applicable permits. (a)  Any person, whether acting as an individual, owner, driver or employee of the owner or operator or whether acting as a mere agent for the owner, employee or operator, in any way directly or indirectly, who violates any provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an offense hereunder. Upon conviction such person shall be punished pursuant to the provisions of section 1-1-5 of the Code of Athens-Clarke County. (b)  In addition, any holder of a vehicle for hire business permit issued pursuant to this chapter or any employee or agent of such person who violates any provision of this chapter, or directs, consents to, permits, or acquiesces in such violation either directly or indirectly shall, by such conduct, subject the vehicle for hire business permit to suspension, revocation or probation upon conditions as provided by section 1-5-1.     For purposes of administering and enforcing this chapter, any act committed by an employee, agent or representative of a holder of a vehicle for hire business permit shall be deemed to be an act of such holder. (c)  Corrections matrix. The holder of a vehicle for hire business permit issued under the provisions of this article that has been issued a citation for a violation of any of the sections regarding vehicle maintenance and serviceability, advertising graphics, identification lights and markings shall be required to correct the violation within the time specified as described in the corrections matrix below or shall be subject to prosecution and additional fines and penalties by the municipal court judge, pursuant to the provisions of section 1-1-5 of the Code of Athens-Clarke County. Time allowed for corrections Information to be displayed Company graphics not properly affixed 15 days ACVH number not properly affixed 15 days Company phone number not correct or improperly affixed 15 days Top light does not function Five days Approved bracket or receptacle for taxicab driver's permit required Five days Mechanical deficiencies Headlights (one beam) Five days Taillights (one side) Five days Signal lights (one) not working Five days Signal lights (both) not working Out of service until re-inspected by ACC designated inspector Brake lights not working Out of service until re-inspected by ACC designated inspector No brakes Out of service until re-inspected by ACC designated inspector Number of seatbelts must equal passenger rating Out of service until re-inspected by ACC designated inspector Loud muffler Five days to replace Door handles, latches, trunk not operable Out of service until re-inspected by ACC designated inspector Air conditioner does not work (summer) Out of service until re-inspected by ACC designated inspector Heater does not work (winter) Out of service until re-inspected by ACC designated inspector Balding tires 15 days Thread bare tires Out of service until re-inspected by ACC designated inspector No or insufficient spare tire Out of service until re-inspected by ACC designated inspector No jack in vehicle 15 days Windshield crack (less than 12 inches) 15 days to replace Windshield crack (12 inches or more) Out of service until replaced and re-inspected Window tint 15 days to remove Small dents in body 90 days to repair and repaint Large dents/damage in body Out of service until repaired and repainted Door Mirrors on both sides of vehicle Five days No rear view mirror Five days Inspection permits No biannual inspection permit Out of service until re-inspected by ACC designated inspector No quarterly insurance validation sticker Out of service until requirements are met Required documents Insurance card not in vehicle One day No rate card in vehicle One day No receipt book in vehicle One day Appearance and aesthetics Excessive paint damage or deterioration, rust Out of service until re-inspected by ACC designated inspector Lens covers damaged Five days Grill, fender, bumper, or trim damaged or loose Ten days to repair Excessive fumes, smoke, noise coming from engine Out of service until re-inspected by ACC designated inspector Excessive dirt, mud, debris on body or windows One day Interior excessively dirty or littered One day Unrepaired interior damage, large wear spots, holes Out of service until re-inspected by ACC designated inspector Carpet is dirty or worn out, holes in carpet Out of service until re-inspected by ACC designated inspector  (Ord. of 3-2-2004, § 1) 
Secs. 6-14-39—6-14-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 3. - RESERVED 
Secs. 6-14-61—6-14-90. - Reserved. Editor's note— Ord. of 7-7-2015 , § 6, repealed Art. III, §§ 6-14-61—6-14-71, which pertained to taxicab driver's permits. For prior history, see Code Comparative Table. 
ARTICLE 4. - OPERATING REGULATIONS 
Sec. 6-14-91. - Ability to provide receipts required; method of payment of fare.     The driver of any taxicab shall be able at all times to render a receipt which includes at a minimum the following information: The name, address and phone number of the taxicab company, the Athens-Clarke County vehicle for hire business permit number, name of driver, vehicle number, any items for which a charge is made, the total amount paid, and the date of transaction. A receipt containing such information may be provided in digital format transmitted to the passenger, by a mechanically printed receipt, or on a paper form with information manually entered by the driver. The driver of any taxicab must accept cash or credit cards or debit cards issued by MasterCard, Visa, American Express, Discover or any other issuer approved by the chief of police or designee. (Ord. of 3-2-2004, § 1; Ord. of 2-2-2016(2), § 7 ) 
Sec. 6-14-92. - Solicitation, acceptance and discharge of passengers. (a)  Solicitation—Generally. No driver shall solicit passengers for a taxicab except when sitting in the driver's compartment of such taxicab or while standing immediately adjacent to the curb-side thereof. The driver of any taxicab shall remain in the driver's compartment or immediately adjacent to his or her vehicle at all times when such vehicle is upon the public street; and provided further, that nothing in this subsection shall be held to prohibit any driver from alighting to the street or sidewalk for the purpose of assisting passengers into or out of such vehicle. (b)  Same—Voice; signs; annoyance; obstruction; following. No driver shall solicit patronage in a loud or annoying tone of voice or by sign or in any manner annoy any person or obstruct the movement of any persons, or follow any person for the purpose of soliciting patronage. (c)  Receipt and discharge of passengers. Drivers of taxicabs shall receive or discharge passengers only by pulling up to the extreme right-hand side of the roadway; provided, however, on one-way streets passengers may be received or discharged at either the extreme right- or left-hand side of the roadway. (d)  Passenger limitations. While operating a taxicab, a driver may carry only a person who is a paying passenger unless the passenger is an employee/trainee of the holder for whom the driver is driving. (e)  Solicitation of other common carrier passengers. No driver, owner or operator of any taxicab or vehicle whatsoever shall stop for any reason within an officially designated Athens-Clarke County bus stop area; provided, however, that the provisions of this subsection shall be inapplicable during hours when the Athens-Clarke County bus system is not in operation. A  taxicab pickup location is authorized to operate from 8:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m., Wednesday through Saturday, at the bus stop on Broad Street at the University of Georgia Arch in the area marked as the taxi pick-up location. No driver, owner or operator of a taxicab shall pick up passengers or park in this designated location except during the hours of operation set forth herein. (f)  Number of passengers. No driver shall permit more persons to be carried in a taxicab as passengers than the rated seating capacity of his or her taxicab as stated in the license for such vehicle issued by the police department. A child-in-arms shall not be counted as a passenger. (g)  Prohibition of drivers. The driver of any taxicab shall not solicit business from any hotel or attempt to divert patronage from one hotel to another. Neither shall such driver engage in selling intoxicating liquors or solicit business for any house of ill repute or use his vehicle for any purpose other than the transportation of passengers. (h)  It shall be unlawful for the driver of a taxicab to violate the provisions of this section. (Ord. of 3-2-2004, § 1) 
Sec. 6-14-93. - Refusal to pay fare.     It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to pay the legal fare of any of the vehicles mentioned in this chapter after having hired the same, and it shall be unlawful for any person to hire any vehicle defined in this chapter with the intent to defraud the person from whom it is hired of the value of such service. (Ord. of 3-2-2004, § 1) 
Sec. 6-14-94. - Daily dispatch manifest required.     Each taxicab company shall maintain a daily dispatch manifest upon which the taxicab dispatcher on duty at the approved business location shall record all trips made by each vehicle each day. The daily manifest shall show time and place of origin and destination of each trip, driver's name, and the amount of fare. Each taxicab company shall retain and preserve all dispatch manifests for at least 12 months, and such manifests shall be made available to the police department at all times. (Ord. of 3-2-2004, § 1) 
Sec. 6-14-95. - Smoking.     It shall be unlawful for the driver of any taxicab operated upon the streets of Athens-Clarke County to smoke or use any other tobacco product in the taxicab while the taxicab is occupied by a passenger. (Ord. of 3-2-2004, § 1) 
Sec. 6-14-96. - Property left in taxicab.     Any taxicab driver or operator discovering in any taxicab under his or her control personal property which was lost or left therein by a passenger shall report the loss and deliver all such property to the office of the taxicab company within 12 hours after the discovery of the property. The company shall retain the property on behalf of the owner for at least 60 days. The company shall make all reasonable efforts to contact the owner if the identity of the owner can reasonably be ascertained. (Ord. of 3-2-2004, § 1) 
Sec. 6-14-97. - Compliance with laws and ordinances; safety, etc.     The drivers of vehicles provided for in this chapter shall operate them in accordance with the laws of the state and the ordinances of Athens-Clarke County. They shall have due regard for the safety, comfort and convenience of their passengers and for the safe and careful transportation of property and the safety of the general public. (Ord. of 3-2-2004, § 1) 
Sec. 6-14-98. - Dress standards for drivers.     The holder of a vehicle for hire business permit shall establish and enforce company dress standards for its drivers in conformance with the provisions of this section. (1)  Except as provided pursuant to paragraph (2) below, as a minimum standard, the driver shall wear: a.  Shirts or blouses with a collar, such as sports or dress shirts or polo-type shirts; b.  Jeans, dress, or sport slacks; c.  Shorts or skirts that are no more than two inches above the knee; and d.  Shoes with closed heels and toes must be worn at all times; or (2)  A uniform adopted by the company and approved by the chief of police or designee. (3)  A driver and the driver's clothing must conform to basic standards for hygiene and be clean and sanitary at all times, as well as comply with such other dress requirements imposed by the holder of the vehicle for hire business permit for whom the driver is operating a taxicab. (Ord. of 3-2-2004, § 1) 
Sec. 6-14-99. - Use of scanner prohibited.     It shall be unlawful for the holder of a vehicle for hire business permit or taxicab driver to use, or permit to be used, a scanner or other electronic device to monitor communications between other taxicabs or taxi companies. (Ord. of 3-2-2004, § 1) 
Sec. 6-14-100. - Alcohol prohibited.     Alcoholic beverages within a taxicab are specifically prohibited unless the beverages are purchased from a retail establishment by the passenger, are in a bag, and the seal on the beverages has not been broken and remains unbroken while the passenger is in the taxicab. (Ord. of 3-2-2004, § 1) 
Secs. 6-14-101—6-14-115. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 5. - LIMOUSINE SERVICE 
Sec. 6-14-116. - Business license required.     Any person operating a limousine service involving the use of one or more limousines on the streets of Athens-Clarke County shall be required to have an occupation fee certificate in accordance with the regulations and provisions set forth in title 6, chapter 1 of this Code. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 14; Ord. of 1-3-95, § 1) 
Sec. 6-14-117. - Driver's permits.     No person shall operate a limousine for hire on the streets of Athens-Clarke County and no person who owns or controls a limousine shall permit it to be so driven, and no limousine licensed by Athens-Clarke County shall be so driven at any time for hire unless the driver of such limousine shall have first obtained and shall have then in force a driver's permit in accordance with the regulations and provisions set forth for taxicab driver's permits in article 3 of this chapter. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 14) 
Sec. 6-14-118. - Liability insurance or bond.     Any person operating a limousine service under the provisions of this article shall be required to meet the requirements set forth in section 6-14-37. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 14) 
Sec. 6-14-119. - Indemnity for benefit of Athens-Clarke County.     Any limousine service operating under this article shall hold Athens-Clarke County harmless against any and all liability, loss, cost, damage or expense which may accrue to Athens-Clarke County by reason of the negligence, default or misconduct of the company in connection with the rights granted to such company hereunder. Nothing in this article shall be considered to make Athens-Clarke County liable for damages because of any negligent act or omission or commission by any limousine service, its agents, drivers or other employees during the operation by the company of the limousine service or business, either in respect to injuries to persons or with respect to damage to property which may be sustained. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 14) 
Sec. 6-14-120. - Cruising. (a)  It shall be unlawful for the driver of a limousine to cruise in search of passengers for hire. (b)  "Cruising," for the purposes of this section, means the driving of a limousine on the streets, alleys, or public places of Athens-Clarke County for the purpose of soliciting prospective passengers for hire. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 14) 
Sec. 6-14-121. - Solicitation of passengers. (a)  It shall be a violation of this article for any driver of a limousine to solicit business of any nature whatsoever except in answer to a specific request to provide transportation between specific locations. (b)  It shall be unlawful for a driver of a limousine to solicit business on the premises of any establishment other than the limousine company's central place of business, including, but not limited to, bus terminals, hotels, motels and airports, for the purposes of randomly soliciting passengers for hire. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 14) 
Sec. 6-14-122. - Duty of drivers to obey laws.     The driver of vehicles provided for in this article shall operate them in accordance with the laws of the state and ordinances of Athens-Clarke County. They shall have regard for the safety, comfort and convenience of their passengers and for the safe and careful transportation of property and the safety of the general public. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 14) 
Sec. 6-14-123. - Permit for business, etc., at airport; required.     No person shall engage in any nonaeronautical business or activity on the premises of the Athens-Ben Epps Airport without making a written application to the director of Athens-Ben Epps Airport for a permit to engage in such business on the airport premises. Nonaeronautical activities shall include, but not be limited to, the operation of taxicabs or taxi service, limousines or limousine services, buses for hire and automobile rental services. Such written application for a permit authorizing the transaction of such businesses on the airport premises shall be on forms which are prescribed by the manager of Athens-Clarke County. Such permits shall be issued without charge to such applicants as are qualified in accordance with the provisions of Athens-Clarke County to transact business at such airport facility. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 14; Ord. of 1-3-95, § 2) 
CHAPTER 6-15. - WRECKER SERVICES FOR ATHENS-CLARKE COUNTY-INITIATED TOWS[10] Sec. 6-15-1. Wrecker services for Athens-Clarke County-initiated tows. Sec. 6-15-2. Provision of services for towing and removal of motor vehicles which have been wrecked, impounded, abandoned or improperly parked on public streets or other public places within Athens-Clarke County; violations; removal. Footnotes: --- (10) --- Editor's note— Ord. of 9-6-2016(1) , § 8, amended the title of Ch. 6.15 to read as herein set out. Section 1 of an ordinance adopted Dec. 7, 2004, deleted former Ch. 6-15 of the Code in its entirety and added new provisions as Ch. 6-15 as herein set out. Former Ch. 6-15, §§ 6-15-1—6-15-10, pertained to wrecker services on police nonconsensual call lists and derived from § 1 of an ordinance adopted Oct. 5, 1999. Cross reference— Business license tax, Ch. 6-1; vehicles for hire, Ch. 6-14. State Law reference— Removal of junked motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-4; local ordinances, etc., relating to wrecker services, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-10.1; flashing or revolving lights on vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-8-92. 
Sec. 6-15-1. - Wrecker services for Athens-Clarke County-initiated tows.     For purposes of this chapter, "wrecker service" means any legal entity, corporation, partnership, or individual person, either as principal, agent, or employee, in the business of removing, towing, and/or storing wrecked, disabled, or abandoned automobiles or other vehicles by the use of a wrecker or other towing device. For purposes of this chapter, "Athens-Clarke County-initiated tows" shall mean all situations in which a vehicle is abandoned or illegally parked, where motorists are unconscious, trapped or unable to make a call for wrecker services, or in which the stranded vehicle is in the roadway. On and after April 1, 2005, all wrecker services for Athens-Clarke County-initiated tows shall be furnished only by providers who have contracted with Athens-Clarke County in accordance with this chapter. It shall be unlawful for any provider to provide wrecker service for an Athens-Clarke County-initiated tow except in accordance with this chapter. There are hereby established two categories of wrecker services for contracts with Athens-Clarke County to provide wrecker services for Athens-Clarke County-initiated tows to be awarded and administered in accordance with this chapter. The wrecker service categories are defined as follows: (a)  Standard duty wrecker service .A standard duty wrecker service shall operate one or more "standard duty wreckers" which shall be defined as wreckers having at least 10,000 pounds minimum gross weight rating equipped with an 8,000-pound P.T.O. mechanically driven power winch, crane and boom having dual wheels or an equivalent vehicle having the same minimum capabilities. A standard duty wrecker service shall be capable of towing automobiles, light trucks and similar-sized vehicles. A rollback may be used to satisfy the requirements of this section. (b)  Heavy duty wrecker service . A heavy duty wrecker service shall operate one or more "heavy duty wreckers" which shall be defined as wreckers having at least 25,000 pounds minimum gross weight rating equipped with a 16-ton or larger P.T.O. mechanically driven power winch, crane and boom having dual wheels or an equivalent vehicle having the same minimum capabilities.     A heavy duty wrecker service shall be capable of moving all types of vehicles, including large trucks, buses and loaded and unloaded tractor trailers. (c)  Logs. For documentation purposes, the police dispatcher shall maintain two call logs: A standard duty log and a heavy duty log. Each log shall include wrecker call, time, date and location, officer or person making the request, and police dispatcher on duty. (d)  Wrecker service request procedure. All requests for wrecker service shall be made to the police dispatcher. The police dispatcher shall maintain the call lists as authorized. In the event of multiple contractors in a category the dispatcher shall make calls for wrecker service on a rotation basis as provided for by individual contract with the wrecker services. The police dispatcher shall enter such calls on the proper log. (e)  Monitoring police radio calls, etc. No wrecker service shall proceed to an accident scene by reason of any information received by any means other than being dispatched by the Athens-Clarke County police communications center. (f)  Where vehicles to be towed. All vehicles towed pursuant to this chapter shall be towed to the wrecker service yard unless otherwise directed by the police officer on the scene, or the Athens-Clarke County manager or the manager's designee. (Ord. of 12-7-2004, § 1; Ord. of 9-6-2016(1), § 9 ) 
Sec. 6-15-2. - Provision of services for towing and removal of motor vehicles which have been wrecked, impounded, abandoned or improperly parked on public streets or other public places within Athens-Clarke County; violations; removal. (a)  Beginning on April 1, 2005 and for two-year periods thereafter, Athens-Clarke County shall, after public bid, contract with one or more standard duty wrecker services and one or more heavy duty wrecker services for all Athens-Clarke County-initiated tows. The contracts shall provide that the parties may renew the agreements by mutual consent for one additional two-year period with any adjustments to the rate structure being made only in accordance with the applicable U.S. Department of Labor Consumer Price Index. Prior to initiation of each public bid process, the mayor and commission shall approve the process and methodology of the contract award proposed by the manager. In the event that the mayor and commission shall contract with more than one wrecker service provider in a wrecker service category, the contract award procedure shall require that each bidder disclose detailed information about the ownership and management of the entity seeking a contract, and the mayor and commission shall have the authority to decline to award contracts to entities that have common ownership or management. Any contract awarded pursuant to this chapter shall not be assigned to any other person, firm or corporation or other entity. Each wrecker service contracting with Athens-Clarke County shall satisfy the minimum requirements set forth below and any other requirements as provided for by the contract. (b)  The wrecker service shall be available for Athens-Clarke County-initiated tows via listed telephone numbers 24 hours a day, seven days a week, with adequate personnel available to respond to calls immediately. No pagers or answering machines shall be allowed to answer said calls. (c)  The wrecker service shall respond to the police dispatcher call within a maximum of 30 minutes for standard duty and within a maximum of 45 minutes for heavy duty. (d)  The wrecker service shall have the capability of moving all types of motor vehicles as required by the applicable category of contract. All towing will be performed with the wrecker service's equipment (or leased equipment) and the wrecker service's employees, and the wrecker service will not contract out any work received from an Athens-Clarke County-initiated call within the limits of Athens-Clarke County. Each wrecker service shall display in a conspicuous manner, either painted or permanently affixed thereto on each side of its vehicles, the name, address and phone number of its business establishment. Wrecker service vehicles of all types shall be commercially manufactured, shall have an adequate chassis, and be in safe operating condition at all times. (e)  The wrecker service shall maintain a place of business within Athens-Clarke County with its name, phone number and street number readily visible to the public. Said business shall also be easily visible from a public street to the passing public. The business shall be in compliance with all applicable zoning ordinances. The business must be staffed and operated from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, and from 8:00 a.m. to 1:00 p.m. on Saturdays except on days on which the University of Georgia has a home football game scheduled, the wrecker service shall remain open and staffed from 8:00 a.m. to at least three hours after the time that the football game is completed. During the hours of operation required by this paragraph, the wrecker service shall allow access to impounded vehicles by any officer of the Athens-Clarke County Police Department, any individual accompanied by an officer of the department, or an owner or lessee of the vehicle as established by proof of a valid state motor vehicle registration, current motor vehicle insurance card or policy on an impounded vehicle and state driver's license, and the purpose of such access shall be for investigative purposes or to retrieve personal property of the driver and/or passengers. There shall be no charge for this access. (f)  The wrecker service shall maintain a fenced-off impoundment lot within the boundaries of Athens-Clarke County for storage of impounded vehicles. Such impounded area must be separate from any other impoundment facility of the wrecker service. Such impoundment lot shall be enclosed by a fence not less than six feet high with a gate which can be securely fastened and locked. The fence shall have six-strand barbed wire Y-bracket top. The impound lot must be sufficiently lighted so that the surface of the lot is illuminated to the intensity of at least two footcandles. The impound lot must comply with all applicable Athens-Clarke County ordinances. The impoundment lot shall be capable of storing the number of vehicles required by the contract. The wrecker service shall provide adequate security for all vehicles they place in storage and shall be held responsible for such vehicles and contents thereof. The wrecker service shall maintain at least one protected inside storage area (garage) within Athens-Clarke County for vehicles under police investigation. (g)  An attendant, who shall be a full time employee of the wrecker service, shall be available to receive and dispatch wrecker calls for 24 hours a day, seven days a week. (h)  The wrecker service shall post towing fees reflecting the prices to be charged to the public. Fees shall be posted in open view to the public in the wrecker service's lobby. In addition, the wrecker service shall deliver to each owner or representative of every towed vehicle present at the scene of the tow a pre-printed disclosure form drafted by Athens-Clarke County that states the fees to be charged by the wrecker service, location of storage lots, times of vehicle release, and phone number(s) of the wrecker service. The wrecker service must accept credit cards or bank debit cards at its place of business for payment of the fees. The wrecker service shall furnish the person who pays for wrecker services a written receipt on a pre-printed form drafted by Athens-Clarke County which contains the same information as the within-described disclosure form and which provides an itemization of all charges, the name of the person on the scene who recovered the vehicle, and the telephone number of a representative of Athens-Clarke County designated to receive comments about wrecker service. (i)  The wrecker service must maintain a valid Athens-Clarke County occupation tax certificate. (j)  The wrecker service must maintain registration with the Georgia Public Service Commission and possess all state-required permits. In addition, the wrecker service shall maintain a daily list of vehicles towed and/or stored for Athens-Clarke County-initiated towing and storage services. The list shall contain details as to the make, year, model, color, vehicle I.D. number, license plate number, name of owner, and the purpose of removing and/or storing vehicle. The records shall be retained for a period of 12 months and shall be made available to Athens-Clarke County at any reasonable hour. (k)  The wrecker service must own and maintain at all times the equipment and accessories as required by the contract (or the right to use the same under a written lease agreement for the period covered by the contract). (l)  The wrecker service shall maintain in the wrecker service's name at a minimum the following insurance policies: (i) an automobile liability insurance policy having a combined single limit of not less than $500,000.00, (ii) a comprehensive general liability policy providing bodily injury coverage limits of $1,000,000.00 per person and $1,000,000.00 per occurrence and property damage coverage limits of $500,000.00 per person and $500,000.00 annual aggregate, (iii) cargo and garage keepers liability insurance with a limit of $100,000.00, and (iv) workers' compensation insurance in the minimum coverage required by Georgia law. Said insurance shall name Athens-Clarke County as an additional insured under the policy and shall provide for written notification within 15 days of policy modification, expiration or cancellation. The wrecker service shall provide to the chief of police a full copy of the insurance policy no later than five days from date of execution of agreement or extension thereof or any modification of the policy and upon renewal of the policy. (m)  It shall be the duty of every driver of a wrecker service vehicle to tow vehicles in a professional manner in accordance with standards in the contract and to deal with the public in a professional and courteous manner. Operating personnel of wrecker units shall be technically qualified and physically capable of responding immediately to all calls received. Reasonable care shall be taken by wrecker service personnel to ensure no further damage will occur to the vehicle towed either through carelessness or from natural elements, and the wrecker service shall use the proper equipment of whatever nature necessary (i.e. dollies, wheel lifts) in order to prevent further damage to the vehicles towed. (Ord. of 12-7-2004, § 1; Ord. of 9-6-2016(1), § 10 ) 
CHAPTER 6-16. - CABLE[11] Article 1. Definitions Sec. 6-16-1. Definitions. Secs. 6-16-2—6-16-10. Reserved. Article 2. Procedures for Franchising and Regulating Cable Systems Sec. 6-16-11. A franchise is required to operate a cable system. Sec. 6-16-12. Duration of franchise and renewal. Sec. 6-16-13. Transfers and assignments. Sec. 6-16-14. Reservation of rights by government. Secs. 6-16-15—6-16-24. Reserved. Article 3. Franchise Requirements Sec. 6-16-25. Upgrading and maintaining state-of-the-art system. Sec. 6-16-26. New developments. Sec. 6-16-27. Access channel requirements. Sec. 6-16-28. Interconnection of Local cable systems. Sec. 6-16-29. Continuity of service mandatory. Secs. 6-16-30—6-16-39. Reserved. Article 4. Construction Requirements Sec. 6-16-40. Cable system construction plan, map and schedule. Sec. 6-16-41. Construction and technical standards. Secs. 6-16-42—6-16-50. Reserved. Article 5. Regulations Pertaining to Use of Government Streets Sec. 6-16-51. Placement of grantee's facilities. Sec. 6-16-52. Changes required by public improvements. Sec. 6-16-53. Failure of grantee to perform street work. Sec. 6-16-54. Emergency work. Sec. 6-16-55. Tree trimming. Sec. 6-16-56. Removal and abandonment of property of grantee. Secs. 6-16-57—6-16-69. Reserved. Article 6. Customer Service Requirements Sec. 6-16-70. Rights of individuals. Sec. 6-16-71. Customer service standards. Sec. 6-16-72. Refunds. Secs. 6-16-73—6-16-83. Reserved. Article 7. Administration and Enforcement Provisions Sec. 6-16-84. Controlling Authority. Sec. 6-16-85. Communications with federal and state regulatory organizations. Sec. 6-16-86. Inspection of property and records. Sec. 6-16-87. Permits, employment, and purchasing. Sec. 6-16-88. Grantee to comply with nondiscrimination and affirmative action requirements. Sec. 6-16-89. Administrative procedure. Sec. 6-16-90. Performance evaluation sessions. Sec. 6-16-91. Rate regulation. Sec. 6-16-92. Payment of franchise fee. Sec. 6-16-93. Protection of government against liability. Sec. 6-16-94. Construction bond. Sec. 6-16-95. Letter of credit. Sec. 6-16-96. Liquidated damages. Sec. 6-16-97. Forfeiture and termination. Secs. 6-16-98—6-16-109. Reserved. Article 8. Miscellaneous Provisions Sec. 6-16-110. Appeals. Sec. 6-16-111. Reserved. Sec. 6-16-112. Time is of the Essence. Sec. 6-16-113. Sundry provisions. Sec. 6-16-114. Violation of ordinance. Footnotes: --- (11) --- Cross reference— Utilities generally, Tit. 5. 
ARTICLE 1. - DEFINITIONS 
Sec. 6-16-1. - Definitions.     For the purposes of this chapter and any franchise agreements, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meanings set forth in this section, unless the context clearly indicates that another meaning is intended. When not inconsistent with their context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words used in the singular number include the plural number. Words not defined herein shall be given their common and ordinary meaning.     Access channel: A channel dedicated in whole or in part for programming which is not originated or controlled by a cable company,, including, but not limited to, public, educational or governmental programming (sometimes referred to as "PEG" use or leased access programming).     Agreement or franchise agreement: A separate contractual agreement that is entered into between Athens-Clarke County and a grantee, together with the appendices thereto, to the extent expressly incorporated therein, and all amendments or renewals thereof.     Basic service: Any service tier which includes the retransmission of local television broadcast signals and education, government, and public access channels.     Cable: The provision of cable television services, video dialtone, telecommunications services or other lawful noncable services.     Cable services shall be defined as the one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming and other programming services, together with subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection of such programming and programming services that a cable operator makes available to all subscribers generally.     Cablecasting: Programming carried on a cable system, exclusive of broadcast signals, whether originated by the grantee or any other party.     Cable system: A facility consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service which includes video programming and other services and which is provided to multiple subscribers within a community, but such term does not include (a) a facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or more television broadcast stations; (b) a facility that serves only subscribers in one or more multiple unit dwellings under common ownership, control, or management, unless such facility or facilities uses any public right-of-way or airspace over public right-of-way; (c) a facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part, to the provisions of Title II of the Communications Act of 1934, except that such facility shall be considered a cable system to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers; or (d) any facility of an electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility systems.     Channel: A band of frequencies in the electromagnetic spectrum, or any other means of transmission (including, without limitation, optical fibers or any other means now available or that may become available), which is capable of carrying a video signal, or an audio signal, a voice signal or data signal, provided that the spectrum capacity of each such channel and the technical specifications of each such signal are as defined in a specific franchise agreement. All video channels shall include their Vertical Blanking Intervals, all other video components, all aural components including subcarriers, and shall be transmitted to subscribers on the cable system.     Government: The Unified Government of Athens-Clarke County, a municipal corporation of the State of Georgia, in its present incorporated form or in any later reorganized, consolidated, enlarged or reincorporated form, its commission, boards, departments, or any other entity of, or acting on behalf of, Athens-Clarke County, or any officer, official, employee, or agent thereof, its designee, or any successor thereto.     Commission: The present governing body of the government or any future commission constituting the legislative body of the government.     Complaint: Any verbal or written inquiry, allegation, or assertion made by a person which requires subsequent action or corrective action to the system or any portion thereof, or any subsequent investigation, research and/or service call (such as delivery or exchange of a converter box) to be undertaken by a grantee, its employees or agents. An inquiry which is immediately answered by a grantee's representative receiving the inquiry is not required to be included within the written record of complaints, if the complaint has been resolved to the satisfaction of the complainant.     Construction. The terms "completion of construction or reconstruction," "complete system construction," "satisfactorily complete" and "fully activated" shall mean that in each instance that strand has been put up and all necessary cable (including trunk and feeder cable) has been lashed or, for underground construction, that all cable has been laid and trenches refilled, all road surfaces restored and, except as prevented by weather conditions or delayed because of seasons, landscaping restored; that all amplifier housings and modules have been installed (including modules for return path signals if proposed); that power supplies have been installed and all bonding and grounding has been completed; that construction or reconstruction of the headends or hubs have been completed and all necessary processing equipment has been installed; and that any and all other construction or reconstruction necessary for the cable system to deliver cable service to subscribers has been completed. Proof of performance tests shall have been conducted on each otherwise completed segment of the cable system. It is expected that segments of less than the entire cable system will be activated and proofed when completed. Construction or reconstruction of any segment or of the entire cable system will not be considered complete until proof of the performance tests have been conducted on such segment (or in the case of the entire cable system, on all segments of the cable system) and any problems found during testing have been corrected. The term "completion of construction or reconstruction" does not include marketing and installation of subscriber service.     Grantee: A person that has been granted a valid franchise agreement from the government.     Gross revenues: All amounts, which are received, directly or indirectly, by a grantee from or in connection with the operation of the system, including, without limitation: (1)  Any revenue received from subscribers, including, but not limited to, revenue for basic service, tier service, additional outlets, FM service, commercial service, premium service, pay-per-view service and related per-event services, or for the distribution of any service over the system or the provision of any service-related activity in connection with the operation of the system. (2)  Revenue received from subscribers for installation, change in service and reconnection charges and similar fees. (3)  Revenue received from subscribers for converters, remote controls or other equipment leased or rented to subscribers in connection with the delivery of cable services to such subscribers. (4)  Revenue received from subscribers for service charges and late fees attributable to delinquent accounts. (5)  Revenue received from third parties, including advertising revenue, home shopping commissions or revenue derived from trades and barters, guide commissions, leased access payments, and studio and other facilities or equipment rentals. (6)  Revenue shall include any payment or consideration (including copyright, but excluding any utility users tax or new sales tax imposed by Government or the state or federal government) collected for direct payment to a third party. (7)  Gross revenue shall also include the gross revenue of any other person which is derived directly or indirectly from or in connection with the operation of a system to the extent that said revenue is derived, through a means which has the effect of avoiding the payment of franchise fees to Athens-Clarke County that would otherwise be paid herein. There shall be deducted from gross revenue: a.  Bad debts written off by grantee in the normal course of its business; provided, however, that bad debt recoveries shall be included in gross revenue. b.  Refunds made to subscribers or other third parties. In computing gross revenue from sources other than a grantee's subscribers, including, without limitation, revenue derived from the sale of advertising, home shopping services, guide sales, the lease of channel capacity over its cable system, or any other gross revenues attributable or allocated to grantee in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles but received by another entity affiliated with grantee, the aggregate revenue received by grantee from such other sources during the period in question shall be multiplied by a fraction, the numerator of which shall be the number of grantee's subscribers in Athens-Clarke County as of the last day of such period and the subscribers served by the Athens-Clarke County head-end of which shall be the number of subscribers within all areas served by grantee as of the last day of such period.     Initial activation of cable service or initially providing cable service: With respect to a particular segment, group of segments or the entire cable system, as the case may be, that, all proposed cable services and cable system capabilities as stated in a franchise agreement are available and/or in place, construction or reconstruction has been completed (see above definition of construction) and the completed segment or segments in question or the entire cable system, as the case may be, have been activated.     Leased access channel: The channels a grantee is required by the Cable Act (see section 612) to designate for commercial use by persons unaffiliated with the grantee.     Local origination programming: Programming locally produced by a grantee.     Person: An individual, corporation or other entity, whether for profit or not for profit, but not the government.     Proposal or application shall refer to a formal response by a cable company in accordance with government specifications to provide cable services to residents, businesses, industries, and institutions within Athens-Clarke County.     Property of grantee: All property owned, installed, rented, leased or used by a grantee in the conduct of cable system business in Athens-Clarke County.     Service: Any basic or enhanced programming service, or any other programming or non-programming service whether or not originated by a grantee, which is offered to any subscriber and is distributed over the system.     Service-related activity: Any activity or function for which a grantee receives revenue from any other person and which is directly associated with the operation of the system, or the production or distribution of any service over the system by any person other than the grantee, including, without limitation, operation of studio or other facilities or equipment, billing, audience promotion, or installation or lease of equipment.     Standard service drop: A cable connection, either aerial or underground, that is made available to all subscribers at a uniform installation fee. A standard service drop shall require no more than a 125-foot drop measured from the nearest point of a subscribers home or place of business to the nearest active tap on the cable system, whether or not street cutting or boring is required, and shall involve only one subscriber outlet and standard materials and shall not involve a wall fish. A standard drop shall exclude custom installation work, including specific subscriber requested work that requires nonstandard inventory or cable routing requiring construction methods exceeding reasonable underground or aerial work.     State-of-the-art: A cable system with production or other facilities, plant or other equipment, technical performance, capacity, equipment, components, construction techniques and service equal to that which has been developed and demonstrated by existing cable television system operators and reputable equipment suppliers to be workable in the field, which is more modern and technologically advanced than generally accepted, which is reasonably available and technically economically feasible to install and used by at least some other cable systems in comparable areas of equivalent population, and for which there is some reasonable market demand.     Street or public street: Only a street, road, highway, freeway, lane, path, alley, court, sidewalk, parkway, or drive which is owned by a public entity in fee or to which a public entity has been granted an easement or which has been dedicated for street purposes, and with respect to which, and to the extent that, the government has a right to grant the use of the surface of, and space above and below, in connection with a franchise for a cable system or other compatible uses.     Subscriber: Any person or entity lawfully receiving any services provided by the grantee over the cable system.     Two-way communication: The transmission of video, audio, voice, data, and/or other signals from subscriber locations or other points throughout the cable system back to the cable system's control center as well as transmission of signals from the control center to subscriber locations.     User: A party utilizing a cable system channel for purposes of production or transmission of material to subscribers, as contrasted with receipt in a subscriber capacity.     The terms "will be available," "will be equipped," "will use," "will be designed," "will perform," "will be utilized," "will permit," "will allow," "will be activated," "will be initially connected," "will be capable," "will provide," "will include," "will employ," "will be established," "will be able," "will be implemented," "will be delivered," "will utilize," and other similar uses of terms of a grantee's proposal denoting the activation of cable service, shall be interpreted to mean delivery or accomplishment at a date no later than the initial activation of cable service (as defined in this section), unless otherwise expressly and clearly stated or qualified in a grantee's proposal to mean a more specific or different time. (Ord. of 12-5-95, § 1) 
Secs. 6-16-2—6-16-10. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 2. - PROCEDURES FOR FRANCHISING AND REGULATING CABLE SYSTEMS 
Sec. 6-16-11. - A franchise is required to operate a cable system.     A nonexclusive franchise to construct, operate and maintain a cable system within all or any portion of Athens-Clarke County is required of anyone desiring to provide cable television service, video dialtone, telecommunications services or other lawful noncable services in Athens-Clarke County. A franchise may be granted by the commission to any person, whether operating under an existing franchise or not, who offers to furnish and provide a cable system under and pursuant to the terms and provisions of this chapter and an approved franchise agreement. (a)  Authorization to engage in business and to utilize public ways. Any franchise granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall authorize and permit the grantee to engage in the business of operating and providing a cable in Athens-Clarke County, and for that purpose to erect, install, construct, repair, replace, rebuild, reconstruct, maintain and retain in, on, over, under, upon, across and along any public ways, such poles, wires, cable, fiber optics, conductors, ducts, conduit, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, attachments, and other property as may be necessary and appurtenant to the cable system; and in addition, so to use, operate, and provide similar facilities or properties rented or leased from other persons, firms, or corporations, including, but not limited to, any public utility or other grantee franchised or permitted to do business in Athens-Clarke County.     A franchise shall also confer upon the grantee the right or privilege to enter upon the public easement in government streets and other easements within the scope hereof, and through easements within the franchise area and which have been dedicated for compatible uses. Compatible uses for the purpose of this section include, but shall not be limited to, easements or rights-of-way dedicated for electric, gas or other utility transmission. (b)  Noncable communications service. Insofar as it is not pre-empted by federal or state regulations, a franchise shall also grant the right and privilege to a grantee to provide noncable communications services, provided that: (i) the government reserves all rights it may now have or subsequently acquire with respect to the regulation of noncable services, including, without limitation, the right to impose terms and conditions in addition to or different from those set forth in this chapter with respect to the provision of any noncable service over or in connection with the system or otherwise involving the use of the streets or public ways: (ii) a grantee shall provide written notice to the government 30 days in advance of commencing the offering or distribution of any noncable service; and (iii) the government may authorize such activity subject to such reasonable terms and conditions as the government may establish. (c)  Violations (for not having a franchise) unauthorized connection, tampering: (1)  From and after the effective date of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to establish, operate, or to carry on a business of distributing to any persons in Athens-Clarke County any cable services, video dialtone, telecommunications services or other lawful (noncable services) by means of a cable system or to construct, install or maintain such a system through or over any public property in Athens-Clarke County, or within any other public property of Athens-Clarke County, unless a franchise authorizing such use of such street or property or area has first been obtained pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, and unless such Franchise is in full force and effect. (2)  It shall be unlawful for any person, without the consent of a grantee, to willfully tamper with, remove or injure any cables, wires or equipment used for distribution of television signals, radio signals, pictures, programs, voice, data or sound through a cable system. (3)  Nothing in subsection (1) shall be deemed to invalidate any preexisting franchise that is in full force and effect as of the effective date hereof, but the provisions of this chapter shall apply to such preexisting franchise to the fullest extent permitted by law. Any person that, as of the effective date of this chapter, is operating a cable system in Athens-Clarke County without a franchise, but pursuant to a valid permit or license may continue operating such cable system for one year after the effective date of this chapter, provided that such entity (1) promptly applies for a franchise or enters into franchise negotiations with Athens-Clarke County; (2) pays a fee to Athen-Clarke County equal to five (5) percent of gross revenues during the one-year period; and (3) fully complies with the conditions of its permit and the provisions of sections 6-16-41 and 6-16-51 through 6-16-55 of this chapter. (d)  Grant of authority shall not be exclusive. A grant of authority to operate and provide cable in Athens-Clarke County and the right to use and occupy the streets, alleys, public ways and places for the purposes herein set forth shall not be exclusive. The government reserves the right, at its discretion, to grant Franchises for the same service area to other grantees. (e)  Applications to be submitted to commission for initial franchise. An application for an initial franchise shall be submitted to the commission, or its designee, on a written application form furnished by the government and in accordance with the procedures, schedule and nonrefundable application fee established by the commission to determine the legal, financial, technical and character qualifications of an applicant to provide for the transmission of video, audio, voice, data and other signals.     Notwithstanding the foregoing, any person that was operating a cable system pursuant to a pre-existing franchise as of the effective date of this chapter shall be treated as an applicant for renewal. An initial application also shall not be required of any person that is operating a cable system in Athens-Clarke County pursuant to a valid license or permit issued prior to the effective date of this chapter, so long as such entity obtains a franchise within one year of the effective date hereof. (Ord. of 12-5-95, § 1) 
Sec. 6-16-12. - Duration of franchise and renewal. (a)  Duration franchise agreement may be considered for renewal. The duration of the rights, privileges and authorizations granted in a franchise agreement may not exceed number of years specified in the franchise agreement. A franchise may be considered for renewal by the government pursuant to the procedures established. (b)  Renegotiation may be done at any time. At any time prior to the expiration of the term of a franchise, the government and a grantee may agree to renegotiate all or any part of an agreement. As a result of such renegotiation, the commission may grant a renewal of a franchise, subject to the terms and conditions as may be agreed upon by the parties. (c)  Franchise to be terminated if government decides not to grant a renewal. In the event that: (i) the government lawfully denies to grant a renewal of a franchise at the expiration of the term of an agreement and the franchise term is not temporarily extended; or (ii) the agreement is terminated for cause prior to the expiration of the term thereof; or (iii) the cable system is lawfully abandoned by the grantee; then the franchise granted thereunder shall be revoked and terminated, and all rights of the government and a grantee to the system or any part thereof, shall be determined as provided in section 6-16-97. (Ord. of 12-5-95, § 1) 
Sec. 6-16-13. - Transfers and assignments.     Any transfer or assignment of a franchise shall be done in compliance with the requirements of section 617(e) of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended; and FCC Form 394; and the government requirements set forth in this section. (a)  Prior written consent of government required before any sale, assignment, or transfer of a franchise. Transfer of a franchise means any transaction in which an ownership or other interest in a grantee or its cable system is transferred from one person or group of persons to another person or group of persons so that control in interest of the grantee is transferred, or the rights and/or obligations held by the grantee under a franchise agreement are transferred or assigned to another person or group of persons.     For purposes of this section, "controlling interest" is defined as a change in 10 percent or more of the voting stock of the grantee. A change in management refers to the actual working control or significant influence in whatever manner exercised by the management of the grantee. (b)  Grantee to submit petition documenting information required by government. A grantee shall promptly notify the government of any action or proposed action requiring consent of the government pursuant to this section.     A grantee shall submit to the government an original petition and four (4) copies, unless otherwise directed, which petition shall fully describe the action or proposed action subject to this section and clearly state the basis on which the petition should be approved. The petition shall also contain all reasonably appropriate documentation and such additional information as the government may reasonably require.     At any time during the review process, the government reserves the right to require additional supporting documentation from a grantee or any other person involved in the action or proposed action provided that such requests are consistent with applicable federal law governing the transfer of cable systems. A grantee shall provide all requested assistance to the government in connection with any such inquiry and, as appropriate, shall secure the cooperation and assistance of all other persons involved in such action. (c)  Showings required of proposed assignee. Assignee must agree to conditions prescribed by government: (1)  A proposed assignee must show the transfer will not cause any increased risks of nonperformance of a franchise agreement, or any overall diminution in service, or any loss to the government of its bargained for consideration in a franchise agreement. The assignee's showings must, at a minimum, detail facts sufficient to show the assignee's technical ability, financial capability, legal qualifications and general character qualifications, contain a summary of the plans and commitments of the proposed assignee to remedy the specific defaults and violations, if any, in the operations of the grantee under the existing franchise, and demonstrate such other qualifications as determined by the government; and the assignee must agree to comply with all provisions of the franchise. (2)  In seeking the government's consent to any change of control, grantee shall have the responsibility: a  To show to the satisfaction of the government whether the proposed purchase, transferee, or assignee, including all directors and officers has ever been convicted or held liable for acts involving moral turpitude, fraud, deceit or misrepresentation or is presently under investigation or indictment for such acts, by any applicable federal, state or local jurisdiction. b.  To establish, to the satisfaction of the government, the financial capability of the proposed transferee to operate the franchise system based on the proposed transferee's aggregate financial commitments and resources. Additionally, the government may request, and to the extent such documents exist, the grantee shall assist in providing reasonable financial data relative to the transfer, including, but not limited to, historical financial information such as annual reports, income and expense statements, capital expenditure statements and accompanying notes, and the transferee shall provide to the government the terms and conditions of the purchase agreement, merger agreement, partnership agreement or other document necessary to clarify financial viability and ownership of the proposed transferee. c.  To establish to the satisfaction of the government that the capability of the proposed transferee is such as shall enable it to maintain and operate the cable system for the remaining term of the franchise under the existing or lawfully modified franchise terms. (e)  Reserved. (f)  Transfer without prior consent deemed to be material breach and may be subject to liquidated damages. Any assignment of franchise or transfer of ownership or control of grantee without the prior consent of the government shall be null and void unless later ratified by the government and shall: (i) be deemed a material breach of an agreement and, (ii) among and/or in addition to other remedies available to the government, be subject to a liquidated damages assessment, on a daily basis, until the taking of a transfer or assignment is approved, or if not approved, until the prior ownership, control or other status quo ante is restored to a condition satisfactory to the government. (g)  Government may revoke franchise if unauthorized transfer occurs. If the government denies its consent to any such assignment of franchise or transfer of ownership or control of grantee and such action has nevertheless been effected, the government may revoke a franchise and terminate an agreement unless control of the grantee or the system is promptly restored to its status prior to such unauthorized action or to a status acceptable to the government. (h)  Consent of government to transfer shall not constitute waiver of government rights. The consent or approval of the commission to any assignment of a franchise or transfer of control of a franchise or of ownership shall not constitute a waiver or release of any of the rights of the government. (i)  No transfer to be approved within three (3) years following either the acquisition or prior to completion or initial construction of system. Subject to federal law, no grantee may sell or otherwise transfer ownership in a cable system within a 36-month period following either the acquisition or initial construction of such system by such grantee. (j)  Government to act within 120 days of request for transfer. In accordance with section 617 of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, the government is required to act upon any request for transfer approval or sale of system within 120 days from the receipt of such a request that includes the information required by the FCC regulations and the government's requirements as detailed in this section. (k)  Successor-in-interest must become signatory to an agreement. In no event shall an assignment of franchise or a transfer of ownership or control be approved without the successor-in-interest becoming a signatory to existing franchise agreement. (l)  Grantee not to enter into any management contract if it results in a change of control. A grantee shall not enter into any management contract or other arrangement for the management of the system, to the extent that such contract or other arrangement would result in a change in control of a grantee or the system, without the prior consent of the government. (m)  Cost of evaluation of transfer. The government may impose a processing fee to cover its costs in consideration of an application for the transfer of a franchise. Such fee shall be paid to the government by the grantee (or the transferee) prior to a transfer becoming effective. The fee shall not exceed $20,000.00 and shall be based on actual cost incurred by the government for the processing of the transfer request. This provision shall not be effective for 12 months following the effective date of the franchise agreement. (Ord. of 12-5-95, § 1) 
Sec. 6-16-14. - Reservation of rights by government. (a)  Franchise may be amended to comply with franchising standards of government, state or federal law. A franchise agreement may be amended in any manner necessary to comply with franchising standards of Athens-Clarke County and the State of Georgia, or the requirements of applicable local, state or federal law. If federal law is amended to expand Government powers pertaining to cable television, the government reserves the right to adopt and incorporate additional terms, conditions or regulations that are consistent with the expanded powers and with the terms of each franchise agreement. (b)  Government has right to purchase cable system. Nothing in this chapter or any franchise agreement shall be deemed or construed to impair or affect, or in any way, or to any extent, the right of the government to acquire the property of a grantee in accordance with section 627 (47 USD 547). (c)  If government acquires system, it shall not assume any of grantee's employment or pension contracts or any insurance obligations. In the event of any acquisition of a cable system by the government, and subject to the requirements of applicable law: (i) the government shall not be required to assume any of the obligations of any collective bargaining agreements or any employment contract held by a grantee or any other obligations of a grantee to any of its officers, employees, or agents, including, without limitation, any pension or other retirements, or any insurance obligations; and (ii) the government may lease, sell, operate, or otherwise dispose of all or any part of the system in any manner. (d)  Privileges claimed by grantee in public streets and easements subordinate to government's rights. Any privilege claimed by a grantee in any public street or other public property shall be subordinate to any prior or subsequent lawful occupancy or use thereof by the government or any other governmental entity and, shall be subordinate to any prior lawful occupancy or use thereof by any other person, and shall be subordinate to any prior easements therein. (e)  Police powers. In accepting a franchise, a grantee shall acknowledge that its rights thereunder are subject to the police powers of the government to adopt and enforce general ordinances necessary to the safety and welfare of the public; and it shall agree to comply with all applicable general laws and ordinances enacted by government pursuant to such power. (f)  Right of inspection of construction. The government shall have the right to inspect all construction or installation work performed subject to the provisions of the franchise and to make such tests as it shall find necessary to ensure compliance with the terms of this [the] franchise, the [this] Ordinance and other pertinent provisions of law; provided, that such inspections and tests do not interfere with grantee's operation of the cable system or provision of service, and the government gives grantee reasonable written notice of its intention to conduct such inspections and test. (g)  Right to inspect facilities. Grantee shall allow the government to inspect any of grantee's facilities and equipment at any time, upon reasonable written notice or, in the case of emergency, upon demand without prior notice, provided that such inspections do not interfere with grantee's operation of the cable system or provision of service. (h)  Small system waiver. The government may grant a temporary waiver of any provision of this chapter to a small cable system if such cable system shows that (1) application of the provision to it would cause undue hardship, considering the needs and interests of subscribers and the costs involved; and (2) such cable system has provided an alternative means of satisfying the intent of the requirement that adequately protect the public interest. A small system is a system that, from a single headend, (i) serves fewer than 3,000 subscribers in the jurisdiction of Athens-Clarke County; (ii) serves fewer than a total of 15,000 subscribers; and (iii) is not affiliated with a multiple system operator that serves more than 400,000 subscribers nationwide. The waiver may be embodied in a franchise agreement or in a waiver issued by the government manager. Such waiver shall apply only for so long as the grantee or its successors or assigns meet the foregoing definition of a small system, and shall be subject to such terms and conditions that the government finds are appropriate to protect the public interest. A grantee's eligibility for a waiver and the nature and degree of any relief to be granted shall depend on the nature and degree of the burden imposed by the provision for which the waiver is sought. (i)  Waivers relating to rebuilds or upgrades. The government may grant a temporary waiver of any provision of this chapter to a grantee whose franchise agreement requires it to rebuild or upgrade its system, or that is planning to rebuild or upgrade its system, if such grantee shows that application of the provision to the grantee prior to completion of the rebuild or upgrade would cause undue hardship. The waiver may be embodied in a franchise agreement or in a waiver issued by the government Manager, and shall be subject to such terms and conditions as the government finds appropriate to protect the public interest. Such waiver shall apply only for the period specified in the waiver and shall in no event extend beyond the date on which the upgrade or rebuild is completed. A grantee's eligibility for a waiver and the nature and degree of any relief to be granted shall depend on the nature and degree of the burden imposed by the provision for which the waiver is sought. (Ord. of 12-5-95, § 1) 
Secs. 6-16-15—6-16-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 3. - FRANCHISE REQUIREMENTS 
Sec. 6-16-25. - Upgrading and maintaining state-of-the-art system.     Throughout the term of a franchise agreement, a grantee shall maintain and upgrade the system facilities and the technical performance of the system so as to keep pace with developments in the state-of-the-art, as defined herein, of communications facility technology so long as such maintenance and upgrading is reasonable and economically feasible. A grantee may, on its own initiative, participate in or undertake experiments, tests, and other activities to enhance and advance the state-of-the-art of its communications facility technology. The government may request that a grantee undertake such tests to the extent the grantee and the government reasonably determine that it is economically and technically viable and feasible to do so and provided that such experiments, tests, and other activities are technically sound and undertaken in response to a defined market demand. (Ord. of 12-5-95, § 1) 
Sec. 6-16-26. - New developments. (a)  Government may require additional channel capacity, state-of-the-art improvements, and upgrading of facilities. The government shall have the authority to order the provision of additional channel capacity by a grantee or the inclusion in the grantee's cable system of "state of the art" technology or upgraded facilities, provided that notice of a hearing to consider such an order shall be provided to the grantee and the public not later than 30 days prior to such hearing. At any such hearing, grantee may introduce evidence of the effect of any new requirements on subscriber rates. (b)  Government required to determine need for improvements and financial impact on grantee. If after such hearing, the commission determines that (i) there exists a reasonable need for additional channel capacity and/or "state-of-the-art" technology or upgraded facilities, and (ii) the grantee will receive a fair rate of return on its total investment (including the additional investment required to provide the additional channels and/or the "state-of-the-art" technology or upgraded facilities), the commission may order grantee to provide a specified number of additional channels and/or specified "state-of-the-art" technology or upgraded facilities. In considering the economic feasibility of required cable system improvements, the government may consider the extension of the term of a franchise to permit the recovery of the cost of said improvements. (Ord. of 12-5-95, § 1) 
Sec. 6-16-27. - Access channel requirements. (a)  Minimum channels required to be designated in franchise agreement. Each cable system franchised by the government shall provide the number of access channels established in the franchise agreement. (b)  Creation of entities to administer channels. The government may create or designate one or more entities to be individually or jointly responsible for administering the use of the channels designated for educational and government access purposes. The government may delegate to such entities responsibility for the management, utilization, programming and scheduling of the channels. (c)  Grantee shall assure high technical quality of access channels. All access channels with the exception of commercial leased access channels shall include the vertical blanking intervals, all other video components, and all aural components, including subcarriers, and shall be transmitted to the subscribers on the first basic service tier. The technical quality of all access channels under a grantee's control, apart from the technical quality of the programming supplied to it, shall be at least equal to the same technical quality as the channels used by grantee to transmit other commercial television broadcast stations and satellite channels. For access channels not under grantee's direct control, grantee shall insure that there is no material degradation in the signal that is received by the grantee for distribution by grantee over the cable system. (d)  Formula that trigger additional access channels . If any access channel is being utilized more than seven consecutive hours per day, seven days per week, for seven consecutive weeks, a grantee shall, upon receipt of written notice from government, make an additional new channel available for the same purpose(s) within 60 days. If doing so would require a rebuild, the grantor shall not require the franchisee to add access channels. In calculating channel utilization, only 30 percent of character generated programming hours shall be counted in the total hourly utilization of each individual access channel. (e)  Underutilized access channels to be used by others under rules established by government. Whenever any access channel is utilized less than four consecutive hours per day for six days per week for a continuous period of not less than six consecutive weeks, the government may permit different or additional "interim" uses for said channel. A grantee, among others, may be permitted to utilize unused access channel capacity under rules and procedures established by the government; however, no access capacity shall be utilized by a grantee until all other un-utilized channel capacity on the cable system has been programmed. (f)  Restoration of access channels if demand increases. Access channels permitted by the government for "interim" use by a grantee are to be restored to government, education or government access use whenever the criteria in subsection (d) of this section are exceeded for any one of the existing access channel uses or whenever there is significant, unsatisfied, documented demand for use of access channel capacity, as determined by the government. (g)  Program censorship prohibited. Neither a grantee, the government, nor any other designated entity shall engage in any program censorship or other control of the content of the access programming on the system, except as otherwise permitted by law, provided, however, the government may exercise editorial and scheduling control over programming on any government access channel. (Ord. of 12-5-95, § 1; Ord. of 10-4-2005, § 1) 
Sec. 6-16-28. - Interconnection of local cable systems.     All grantees providing cable service within Athens-Clarke County shall interconnect the access channels of their cable system with the access channels of all other local cable systems in order that access channel programming can universally be available if technically possible on the same channel number to all cable subscribers within Athens-Clarke County. The cost of such interconnection shall be borne by the interconnecting grantees in proportion to the number of subscribers each interconnecting grantee has in Athens-Clarke County (Ord. of 12-5-95, § 1) 
Sec. 6-16-29. - Continuity of service mandatory. (a)  Grantee shall act so as to assure all subscribers receive continuous service. It shall be the right of all subscribers to continue receiving cable service insofar as their financial and other obligations to a grantee are honored. In the event that a grantee elects to rebuild, modify or sell the cable system, or the government gives notice of intent to terminate or fails to renew a franchise, a grantee shall act so as to assure that all subscribers receive continuous service. In the event of a change of grantee, or in the event a new operator acquires the cable system, the grantee shall cooperate with the government, new grantee or operator in maintaining continuity of cable service to all subscribers. During such period, grantee shall be entitled to the revenues for any period during which it operates the cable system, less any amount owed to the government or as may be required by the agreement. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in the event the government lawfully revokes or denies renewal of the franchise, the grantee shall continue to provide service for a period not to exceed six months from the effective date of such revocation. (b)  Failure by grantee without just cause, including forece majeure, to operate system for 48 hours can result in government causing the system to be operated. In the event a grantee fails to operate the cable system for 48 consecutive hours without prior approval of the government or without just cause, the government may, at its option, operate the cable system or designate an operator until such time as a grantee restores cable service under conditions acceptable to the government or a new permanent operator is selected. If the government is required to fulfill this obligation for a grantee, the grantee shall reimburse the government for all reasonable costs or damages that are the result of the grantee's failure to perform. (Ord. of 12-5-95, § 1) 
Secs. 6-16-30—6-16-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 4. - CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS 
Sec. 6-16-40. - Cable system construction plan, map and schedule. (a)  Map and detailed plan to be provided. A grantee shall submit a construction or reconstruction plan not less than 90 days prior to the date grantee intends to commence construction, and that plan shall be incorporated by reference and made a part of a franchise agreement. The plan shall include cable system design details, equipment specifications, and design performance criteria. The plan shall also include a map of the entire franchise area and shall clearly delineate the following: (1)  Areas within the franchise area where the cable system will be available to subscribers, including a time schedule of construction or reconstruction for each year that construction or reconstruction is proposed; and (2)  Areas within the franchise area where extension of the cable system cannot reasonably be done due to lack of present or planned development or other similar reasons, with the areas and the reasons for not serving them clearly identified on the map. (b)  Delay in system construction or reconstruction requires consent by commission. Any delay in the cable system construction or reconstruction beyond the times specified in the plan time table shall require application to and consent by the commission. Any delay beyond the terms of the construction timetable, unless approved by the commission, will be considered a violation of the franchise for which the provisions of sections 6-16-94 through 6-16-97 shall apply. However, nothing in this section shall prevent a grantee from constructing or reconstructing the cable system earlier than planned. (c)  Failure to proceed with construction and/or reconstruction expeditiously is grounds for revocation and/or liquidated damages. Construction or reconstruction in accordance with the plan submitted by a grantee shall occur according to the time schedule and shall commence as soon after the effective date of the franchise as is reasonably possible. Failure to proceed expeditiously shall be grounds for revocation of the franchise and/or liquidated damages. (d)  Line extension policy. Extension of a cable system into any area not specifically treated in the plan shall nonetheless be required if the terms of any of the following conditions are met: (1)  Mandatory extension rule . The grantee shall be required to extend energized cable from any existing activated lines of the cable system to any area immediately adjacent and not currently served by existing cable service, including residential, commercial, and industrial property having a density of at least 20 potential subscriber units per mile as measured in linear trench or aerial strand footage from the nearest technically feasible point on the system. The extension shall be at grantee's cost. The mandatory extension rule shall not apply to the Downtown Business Area as defined in a franchise agreement unless the government has provided notice to the grantee and the government has made available to the grantee open trenches. Upon the request of a potential subscriber, a grantee shall be required to extend energized cable from any existing activated lines of the grantee's cable system to serve the person requesting service; provided, that the location at which service has been requested, including residential, commercial and industrial property, is (i) within the grantee's service area; (ii) has a density of at least 20 potential subscriber units per mile as measured in linear trench or aerial strand from the nearest technically feasible point on the system, and (iii) is not passed by another cable operator's feeder cable. If a grantee has been requested to extend its system to serve an area that meets the foregoing standard for extension with respect to more than one grantee, and the grantee has refused to extend its system, the government's manager, after consultation with each affected grantee, shall determine which grantee shall be required to serve the area in question. Any extension under this section shall be at the grantee's expense. (2)  Early extension. In areas not meeting the requirements for mandatory extension of cable service, a grantee shall provide, upon the request of one or more potential subscribers desiring cable service, an estimate of the costs for time and material required to extend cable service to said subscribers. A grantee shall then extend cable service upon request of said potential subscribers upon payment of cost for time and materials. A grantee may require advance payment or assurance of payment satisfactory to grantee. The amount paid by subscribers for early extension shall be nonrefundable, and in the event the area subsequently reaches the density required for mandatory extension, such payment shall be treated as consideration for early extension. (3)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent grantee from serving areas not covered under this section upon agreement with developers, property owners or residents. Grantee shall furnish and maintain services to each person within the franchise area who makes a bona fide request to receive any service that is based upon the requirements of this chapter. Nothing in a franchise agreement shall limit the right of the grantee to deny service to any household or individual which has a negative credit or service history with the grantee, which may include nonpayment of bills or theft or damage to the grantee's equipment, or who has threatened or assaulted employees of the grantee in the course of their employment. In the event service is denied, the grantee will give written notice within 10 days to the subscriber of his right to notify to the government the grantee's decision to deny service. (e)  Service drops: (1)  Grantee shall make service available to any subscriber within Athens-Clarke County upon a request and at the standard connection charge if the connection requires no more than a 125-foot aerial or underground drop measured from the nearest point of a subscribers home or place of business to the nearest active tap on the cable system whether or not street cutting or boring is required and shall include one outlet, and standard materials, and shall not involve a wall fish installation. (2)  If making street cuts or borings will be necessary to provide service to a commercial subscriber and/or requires more than a standard drop (such as a wall fish installation), grantee may charge the subscriber (i) the standard connection charge and (ii) an amount equal to the reasonable actual labor and material costs incurred by grantee for the additional facilities and work. (3)  Absent a showing by grantee to the manager of unusual circumstances (such as but not limited to street crossings), any standard drop shall be accomplished within seven working days of subscriber's request, a non standard drop shall be accomplished within 15 working days of a subscriber's request. (f)  Aerial and underground drops in excess of 125 feet are not to exceed actual installation costs. With respect to requests for connection requiring an aerial or underground drop line in excess of 125 feet, a grantee must extend and make available cable service to such subscribers at a connection fee not to exceed the actual installation costs incurred by the grantee for the distance exceeding 125 feet. (g)  Underground installation not to exceed standard installation if subscriber provided trenching and conduit. In the event that a subscriber independently provides for his or her own trenching and conduit (including any necessary boring, backfilling, replacing and/or replanting), the installation charge shall be the same as for a standard installation. Provided, however, that the subscriber agrees, in writing and in a form acceptable to the grantee and the government, to hold the grantee and the government harmless for any injury, loss or damage caused by or related to the work so undertaken by the subscriber, and that the grantee shall not be responsible for any service problems caused as a result of the work performed by the subscriber. In such case the installation by the grantee will consist of a standard service drop. (Ord. of 12-5-95, § 1; Ord. of 10-4-2005, § 2) 
Sec. 6-16-41. - Construction and technical standards. (a)  System construction and operation to be consistent with government requirements (listed); government to observe proof of performance tests; government may conduct independent tests at cost of grantee. Grantee shall construct, install, operate and maintain its system in a manner such that it operates at all times consistent with all laws, ordinances, and construction standards of the government; NCTA Recommended Practices for Measurements on Cable Televisions Systems, Second Edition, November 1989, and as amended from time to time; The Rules and Regulations of the Federal Communications Commission; and detailed standards submitted by grantee as part of its application, which standards shall be incorporated by reference in the franchise agreement. In addition, a grantee shall provide the government, upon request, with the opportunity to observe the conduct of, and receive a written report of, the results of, grantee's proof of performance tests. In addition, the government may at any time conduct independent measurements of the system, provided that such measurements, tests and inspections do not interfere with grantee's operation of the cable system or provision of service, and the government gives grantee reasonable written notice of its intention to conduct such measurements, tests and inspections. In the event the government conducts an independent measurement of the system which results in a report indicating that the grantee is not in compliance with the applicable aforementioned standards, then the cost of conducting such independent measurement shall be borne by the grantee. However, if the independent measurement indicated the grantee is in compliance with the aforementioned standards, then the cost of conducting same shall be borne by the government. (b)  Additional specifications—Standby power, national, state and local code requirements. A grantee shall construct, install and maintain the cable system in an orderly and professional manner, using due diligence and materials of good and durable quality. All cables and wires shall be installed, where possible, parallel with and in the same manner as electric and telephone lines. Multiple cable configurations shall be arranged in parallel and bundled with due respect for engineering considerations. Underground installations shall be in conformance with all applicable codes, unless otherwise provided for in the franchise agreement.     Unless otherwise provided in a franchise agreement, a grantee shall maintain equipment capable of providing standby power to be engaged automatically in the event of a power failure for 24 hours at all headend, tower, and HVAC systems and for a minimum of two (2) hours at all trunk nodes and at all distribution amplifiers.     A grantee shall at all times comply with applicable sections of the following, all as from time to time amended and revised, and all other applicable rules and regulations now in effect or hereinafter adopted by the government: (1)  National Electrical Safety Code (ANSI) most recently adopted; (2)  National Electrical Code (National Bureau of Fire Underwriters); (3)  NCTA Recommended Practices for Measurements on Cable Television Systems, Second Edition, November 1989, as amended; (4)  The Rules and Regulations of the Federal Communications Commission; (5)  The government building code; (6)  Government subdivision regulations; (7)  The government road standards. In any event, the grantee shall not endanger or interfere with the safety of persons or property in the franchise area or other areas where a grantee may have equipment located. (c)  Construction inside private areas to be in accordance with public street standards. The grantee shall comply with all of the same standards, specifications and codes to construct and maintain its system within private rights-of-way, as are required for the government's public streets. The grantee shall also agree to inspections of cable construction in private rights-of-way by the government's department of public works, or a contract inspector, designated by the government to enforce the requirements of this section. (d)  Access to grantee's trenches by other utilities. During cable system construction or rebuilding, grantee shall allow other entities as determined by the manager, to put other compatible facilities in their trenches while they are open and provided that such other entities share in the cost of such trenching and refilling of the trenches. (e)  If government determines any part of facilities are harmful to health and safety of any person, grantee shall promptly correct. If, at any time, it is determined by the government or any other agency or authority of competent jurisdiction that any part of the system facilities are endangering the public, including without limitation missing vault or pedestal covers, temporary drop cables that cross walkways, driveways or other areas, and low cables, riser problems and other violations of local or State codes and laws that are harmful to the health or safety of any person, then a grantee shall correct all such conditions, at its own costs and expense, immediately, within 24 hours of receipt of notice from the government or any other agency or authority of competent jurisdiction. Until such conditions are corrected, grantee shall post suitable warnings to ensure that the health and safety of persons possibly affected is ensured. (f)  Grantee to maintain system in conformance with FCC radiation rules. A grantee shall construct, operate and maintain the system in conformance with FCC Signal Leakage requirements, 47 C.F.R. 76 subpart K, to prevent interference with the transmission or reception of over-the-air broadcast signals by television receivers. A grantee shall not interfere with the ability of any subscriber to utilize his or her television receiver for any lawful purpose. The connection of any cable input selector device or any converter to a subscriber's terminal shall not be considered as interference with the subscriber's ability to utilize his or her television receiver. (g)  Grantee to take all necessary steps to prevent accidents. A grantee shall, at its own cost and expense, take all necessary efforts to prevent accidents at its work sites, including the placing and maintenance of proper guards, fences, barricades, and security personnel and, at night, suitable and sufficient lighting. (h)  Notice of cable construction/planned outage/repair to subscribers. Grantee shall notify residents on affected streets of pending construction, where service will be interrupted for one or more hours, or major repairs including any which require street or sidewalk trenching, at least 48 hours prior to commencement of such work. Notification shall be by leaving an appropriate notice at the residence, by telephone, or by mail. In the event of a system extension or rebuild, possibly affecting general system reception, a grantee shall notify all of its subscribers by mail, stating the scope and duration of the proposed extension or rebuild and its impacts at least 14 days prior to commencement of such work, with a followup notice also no later than 48 hours prior to the commencement of the extension or rebuild work. In addition to any other notice the grantee shall inform customer by any community bulletin board on its system. (Ord. of 12-5-95, § 1) 
Secs. 6-16-42—6-16-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 5. - REGULATIONS PERTAINING TO USE OF GOVERNMENT STREETS AND PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY 
Sec. 6-16-51. - Placement of grantee's facilities. (a)  All grantee's facilities to be installed only at locations approved by public works director. Any poles, wires, cable lines, conduits or other properties of a grantee to be constructed or installed in streets shall be so constructed or installed only at such locations and in such manner as shall be approved in writing by Athens-Clarke County's Public Works Director in the exercise of his or her reasonable discretion in conformance with all applicable codes. (b)  During construction, reconstruction or maintenance of system grantee shall not obstruct public ways without prior consent of authorities. In connection with the construction, reconstruction, operation, maintenance, repair, or removal of the system, a grantee shall give due regard to the aesthetics of the franchise areas and shall not obstruct the public ways, streets, railways, passenger travel, or other traffic to, from or within the government, without prior consent of the appropriate authorities. In addition: (1)  All transmission and distribution structures, lines, and equipment erected by a grantee within Athens-Clarke County shall be so located as to cause minimum interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin any streets or public way. (2)  In case of any disturbance to any public way, street, easement, paved area or other property, a grantee at its own cost and expense and in a manner and time period approved by the government, shall replace and restore such public way, street, easement, paved area or other property in as good condition as before the work involving such disturbance was done (see also section 6-16-53(a)). (c)  Permits required to be obtained prior to any physical work being performed in government's streets. A grantee or its authorized contractors must obtain permits from the public works director, building and/or other appropriate departments prior to any physical work being performed in the government's streets, or on government-owned property. Permits will be issued to a grantee or its contractors only on approved plans by approved contractors, which plans must be submitted on or before the request for the construction permit. All work will be done in accordance with the government's specifications and must comply with all applicable government construction codes and procedures. (d)  Grantee to prepare detailed maps of entire system prior to issuance of permit for construction or reconstruction. Maps also to be filed with affected utility companies. A grantee shall cause detailed maps of the entire cable system showing materials of construction, amplifier, and power supply locations to be filed in the office of the public works director prior to the issuance of a permit for construction or reconstruction. Prior to requesting the issuance of a permit for the installation of any facility or apparatus in accordance with the provisions of this section, a grantee shall file such maps with all utility companies and public agencies whose facilities are affected by such installation. (e)  Upon undergrounding of utility lines, grantee shall concurrently place lines underground in conduits at depth approved by public works director. All facilities of a grantee in any public street or in any public or private easement, and cable service lines to subscribers off the main lines, shall be located underground at such depths and locations as shall be approved by the public works director, except, with respect to such cable service lines, where grantee uses existing poles with permission from their owner, and where and so long as electric and telephone lines to the subscribers are overhead. Upon the undergrounding of the utility lines of the owner using said poles, a grantee shall concurrently (or earlier) place its facilities underground at depths and locations approved by the public works director provided that access is made available to grantee during the placement of the facilities underground. All underground wires or cable of a grantee shall be placed in conduits. (Ord. of 12-5-95, § 1) 
Sec. 6-16-52. - Changes required by public improvements. (a)  Grantee may be required to move its facilities to accommodate changes in public improvements. A grantee shall from time to time protect, support, temporarily dislocate, or temporarily or permanently, as may be required, remove or relocate, without expense to the government or any other governmental entity, any facilities installed, used, or maintained under a franchise, if and when made necessary by any lawful change of grade, alignment, or width of any public street by the government or any other governmental entity, or made necessary by any other public improvement or alteration in, under, on, upon or about any public street or other public property, whether such public improvement or alteration is at the instance of the government or another governmental entity, and whether such improvement or alteration is for a governmental or proprietary function, or made necessary by traffic conditions, public safety, street vacation or any other public project or purpose of the government or any other governmental entity. The decision of the public works director under this section, absent review by the commission, shall be final and binding on a grantee. (b)  Grantee shall obtain prior approval before altering any municipal facility; alterations to be at cost of grantee. In connection with the construction, operation, maintenance, repair, or removal of the system, a grantee shall, at its own cost and expense, protect any and all existing structures belonging to the government. A grantee shall obtain the prior approval of the government before altering any water main, sewage or drainage system, or any other municipal structure in any public way or street, because of the presence of the system in the public ways or streets. Any such alteration shall be made by a grantee, at its sole cost and expense, and in a manner reasonably prescribed by the government. A grantee shall also be liable, at its own cost and expense, to replace or repair and restore to as close to its prior condition as is reasonably possible and in a manner reasonably specified by the government, any public way, street or any municipal structure involved in the construction of the system that may become disturbed or damaged as a result of any work thereon by or on behalf of the grantee pursuant to a franchise agreement. (c)  Grantee shall temporarily move its wires to permit moving of buildings. Grantee shall, at the request of any person holding a moving permit issued by the government, temporarily raise or lower its wires to permit the moving of buildings. The expense of such temporary removal or raising or lowering of wires shall be paid by the person requesting the same, and grantee shall have the authority to require such payment in advance. Grantee shall be given not less then 48 hours' notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes. (Ord. of 12-5-95, § 1) 
Sec. 6-16-53. - Failure of grantee to perform street work. (a)  Grantee shall repair and restore damage to government facilities. In the event that a grantee during construction, installation, inspection or repair of its facilities causes damage to pavement, sidewalks, driveways, landscaping or other property, the grantee or the authorized agent shall, at its own expense and in a manner approved by the government, replace and restore such places consistent with all applicable codes and standards. (b)  Failure by grantee to complete required work in any street can result in government causing work to be done at expense of grantee. Upon failure of the grantee to complete any work required by law, or by the provisions of a franchise, to be done in any street or other public place within 10 days following due notice and to the satisfaction of the public works director, the government may, at its option, cause such work to be done and a grantee shall pay to the government the cost thereof in the itemized amounts reported by the public works director to the grantee within 10 days after receipt of such itemized report. Or, at government's option, government may demand of grantee the estimated cost of such work as estimated by the public works director, and such shall be paid by grantee to government within 10 days of such demand; upon award of any contract or contracts for such work, grantee shall pay to government within 10 days of demand any additional amount necessary to provide for cost of such work. Upon completion of such work, grantee shall pay to government or government shall refund to grantee such sums so that the total received and retained by government shall equal the cost of such work. "Cost," as used herein, shall include 15 percent of other costs for government's overhead. (Ord. of 12-5-95, § 1) 
Sec. 6-16-54. - Emergency work.     The government reserves the right to remove any portion of a grantee's equipment and facilities as may be required in any emergency as reasonably determined by the government without liability for interruption of cable service and the government shall not be obligated to restore cable service or to pay the costs of expenses of restoring cable service. (Ord. of 12-5-95, § 1) 
Sec. 6-16-55. - Tree trimming.     A grantee shall notify the government regarding the need to trim trees upon and overhanging streets of the government so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with the wires and cables of the grantee; at the option of the government, such trimming may be done by the government at the expense of the grantee, or by the grantee under the government's supervision and direction at the expense of the grantee. When authorized, such trimming shall be limited to the area required for clear cable passage and shall not include major structural branches which materially alter the appearance and natural growth habits of the tree. If such trimming is not performed by the government, the grantee shall be responsible for any and all damages to any tree as a result of trimming, or to the land surrounding any tree, whether such tree is trimmed or removed, or for damage to property or person caused by such trimming and removal of any tree. (Ord. of 12-5-95, § 1) 
Sec. 6-16-56. - Removal and abandonment of property of grantee. (a)  Grantee shall remove system from any public street following termination or expiration of franchise. In the event that the use of a part of the cable system is discontinued for any reason for a continuous period of 12 months, or in the event such cable system or property has been installed in any street or public place without complying with the requirements of the franchise, or the franchise has been terminated, canceled or has expired without renewal, a grantee shall promptly, at its own expense, and upon being given 10 days' notice from the public works director, remove from the streets or public places all such property and poles of such cable system other than any which the public works director may permit to be abandoned in place. In the event of such removal, a grantee shall promptly restore the street or other area from which such property has been removed to a condition satisfactory to the public works director. (b)  Grantee's property may be considered abandoned 180 days after termination or expiration of franchise. Any property of a grantee remaining in place 180 days after the termination or expiration of a franchise shall be, at the option of the commission, considered permanently abandoned. The public works director may extend such time not to exceed an additional 60 days. (c)  Abandonment in place shall be done at direction of department of public works; ownership of property shall be transferred to government. Any property of a grantee permitted to be abandoned in place shall be abandoned in such a manner as the department of public works shall prescribe. Upon permanent abandonment of the property of a grantee in place, the grantee shall submit to the government an instrument in writing, to be approved by the government's attorney, transferring to the government the ownership of such property. If such an instrument is not received within 30 days of the abandonment, the property shall automatically become that of the government. (Ord. of 12-5-95, § 1) 
Secs. 6-16-57—6-16-69. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 6. - CUSTOMER SERVICE REQUIREMENTS 
Sec. 6-16-70. - Rights of individuals. (a)  Grantee shall not deny cable service or discriminate against subscribers. A grantee shall not deny cable service, or otherwise discriminate against subscribers, channel users, employees or general citizens on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, ancestry, sex, sexual preference, age, disability, income level or area in which they live within the franchise area. (b)  Annual notice to be given to subscribers regarding their rights to privacy. At the time of entering into an agreement to provide any cable service or other service to a subscriber and at least once a year thereafter a grantee shall provide notice in the form of a separate, written statement to such subscriber which clearly and conspicuously informs the subscriber of his or her rights to privacy as currently directed by section 631 of the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, and this chapter and any future amendments or related provisions. (c)  Grantee to protect subscriber privacy. A grantee agrees to comply fully with all applicable state and federal laws relating to the protection of subscriber privacy, including, without limitations, section 631 of the Cable Act, and any future amendments or related provisions of the Cable Act or this chapter and it its related provisions. (1)  Each grantee shall strictly observe and protect the rights of privacy and of property of subscribers at all times. Information on individual subscribers, individual subscriber preference of any kind, including, but not limited to, viewing habits, political, social, or economic philosophies, beliefs, creeds, religions, shopping choices, interests, opinions, energy uses, medical information, banking data or information, or names, addresses, or telephone numbers, or any other personal or private information, shall not be disclosed or revealed to any person, mailing service, investigating agency or department, company, other agency, or entity unless upon the authority of a court of law or upon prior written permission of the subscriber. The request for such permission must be contained in a separate document with a prominent statement that the subscriber is authorizing the permission in full knowledge of its provision. Such authorization shall not in any event be required as a condition of receiving service. (2)  Grantee may release the number of its subscribers but only as a total number and as a percentage of the potential subscribers throughout Athens-Clarke County. When indicating the number of subscribers viewing a particular channel at a particular time, grantee shall indicate only the total number of subscribers viewing during the relevant time and the percentage of all subscribers which they represent, but never the identity of a particular subscriber. Grantee shall provide such total and percentage information to government upon request. (3)  Grantee shall not sell or release its subscriber mailing lists to any third party. A grantee may disclose confidential subscriber information to its accountants, attorneys and other cable-related service providers, provided that (i) the release of such information is necessary to the conduct of the grantee's business; and (ii) such service providers agree to maintain the confidentiality of such information. (d)  Required services for disabled. Consistent with applicable law, a grantee shall provide maximum practicable availability of the services and facilities of the system to disabled persons. Within 30 days after the effective date of an agreement, a grantee shall submit to the government a plan and/or report for the disabled demonstrating how the grantee intends to ensure the availability of its services and facilities to disabled persons. (Ord. of 12-5-95, § 1) 
Sec. 6-16-71. - Customer service standards.     The grantee shall establish customer service and grievance standards which shall at minimum, provide for the following: (a)  Toll-free telephone number to be available for calls 24 hours/day, seven (7) days a week. A grantee shall provide a local toll-free telephone number and customer service representatives to receive and act upon requests for repairs and consumer complaints. Said telephone number shall be so operated that calls can be received and responded to on a 24-hour basis, seven (7) days a week, including weekends and holidays. When a regular customer service representative is not on duty, an adequately trained answering service is to take the name, address and telephone number of each caller to report back to the grantee. Grantee must respond immediately to any outage (defined as a loss or deterioration of signal affecting two (2) or more customers in the same area), 24 hours per day. Grantee must take the steps required so that customers can report and grantee can respond to outages as required by this section. For routine customer service problems, a grantee's customer service representative is to return the phone call to the customer within 24 hours of the customer's call to the answering service. In addition, grantee shall log the number and nature of calls made to its answering service on an ongoing basis, reporting this information quarterly to the manager in a mutually agreed upon report. For purposes of this section "adequately trained" includes the capability to provide referral information; "referral information" includes the dispatch of technical personnel, information as to business hours and appropriate telephone numbers for business hour contacts. (b)  Telephone access to customer service supervisors. If a subscriber asks to speak with a customer service supervisor and none is available, the customer service representative must record the pertinent information and the customer service supervisor shall return the telephone call within four (4) business hours. If that call does not achieve contact with the subscriber, the customer service supervisor must leave a telephone message or write the subscriber giving a direct dial or extension number to reach the supervisor directly. (c)  Customer service representative identification. Customer service representatives must give his/her true first name and/or identification number when so requested by a subscriber. (d)  Sufficient telephone lines and staffing required to connect caller to live personal representative within 30 seconds. A grantee shall obtain and maintain sufficient telephone lines and staffing so as not to delay unreasonably the answering of all telephone calls. Grantee shall connect a telephone caller to a live personal representative of the grantee within 30 seconds for not less than 10 hours per business day Monday through Friday and for four (4) hours on Saturdays. During the hours when a customer service representative of grantee is not on duty to receive calls, a qualified technician shall either be available to an adequately trained answering service by a paging system or shall call the dispatcher or answering service not less frequently than once every two (2) hours to receive and act upon subscriber calls. The government, upon receiving repetitive documented complaints from subscribers regarding their inability to reach a grantee (except during emergencies or system outage periods, or periods of extra ordinary circumstances as determined by the manager) may seek the remedy provided in the liquidated damages section of the franchise agreement. (e)  Telephone system requirements: (1)  If the manager, or a designee, reviews the telephone usage complaints against a grantee and finds them to exceed the standards of subsection (e)(2) below, the manager, or a designee, shall direct the grantee to provide to the manager, an acceptable telephone traffic study within 60 days of the notice. The study shall be conducted on all subscriber service trunk lines and shall include information concerning the efficiency of a grantee's telephone communication system, measured from the telephone company's central office, as well as other performance information available from the grantee's communication equipment. (2)  The specific telephone standards which shall be met are: a.  Eighty percent of all calls shall be answered within three (3) rings or 15.6 seconds. b.  Ninety percent of all calls shall be answered within four (4) rings or 20.8 seconds. c.  One hundred percent of all calls shall be answered within five (5) rings or 30.0 seconds. d.  Callers should not be left on hold more than 30 seconds without being informed of the status of the call. The length of a held call will depend on circumstances, however, a call back is preferred over recorded twice-per-minute progress reports or endless music. e.  Grade of service must be maintained, so that no more than three (3) calls out of each 100 are receiving a busy signal. (3)  Remedy. In the event that a deficiency is determined by the manager to exist within a grantee's telephone communication system, in that the grantee fails to meet the standards set out under subparagraph (2) above, the grantee shall have a three-month period from written notification of such deficiency by the manager to cure the same. (4)  Reservation. The commission shall have the right to modify the requirements herein as it reasonably deems appropriate to service the public benefit, after notice to grantees and opportunity for them to be heard. (f)  Response to service calls to be made in accordance with stated performance standards. Customers requesting installation and/or service shall be informed of all service delivery performance requirements at the time of requesting service, including the need to be at home (if applicable) or provide cash payment (if applicable for installations, connections or reconnections.)     A grantee shall respond to service calls and complaints promptly. The grantee shall be deemed to have responded to a request for service when a qualified technician arrives at the subscriber's location and begins work; provided, that the technician continues said work without cessation to completion and rectification. In the case of a subscriber not being home when the technician arrives, response time shall be extended 24 hours, provided the technician leaves written notification of arrival and return time. Two (2) successive failures of the subscriber to be present at the appointed time shall excuse the grantee of the duty to respond within the time required in subsection (g) of this section. A grantee shall maintain a repair force of service personnel capable of responding to subscriber requests for service under normal operating conditions within the following time frames (unless a subscriber requests a different date that is more convenient to the subscriber and that is beyond the following performance standards): (1)  System outage. Within two (2) hours, including weekends and holidays, of receiving subscriber calls which by number identify a system outage of sound or picture of one or more channels, affecting three (3) or more subscribers. (2)  Isolated outage. Within a 24-hour day, including weekends, of receiving requests for service identifying an individual outage in cable service. (3)  Inferior reception quality, converter exchange or replacement. Within two (2) business days, excluding weekends, of receiving a request for service identifying a problem concerning picture or sound quality, converter exchange, or replacement. Subscribers not satisfied that services have been provided as outlined in this section and the franchise agreement should notify the system manager. Upon notification by subscriber, the grantee shall work with the subscriber to cure the failure of service within 24 hours. If the failure is not cured within that time period, despite the availability and cooperation of the subscriber, grantee shall credit the subscriber's account on a pro rata basis for outages of service in accordance with section 6-16-72. (g)  Grantee shall accommodate subscriber as to choice of morning or afternoon service calls. A grantee shall notify subscribers of expected time of service visits. Such notification shall indicate whether the anticipated visit will be between 8:00 a.m. and noon or 1:00 p.m. and 5:00 p.m. A grantee shall accommodate subscribers as to the choice of morning or afternoon visits. If a subscriber requesting service on a given day cannot be scheduled within a specific morning or afternoon time period and is advised that the grantee's service personnel may arrive at any point during the business day, the subscriber may request the grantee to make an appointment for morning or afternoon service on the next business day in which such appointments are available. If, under extraordinary circumstances, a grantee is unable to keep a scheduled appointment, immediate contact with subscriber is required to inform the subscriber of the delay and to reschedule the service visit at a time meeting subscriber's convenience. (h)  Log to be maintained showing nature and disposition of each cable service complaint and request for service. An accurate and comprehensive file shall be kept by grantee of any and all complaints regarding the cable system, including complaints regarding the behavior or actions of the grantee's employees and contractors, and including administrative functions related to the provision of cable service such as billing. All service complaint records and records of grantee's actions in response to all complaints shall be retained on file for a period of three (3) years. These files and records shall include: (1)  A summary of complaints, identifying the number and nature of complaints, the date and time complaints were received, and their disposition, in a form approved by government. A copy of the summary shall be completed upon request by the government. (2)  A written or computer-stored log and summary of all requests for cable service and their disposition. (i)  Involuntary disconnection. The grantee shall not disconnect service for nonpayment until the grantee has provided written notice, provided on or after the due date of the subscriber's billing and separately from that billing, at least 10 business days in advance of the disconnection. Notice shall specify: (1)  Statement of period when disconnects may occur; (2)  Total payment required to avoid disconnection, with an itemization of component charges; (3)  Total amount in arrears if that amount differs from above; (4)  Telephone numbers and office hours to contact a customer service representative. Where a grantee has improperly discontinued service, it shall provide free reconnection within 24 hours of being made aware of improper disconnection. (j)  Disconnection and downgrade fee. The grantee shall in accordance with FCC regulation not impose any fee or charge for disconnection or downgrade of service.     In the event a refund is due to a subscriber at the time of service disconnection, such refund must be made to the subscriber within 30 business days, following the return of all equipment. (k)  Voluntary disconnection. In the event of a request for voluntary disconnection, grantee, if requested by subscriber, shall reconnect the subscriber's television receivers, and other video equipment which may have been connected to the cable system, to existing available operative equipment owned and maintained by the subscriber. This shall be in compliance with FCC regulations.The grantee may require a home service charge for the service. (l)  Customers to have three-day right of rescission when ordering cable service. A grantee shall afford customers with a three-day right of rescission excluding Sundays for ordering cable services, except that such right of rescission shall end upon initiation of installation whether physically or electronically on the customer's premises. (m)  Installations to be made within seven (7) working days of request. All requests for installation, except where new extensions of cable system are required, must be completed within seven (7) working days of the request for standard drop and 15 working days for nonstandard drop; provided, however, that a grantee shall have been able to obtain any necessary easements or other consents necessary to complete the installation, and that the schedule or preferences of the person requesting the installation have not been responsible for delay, and that all applicable fees and charges have been timely paid and collected. The foregoing deadlines shall not apply in the event of force majeure. In those situations where new construction, including post-wiring of multiple dwelling units, is required, installation shall be completed in 120 days. Consent of the government must be obtained for installations exceeding the periods specified above, which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld. (n)  Installation record to be maintained. The grantee shall maintain for one year a written record (or an equivalent stored on magnetic media capable of reproduction in printed form by the grantee) of all requests for installation, including the date of the request and the date of actual service activation. Said record shall be made available to the manager upon request. (o)  Failure of grantee to keep scheduled appointments. For each failure of the grantee to meet any scheduled appointment in accordance with FCC regulations, the grantee must offer the subscriber, a credit to the subscriber's then current billing balance in an amount equal to $20.00. (p)  Photo identification badges required of anyone representing grantee in the field. All personnel, agents and representatives of a grantee, including subcontractors, that have occasion to deal directly with subscribers in the field, shall wear photo identification badges, when acting on behalf of the grantee. (q)  Grantee fully responsible for action of subcontractors. Grantee shall accept full responsibility for actions of subcontractors and shall not advise any subscriber with a subcontractor related problem that it is up to the subscriber to deal with the subcontractor directly. (r)  Advance notice to be given by grantee prior to entering upon private property. Unless at the owners request, advance notice shall be provided to owners of private property or their agents with respect to repair, maintenance or reconstruction of the cable distribution system located upon such private property. Notice with respect to major construction necessitated by line extensions or rebuilds shall be given in accordance with subsection 6-16-41(h) of this chapter. For scheduled repair and maintenance activities over or within private property, two (2) days prior oral or written notice shall be provided. In cases of emergency repair, no such notice shall be required. (s)  Subscriber to be advised in writing of specific services and procedures. At the time of providing initial service to each subscriber and at least annually thereafter, a grantee shall advise each subscriber, in writing, of: (1)  The availability of the signal control device (lock box) required by section 624(d)(2) of the Cable Act. (2)  All service offerings and options, the fees, charges, deposits, and associated terms and conditions which apply to all services then being distributed over the system. (3)  The grantee's practices and procedures for protecting against invasions of privacy as required by section 631 of the Cable Act, and subsections 6-16-70(b) and (c) of this chapter. (4)  The grantee's procedures for the receipt and resolution of subscriber complaints and refunds; (5)  The address and telephone number of the grantee's office in the franchise area to which complaints may be reported; and (6)  The responsibility of the manager's office for assistance in resolving cable problems. Said notice containing required information of this subsection (s) shall be submitted to the government for review at least 30 days prior to being distributed to subscribers. (t)  Promotional material. Grantee shall retain for at least 90 days copies of promotional material distributed by the grantee to subscribers, including that circulated by newspapers and/or magazines. (u)  Automated telephone recording required to advise subscribers regarding unplanned system outages. Upon being notified of an unplanned system outage affecting at least 10 percent of its subscribers, grantee shall cause an automated recording to be immediately placed on its incoming telephone lines to advise subscribers of the nature and expected duration of the service interruption. Recording shall also provide an option for subscribers calling on other matters to choose to speak with a live representative. (v)  Notice to subscribers regarding blackout requirement. Grantee shall inform its subscribers at initiation of service and at least annually thereafter of possible broadcast channel syndicated exclusivity blackout requirements which affect subscribers' viewing of the grantee's cable system. In addition, grantee shall, by use of continuous character-generated notice or by substituting another signal, avoid transmitting a "blank" screen on the blacked-out channel frequency. With respect to blackouts of selected sports events, grantee shall prepare a character-generated notice to be superimposed on the affected channel, advising subscribers of the TV blackout of the particular sports event. (w)  Reports required of compliance and enforcement of standards. A grantee shall report to the government on a quarterly basis regarding its compliance with these standards. A report form shall be developed in consultation between the manager and a grantee that will provide the detail necessary to monitor grantee's compliance with these standards. Upon breach of a grantee's service standards and failure of a grantee to remedy such breach upon 10 days' prior written notice from the government, the government may invoke the liquidated damages provision of the franchise agreement without prejudice to any other remedy otherwise available to the government. A grantee shall comply with all procedures established by the government and the grantee regarding the handling of all complaints received directly by the government from government residents regarding cable television service. (x)  Government reserves right to establish and to modify subscriber service standards from time to time. To the extent permitted by applicable law and regulations, the government reserves the right to establish reasonable customer service and to modify those standards from time to time, as may be necessary, after notice to grantee has been afforded and grantee has had an opportunity to be heard on all relevant issues including cost. In any proceeding held pursuant to this section, a grantee may introduce evidence regarding the cost of any modifications of the customer service standards, and the effects of the modifications on subscribers. (Ord. of 12-5-95, § 1) 
Sec. 6-16-72. - Refunds. (a)  Subscriber may receive pro-rated credit for loss of cable service commencing from time of notification of grantee. Subscribers not satisfied that their cable services have been provided as outlined in a franchise agreement shall be encouraged to notify the grantee. A grantee shall work with the subscriber to resolve the problem.     Upon request by a subscriber, the grantee shall provide a credit to the subscriber's account for any outage exceeding four (4) consecutive hours in duration. The credit shall be based on a pro-rata basis equal to one-thirtieth of the subscriber's monthly bill for every 24-hour period a subscriber is without service. The subscriber has up to 30 days after the outage to request the credit. This provision shall apply only to outages within a grantee's ability to control. (b)  Annual notice to be given to subscribers regarding their right to a refund. A grantee shall, at the time of initial subscription to the cable system and annually thereafter, furnish a notice to subscribers of their right to a pro rata refund of their monthly subscription fees for any loss or interruption of cable service as described in subsection (a) above. (Ord. of 12-5-95, § 1) 
Secs. 6-16-73—6-16-83. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 7. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT PROVISIONS 
Sec. 6-16-84. - Controlling Authority. (a)  Agreement is subject to provisions of applicable government ordinances and amendments thereto. Franchise agreements are subject to and shall be governed by all terms, conditions, and provisions of this Cable Ordinance and all applicable government laws, ordinances, and regulations and any amendments thereto, in addition to the terms, conditions and provisions set forth in a franchise agreement and other relevant agreements. (b)  Agreement is subject to requirements, of Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984 and amendments thereto. A franchise agreement is subject to and shall be governed by all requirements of the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, 47 U.S.C. section 521 et seq. ("Cable Act"), and any amendments thereto. (c)  Regulatory authority. Government shall exercise appropriate regulatory authority under the provisions of this chapter and applicable law. If the franchise area served by a cable communications system also serves other contiguous or neighboring communities, government may, at its sole option, participate in a joint regulatory agency, with delegated responsibility in the area of cable and related communications. (Ord. of 12-5-95, § 1) 
Sec. 6-16-85. - Communications with federal and state regulatory organizations.     Grantee agrees to provide to the government a list of any and all pleadings, petitions, applications, communication, reports and documents (collectively referred to as "fillings") submitted by or on behalf of the grantee to the FCC or any other federal or state regulatory commission, agency or court which filings would directly affect the construction, operation and/or regulation of the cable system in Athens-Clarke County. Furthermore, the grantee agrees to provide a list of the responses, if any, to the above-mentioned filings. Upon written request from the government, the grantee will provide copies of any filings and/or responses within thirty (30) days of receipt of such request. (Ord. of 12-5-95, § 1) 
Sec. 6-16-86. - Inspection of property and records. (a)  Grantee shall prepare for manager reports regarding operations, affairs, transactions of grantee. A grantee shall prepare and furnish to the manager, at the times and in the form prescribed by said officer, such reports with respect to its operations, affairs, transactions of property as may be reasonably necessary or appropriate for the enforcement of any of the rights, functions or duties of the government or any of its officers in connection with a franchise. (b)  Quarterly reports on system performance required. A grantee shall submit to the government, upon request, a reasonable, statistical summary of the operations of the system. Such information shall include, but not be limited to: the number of dwelling units passed; the number of basic service subscribers; penetration rates for basic and enhanced service; the number of cable plant miles in construction or completed; a summary of subscriber complaints by type of complaint, showing compliance data, telephone call response time, and delayed and abandoned calls; and a service call summary in compliance with service standards in a mutually agreed upon format and reporting system. (c)  Grantee to keep in Athens-Clarke County complete plans and records showing location of all cable system equipment. A grantee shall at all times make available for inspection by the government full and complete plans and records showing the exact location of all cable system equipment installed or in use in streets, public rights-of-way and other places in Athens-Clarke County. (d)  Grantee shall annually file prior to March 31 current maps showing location of equipment installed. The grantee shall file with the public works director, on or before the last day in March of each year, current maps or sets of maps drawn to scale, showing all cable system equipment installed and in place in streets, public rights-of-way and other public places of the government. (e)  Grantee shall make available to government all materials and information applicable to business, ownership and operations of system. Throughout the term of the franchise, a grantee shall make available at the local system office within 30 days after receipt of a written request by the government, complete and accurate books of account, records, maps, plans, and other like materials of the grantee applicable to the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter and franchise agreement as they pertain to the government, or its designated representatives, shall have the right to inspect, examine, or audit such materials during normal business hours and upon reasonable notice to the grantee at reasonable intervals and for reasons related to the enforcement and administration of a franchise agreement, and to obtain information which has not otherwise been provided the government or which government has reasonable basis to believe has not been reported fairly and accurately. All documents which pertain to financial matters which may be the subject of an audit by the government shall be retained by the grantee for a minimum of three (3) years following any termination of an agreement. (f)  Public reports. A copy of each of grantee's annual and other periodic public reports and those of its parent, subsidiary, and affiliated corporations and other entities, as government requests, shall be submitted to government within 10 days of its issuance. (g)  Annual reports to include specific details. A grantee shall file the following reports annually with the manager, no later than 120 days after the end of a grantee's fiscal year: (1)  An audited financial statement applicable to the cable system serving the government, including a detailed income and expense statement applicable to its operation during the preceding 12-month period, a balance sheet and a statement of its properties devoted to the cable system operation, by categories, giving its investment in such properties on the basis of original cost, less applicable depreciation; and (2)  An operational report including the following information, specific to the government: number of homes passed, number of cable plant miles, number of subscribers for each type of cable service offered, penetration rates, and the gross revenue from each revenue source attributable to the operations of grantee from within Athens-Clarke County.     If a grantee is a multiple system operator that serves other communities in the same region, a verified audit of the regional operation that includes Athens-Clarke County will be acceptable if the regional office then prepares a statement showing the allocated costs among all regional systems along with the rationale used in allocating all costs to each local system.     These reports shall be certified as being correct by a responsible officer of the company and there shall be submitted along with them such other reasonable information as the government shall request. (h)  Failure to report. The refusal, failure, or neglect of grantee to file any of the reports required, or such other reports as government reasonably may request, shall subject grantee to all remedies, legal or equitable, which are available to government under the franchise or otherwise. Notice and opportunity shall be provided by the government to the grantee to cure defaults. (i)  Cost of reports. All reports and records required under this or any other section shall be furnished at the sole expense of grantee. (Ord. of 12-5-95, § 1) 
Sec. 6-16-87. - Permits, employment, and purchasing.     Grantee to obtain all permits and licenses required within 90 days, either by purchase or through the exercise of the right of eminent domain, at a fair and just value, which shall not include any amount for the franchise itself or for any of the rights or privileges granted therein, and nothing herein contained shall be construed to contract away or to modify or abridge, either for a term or in perpetuity, the government's right of eminent domain.     Within 90 days after the effective date of a franchise, a grantee shall proceed with due diligence to obtain, at its own costs all necessary permits, licenses, and authorizations which are required in the conduct of its business, including, but not limited to, any business license, utility joint use attachment agreements, microwave carrier licenses, and any other permits, licenses and authorizations to be granted by duly constituted regulatory agencies having jurisdiction over the operation of cable systems, or their associate microwave transmission facilities. A grantee shall have such permits and licenses prior to the commencement of its cable system operations. (Ord. of 12-5-95, § 1) 
Sec. 6-16-88. - Grantee to comply with nondiscrimination and affirmative action requirements.     A grantee shall comply with all applicable nondiscrimination and affirmative action requirements of any laws, regulations, and executive directives of the United States, the State of Georgia, and the government, including all applicable provisions of the government administrative code. (a)  Grantee shall not discriminate in its employment practices. A grantee shall not discriminate in its employment practices against any employee or applicant for employment because of race, color, religion, national origin, ancestry, sex, sexual preference, age, or disability. (b)  Grantee shall annually submit to government copy of its EEO filing with the FCC. Immediately after the effective date of a franchise agreement, if available, and annually thereafter, a grantee shall submit to the government a copy of the grantee's EEO submissions required to be filed with the FCC. (c)  Grantee shall provide opportunities for small business, minority business, and women-owned businesses. To the extent possible in the operation of a franchise agreement, a grantee shall provide opportunities for small businesses, minorities businesses, and women-owned businesses to participate in procurement under the agreement. (Ord. of 12-5-95, § 1) 
Sec. 6-16-89. - Administrative procedure. (a)  Supervision and regulation of franchises. The government may do all things necessary and proper to supervise, inspect, and regulate the construction and operation of cable television systems franchised under this chapter and implement this section. The responsibility for such supervision, inspection and regulation is hereby delegated to the manager. (b)  Grantee to maintain an office or service center in Athens-Clarke County. A grantee shall maintain a business office or service center within Athens-Clarke County limits, which shall be open during the business hours stated in subsection 6-16-71(d) and shall maintain a publicly-listed telephone number with a toll-free number and sufficient lines which shall be so operated and staffed (in accordance with requirements specified in subsection 6-16-71(e)) to respond to customers in at least four ways: accept payments and resolve billing difficulties; to give out and exchange or accept return converters; schedule and conduct service or technician calls; answer subscriber inquiries; and resolve complaints. Subscribers shall be promptly notified of any change of address of such office or of telephone number(s). Grantee shall also prepare a promotional notice to familiarize residents with the location of said office and the services available. This notice is to be given to each new subscriber upon installation of service. (c)  Repair and maintenance crew to be maintained that is capable of responding to subscriber complaints. Grantee shall maintain sufficient repair and maintenance crews capable of responding to subscriber complaints or requests for service in accordance with subscriber service standards established in section 6-16-71. (d)  Outage log to be maintained showing details of service failures. A grantee shall maintain an outage log showing the date, approximate time, location, duration, number of subscribers affected, type and probable cause of all headend, trunk, or distribution line service failures due to causes other than routine testing or maintenance at reasonable times. A copy of such log showing the "availability criteria" (below) shall be filed with the manager on a quarterly basis and shall be retained by a grantee for a period of three (3) years.     The grantee will design, procure, install and maintain its equipment with the objective of meeting a monthly system availability criteria of 99.5 percent measured as follows: 100—0.5 Power On—Outage Time 100 Power On  (e)  Planned service interruption. The need for periodic system service interruption by grantee to perform preventive maintenance, system expansion, and system design upgrading is hereby acknowledged. All such interruptions shall be planned during minimum viewing hours. The grantee shall be sensitive to newsworthy events of general public interest and modify such outage plans to allow maximum customer reception of the news of these events. Notice shall be provided to customers either by mail, notice in daily local newspaper, or on screen message by the cable grantee. (f)  Government can require testing of system and report on system performance. When there have been repeated complaints made or when there exists other evidence which, in the judgement of the manager, casts doubt on the reliability or quality of cable service, the manager shall have the right and authority to compel a grantee to test, analyze, and report on the performance of the cable system. Such report shall be delivered to the manager no later than 30 days after the manager formally notifies the grantee and shall include the following information: the nature of the complaints which precipitated the special test(s); which cable system component(s) was/were tested, the equipment used, and procedure(s) employed in said testing; the results of such test(s); and the methods(s) in which said complaints were resolved. The manager may require that tests and analyses shall be supervised by a qualified engineer selected by the government who is not on the permanent staff of a grantee. (g)  Required tests may be done by independent professional engineer at cost of grantee. Said tests shall be paid for by the grantee within 20 days after the government submits the engineer's invoice. The aforesaid engineer shall sign all records of the special tests and forward to the manager such records with a report interpreting the results of the tests and recommending actions to be taken by the grantee and the government. (Ord. of 12-5-95, § 1) 
Sec. 6-16-90. - Performance evaluation sessions. (a)  Sessions to be held every three (3) years. The government and each grantee shall hold scheduled performance evaluation sessions every three years from the effective date of a franchise and as may be required by federal and state law. (b)  Written report required of grantee—Details outlined. Ninety days prior to each performance evaluation session, the grantee shall submit to the government or such other entity as may be formed by the government, a written report, in reasonable detail, covering the significant events related to the grantee's performance or nonperformance of the terms and conditions of its franchise agreement during the period from the submission of the last such report. Such reports shall, if applicable, cover significant events, including, but not limited to, those events related to the following topics: (1)  Compliance with, and any modification necessary with respect to, the financial commitments required under the franchise agreement. (2)  Compliance with requirements regarding system characteristics and technical performance and testing requirements; (3)  Compliance with construction terms, standards, and schedules; (4)  A description of the changes made or contemplated to the mix and quality of programming in the broad categories of video programming or other services on the system; nothing in this paragraph, however, shall imply any government regulatory authority or power of censorship over the content of programming on the grantee's channels, the public and educational access channels or the leased channels; (5)  The status of the state-of-the-art communications facility technology; (6)  Compliance with, and any modification necessary with respect to, the plan for interconnection; (7)  Compliance with, and any modification necessary with respect to, the grantee's privacy protection policies; (8)  A summary of all significant service interruptions; (9)  A summary of all significant and representative subscriber and user complaints and the action taken by the grantee in response thereto; (10)  A summary of relevant developments in the law and regulatory constraints; and (11)  Other events which the grantee or Grantor may find significant. (12)  Topics which may be discussed at any scheduled or special evaluation session may include, but not be limited to, service rate structures; (13)  Franchise fees; (14)  Liquidated damages; (15)  Free or discounted services; application of new technologies; (16)  System performance; (17)  Services provided; (18)  Access; (19)  Programming offered; (20)  Subscriber complaints; (21)  Privacy; (22)  Judicial and FCC rulings; (23)  Line extension policies; and (24)  Grantee or government rules. (c)  Government may request additional information and clarification to determine franchise compliance. Within 60 days after receipt of the grantee's report, the government may request additional reasonable and appropriate information on specified topics which the grantee shall supply within 60 days of such request. The government may review the grantee's performance to determine whether the grantee has complied with the terms and conditions of the franchise agreement and shall, following completion of any such review, keep the grantee's report on file. Nothing in this section shall affect the government's remedies provided elsewhere in this chapter. (d)  Special evaluation session possible at any time. Special evaluation sessions may be held at any time during the term of a franchise at the request of the government or the grantee. (e)  Public notification of sessions. All evaluation sessions shall be open to the public and announced in a newspaper of general circulation at least 10 days preceding each session at the grantees expense. A grantee shall notify its subscribers of all evaluation sessions by: (1) a written notice shall be mailed directly to all subscriber households and units at least 10 days preceding each session and (2) by announcement on at least two (2) channels (within channels 2—12) of its system between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 9:00 p.m., for five (5) consecutive days preceding each session. (f)  Reserved. (g)  Government may issue report on adequacy of system performance and require improvements where necessary. Within 60 days after the conclusion of any evaluation session (including the clarification period described in subsection (c) above), the government may include a report with respect to the adequacy of system performance and quality of service. If inadequacies are found which result in a violation of any of the material provisions of this chapter or a franchise agreement, the grantee shall have a minimum of 30 days to respond and propose a plan and a schedule of completion for implementing any improvement or correction. (Ord. of 12-5-95, § 1) 
Sec. 6-16-91. - Rate regulation. (a)  Government may regulate rates if permitted by law. Subject to the provisions of applicable law, the government reserves the right to regulate and may regulate a grantee's rates for cable service to the fullest extent permitted by law. (b)  Current rate schedule to be filed with government; 30 days notice required prior to rate change. A grantee, for information purposes, and for the government to ensure nondiscrimination, shall provide the government with a complete schedule of all current basic service and enhanced service rates and charges, including pay TV and pay per view rates and charges, and shall give 30 days prior notice from the date of mailing to the government and to all affected subscribers of any pricing changes or additional charges, excluding temporary marketing and sales discounts or offers. Thirty days before any price changes or additional charges are to take effect, a grantee shall provide the government with a copy of the proposed notification for subscribers so that the government may review the notices text for accuracy. (c)  No charges to be made to subscriber for repair of equipment or service disconnection. A grantee shall not, except to the extent expressly permitted by law, impose any fee or charge on any subscriber for: (i) any service call to said subscriber's premises to perform any repair or maintenance work related to grantee installed equipment necessary to receive service, except any such work which was necessitated by a negligent or wrongful act of said subscriber; or (ii) the disconnection of any services to a subscriber, provided that the grantee may impose appropriate charges if, at the time of disconnection, some or all of the grantee's equipment is not returned to the grantee or the subscriber has not paid all outstanding fees and charges due to the grantee. (d)  Reserved. (e)  Charges for cable services must be applied on nondiscriminatory basis. All charges for cable service must be applied on a nondiscriminatory basis. A grantee may, however, conduct promotional campaigns in which rates are discounted or waived, and may offer bulk rate discounts for multiple unit dwellings, hotels, motels, and similar institutions. (f)  Bulk service practices. Grantee may provide bulk service to hotels, motels and multiple dwelling units in accordance with section 6-16-40(d) (line extension policy) of this chapter. Should the owner of such property request grantee to provide service to all units within a multiple dwelling unit complex on a direct billed basis, grantee shall accommodate such request if the owner of such complex and grantee agree to mutually satisfactory terms and conditions for the provision of such services. Grantee shall make cable service available to a multiple dwelling unit complex in Athens-Clarke County passed by grantee's cable distribution system utilizing the right to limited public easements as set forth in section 6-16-11(a) of this chapter and under all other applicable terms and conditions herein.     Grantee shall retain the right to discontinue service to the multiple dwelling unit complex should the owner or manager charge occupants more than the standard rates charged from time to time to other residential subscribers.     If cable services are provided to the multiple dwelling unit complex under a bulk sales agreement with the owner, the owner or manager shall distribute or make available to units subscribing to cable services current copies of grantee's program guides which grantee will provide by grantee to its other subscribers; in sufficient numbers and on the same schedule as such program guides are provided for a reasonable fee.     Grantee shall request that a building's owner identify all underground utilities in the multiple dwelling unit complex or the property on which it is situated prior to commencement of any work of installation by grantee of its cable distribution system. (g)  Grantee may require refundable deposits and shall pay interest on said deposits. A grantee may require refundable deposits in circumstances where such deposits are necessary to protect equipment or to ensure payment where there is reasonable evidence of a risk of nonpayment. Said deposits shall accrue interest at a rate equal to the effective interest rate for new issues of one-year United States Treasury Bills, issued during the last week of October of each year. Upon termination of service for any reasons, subscribers will be entitled to receive a refund or credit against amounts owed the grantee equal to the deposit plus accumulated interest. (Ord. of 12-5-95, § 1) 
Sec. 6-16-92. - Payment of franchise fee. (a)  Grantee to pay government five (5) percent of gross revenue as a franchise fee. Because the streets and other public rights-of-way which are used by the grantee in the operation of its cable system within the boundaries of the government are valuable public properties acquired and maintained by the government at great expense to its taxpayers, and because the grant to the grantee for use of said streets is a valuable property right without which the grantee would be required to invest substantial capital in right-of-way costs and acquisitions, a grantee shall pay to the government an amount equal to five (5) percent or the maximum permitted by law of grantee's gross revenue as defined in section 6-16-1 from all sources attributable to the operations of the grantee within the confines of Athens-Clarke County. (b)  Five (5) percent fee also applies to any person distributing a service over the cable system. Consistent with section 622(h) of the Cable Act, the government shall impose a fee equal to five (5) percent or the maximum permitted by law of the gross annual revenue of any person that distributes any service over the system. If a grantee collects revenues for said person, such as a leased channel user, then the grantee shall collect said five (5) percent fee or the maximum permitted by law on the gross annual revenues of said person and shall pay said amounts to the government along with the grantee's franchise fee payments. Any person who distributes any service over the cable system and receives fees for such service that are not received by the grantee shall pay to the government a fee equal to five (5) percent or the maximum allowed by law on the gross annual revenues of said person. (c)  Franchise fee to be paid quarterly along with statement verifying all collected gross revenues. The franchise fee assessed shall be payable quarterly to the government. The grantee shall file a complete, accurate, and certified statement of all collected gross revenues within Athens-Clarke County during the period for which said quarterly payment covers, and said payment shall be made to the Athens-Clarke County Finance Department not later than 60 days after the end of each quarter. The grantee shall also provide annually within 90 days after the end of the fiscal year a detailed report certified by an independent certified public accountant verifying all collected gross revenues, and separately itemizing each individual source of revenue, and detailing methods of calculation and allocations. (d)  Government may examine all grantee's records to determine accuracy of amounts payable to government. The government shall have the right to inspect and examine all of a grantee's books of account, income records and other records applicable to the business ownership and management of the system, as may reasonably be required to verify compliance with this chapter or any applicable franchise agreements. The government shall have the right to audit and to recompute any amounts determined to be payable under a franchise agreement; provided, however, that such audit shall commence within 36 months following the close of each of the grantee's fiscal years. The grantee shall make such records available to the government within seven (7) days of request. Such records shall be available for inspection by the government upon reasonable notice during normal business hours and shall be retained by the grantee for a period of three (3) years. Any additional amount due to the government as a result of the audit shall be paid within 30 days following written notice to the grantee by the government, and said notice shall include a copy of the audit report. (e)  Independent audit at grantee's cost. The government reserves the right for cause to require grantee to obtain, at grantee's cost, an independent audit by a certified public accountant on an annual basis, or as otherwise required by the government. The certified public accountant shall be required to certify in the audit that grantee is in compliance with the franchise fee portions of the ordinance granting the franchise and the franchise agreement itself. This right shall be in addition to the government's right to conduct audits. For purposes of this section "for cause" shall mean underpayment of required franchise fees by five (5) percent or more. (f)  Acceptance by government. No acceptance by the government of any payment from grantee shall be construed as a release or as an accord and satisfaction of any claim government may have for further or additional sums payable as a franchise fee under this chapter or for the performance of any other obligation of the grantee. All amounts paid shall be subject to audit and recomputation by government. (g)  Late payment of franchise fee to be charged penalty of 10 percent plus one percent for each additional month that is overdue. In the event that any franchise payment or recomputed amount is not made on or before the applicable date(s) heretofore specified, grantee shall pay a 10 percent late fee on the amount due plus one percent per month for each additional month that is over due. (Ord. of 12-5-95, § 1) 
Sec. 6-16-93. - Protection of government against liability. (a)  Indemnification. Grantee, by executing a franchise agreement, shall indemnify and hold harmless the government; its officers, boards, commissions, agents and employees against and from any and all claims, demands, actions, suits, liabilities and judgments of every kind and nature and regardless of the merit of the same, arising out of or related to the maintenance, operation, or construction of a cable television franchise. This indemnification shall include, without affecting the scope of the foregoing, and without being limited to the following: claims, demands, actions, suits, liabilities and judgments arising in tort, contracts, infringements of constitutional rights, unfair competition, any infringement or violation, or alleged infringement or violation of any copyright, whether common law or statutory, violations of statutes, ordinances or regulations or failure of grantee to secure consents from owners, authorizing distributors or licensees of programs to be delivered by grantee's cable system. Grantee shall reimburse the government and any other such indemnitee for reasonable costs and expenses incurred by them in defending against any such claim or demand or action, including any attorney's fees, accountant fees, expert witness or consultant fees, court costs, per diem expenses, travel and living expenses; and grantee shall upon demand of the government or any other such indemnitee appear in and defend any and all suits, actions or other legal proceedings whether judicial, quasi-judicial, administrative or otherwise, brought by third persons or duly constituted authorities against or affecting the government, its officers, boards, commissions, agents, consultants or employees and arising out of or related to the maintenance, operation or construction of a cable television franchise, or the granting thereof by the government. The foregoing obligations shall exist and continue without reference to or limitation by the amount of any bond, policy of insurance, deposit, undertaking or other security required hereunder. Neither a grantee nor government shall make or enter into any compromise or settlement of any claim, demand, action or suit subject to this section without first giving the other 10 days prior written notice of its intention to do so. (b)  Comprehensive liability insurance. Upon acceptance of a franchise, the grantee shall file a certificate of insurance showing an amount of coverage with the clerk of the commission and shall thereafter, during the entire term of such franchise, maintain in full force and effect at its own expense, a general comprehensive liability insurance policy or policies which shall insure grantee and provide primary coverage for the government, its officers, boards, commissions, agents, consultants and employees, against liability for loss or liability for personal injury, death, property damage (both automobile and non-automobile cause), or other damages. Such policy or policies shall include insurance against damages from unfair competition, copyright infringement (common law or statutory) and a failure of grantee to secure consents, occasioned by any activity or operation of grantee under a cable television franchise, and regardless of any claimed or actual activities of government, its officers, boards, commissions, agents, consultants and employees. The commission may waive the requirement for insurance from one or more perils mentioned in the last preceding sentence upon a finding that such insurance cannot be procured or cannot be procured at a reasonable cost, and in connection therewith may reduce the otherwise required limits on coverage hereafter set forth. However, if such insurance cannot be procured, the grantee's insurance broker or agent must document its unavailability by showing a good faith effort to obtain such insurance. Such policy shall contain the standards cross-liability endorsement. Such policy or policies shall be issued by a company authorized to transact insurance business in Georgia and approved by the manager and shall be in a form approved by the government attorney, with minimum combined single limits of liability coverage in the amount of $3,000,000.00 per occurrence, for bodily injury and property damage, including coverage for owned automobiles, non-owned automobiles, and for-hire automobiles. The policy or policies shall name the government, its officers, boards, commissions, agents, consultants and employees as additional insureds and contain a provision that a written notice of any cancellation, modification or reduction in coverage of said policy shall be delivered to the clerk of the commission 30 days in advance of the effective date thereof. (c)  Government reserves right to annually review and change amounts and types of insurance coverage. The government may review the insurance required herein annually and, based upon any changes in liability exposure or legal requirements, reserves the right at any time during the term of a franchise agreement to reasonably change, by increasing or decreasing, the amounts and types of insurance required thereunder by giving a grantee 90 days' written notice. (d)  Failure by grantee to maintain insurance coverage constitutes material breach. A grantee's failure to procure or maintain required insurance shall constitute a material breach of a franchise agreement under which the government at its discretion, may procure or renew such insurance to protect the government's interests and pay any and all premiums in connection therewith and recover all monies so paid from the grantee. (e)  Additional requirements for insurance policies: (1)  Grantee's insurance coverage shall be primary with respect to the government, its officers, agents, volunteers, and employees. Any insurance or self-insurance maintained by government shall apply in excess of and not contributory with, insurance provided by grantee's policy. (2)  Insurers shall have no right of recovery or subrogation against government (including its officers, employees, volunteers, and other agents and agencies); it shall be the intention of the government and the grantee that the insurance policies so effected shall protect both parties and be primary coverage for any and all losses covered by the above-described insurance. (3)  The insurance company issuing the policy or policies shall have no recourse against the government for payment of any premiums or for assessments under any form of policy. (4)  Any and all deductibles in the above-described insurance policies shall be assumed by and be for the account of, and at the sole risk of, grantee. (5)  Any failure to comply with reporting provisions of the policies shall not affect coverage provided to the government, its officers, employees, agents, or volunteers. (Ord. of 12-5-95, § 1) 
Sec. 6-16-94. - Construction bond. (a)  Bond required within 30 days of effective date of franchise for system construction or reconstruction. Within 30 days after the effective date of a franchise, if required by the government, the grantee shall obtain and maintain throughout the period of system construction or reconstruction, at its cost and expense, and file with the clerk of the commission, a corporate surety bond in a company authorized to do business in the State of Georgia, and found acceptable by the government's attorney, in the amount set forth in the franchise agreement to guarantee the timely construction or reconstruction and full activation of the cable system and the safeguarding of damage to private property and restoration of damages incurred with utilities. (b)  Construction bond to cover losses suffered by failure to complete system pursuant to terms of an agreement and this Cable Ordinance. The bond may be required to provide, but not be limited to, the following conditions: There shall be recoverable by the government, jointly and severally from the principal and surety, any and all damages, loss or costs suffered by the government resulting from the failure of the grantee to satisfactorily complete and fully construct and/or reconstruct and activate the CATV system throughout the franchised area pursuant to the terms and conditions of the franchise agreement. (c)  Construction time limit may be extended by the commission if necessary due to causes beyond grantee's control. Any extension to the prescribed construction time limit must be authorized by the commission. Such extension shall be authorized only when the government finds that such extension is necessary and appropriate due to causes beyond the control of a grantee. The construction bond shall be available throughout any such extension period. (d)  Construction bond may be terminated after commission finds grantee has satisfactorily completed construction or reconstruction. The construction bond may be terminated only after the commission finds that the grantee has satisfactorily completed construction or reconstruction and activation of the cable system pursuant to the terms and conditions of the franchise agreement. The principal sum of the bond may be reduced upon an application by grantee and approval by the commission. (e)  Government's rights with respect to construction bond are in addition to other rights. The rights reserved to the government with respect to the construction bond are in addition to all other rights of the government and no action, proceeding or exercise of a right with respect to such construction bond shall affect any other rights the government may have. (f)  Endorsement required assuring no bond cancellation until 30 days after notice to government. The construction bond shall contain the following endorsement: "It is hereby understood and agreed that this bond may not be canceled by the surety nor the intention not to renew be stated by the surety until 30 days after receipt by the government, by registered mail, or written notice of such intent to cancel or not to renew."     A copy of the construction bond with this endorsement shall be filed with the government. (Ord. of 12-5-95, § 1) 
Sec. 6-16-95. - Letter of credit. (a)  Irrevocable letter of credit required of grantee. Within 30 days after the effective date of a franchise, grantee shall deposit with the government an irrevocable letter of credit in the amount set forth in the franchise agreement and issued by a local federally insured commercial lending institution that has been approved by the government. The form and substance of said letter of credit shall be subject to the approval of the government's attorney. The letter of credit shall be used to assure: the faithful performance by the grantee of all provisions of the franchise agreement and the Cable Ordinance; compliance with all orders, permits and directions of any agency commission, board, department, division or office of the government having jurisdiction over the grantee's acts or defaults under a cable television franchise and the Cable Ordinance; and the payment by the grantee of any penalties, liquidated damages, claims, liens, franchise fees, taxes or other fees due to the government which arise by reason of the construction, operation or maintenance of the cable system, including cost of removal or abandonment of any property of the grantee. (b)  Letter of credit may be drawn upon by manager after following specified procedure that assures due process to grantee. The letter of credit may be drawn upon by the government by presentation of a draft at sight on the lending institution, accompanied by a written certificate signed by the manager certifying that the grantee has failed to comply with the franchise agreement and/or this Cable Ordinance, stating the nature of the noncompliance, and stating the amount being drawn. Examples of the nature of the noncompliance for drawing upon the letter of credit include, but are not limited to, the following: (1)  Failure of the grantee to pay to the government any franchise fees, taxes, liens or other fees after 10 days' written notice of delinquency; (2)  Failure of the grantee to pay to the government, after 10 days' written notice, any amounts due and owing the government by reason of the indemnity provisions of section 6-16-93; (3)  Failure of the grantee to pay to the government any liquidated damages due and owning to the government pursuant to a franchise agreement; (4)  Failure to make any payment required by an agreement within the time fixed therein; (5)  Failure to pay to the government within 10 working days after receipt of written notice from the government, any damages, claims, costs or expenses which the government has been compelled to pay or incur by the reason of any material act or default by the grantee; (6)  Failure to comply within 10 working days after receipt of written notice from the government, with any material provisions of an agreement or cable ordinance which the government reasonably determines can be remedied by an expenditure of an amount from the letter or other instrument. In the event of such noncompliance, the government may order the withdrawal of the amount thereof from the letter or other instrument for payment to the government, provided that, prior to each such withdrawal; (i) the grantee shall be afforded an opportunity to cure any of said failures within 30 days after written notice from the government that the withdrawal is to be made; or (ii) if such cure cannot be reasonably accomplished within such 30 days, then the grantee shall have a reasonable time to cure, provided that the grantee commences such cure within such 30 days and diligently pursues such cure to completion. (c)  Letter of credit shall be replenished to original amount following any draw down. Grantee agrees to structure the letter of credit in such a manner so that if the government at any time draws upon the letter of credit, the amount of available credit shall automatically increase to the extent necessary to replenish that portion of the available credit exhausted by the honoring of the government's draft. The intent of this subsection is to make available to the government at all times a letter of credit in the amount specified in the franchise agreement. (d)  Government's rights with respect to letter of credit are in addition to other rights. The rights reserved to the government with respect to the letter of credit are in addition to all other rights of the government, whether reserved by a franchise agreement or authorized by law, and no action or proceeding against a letter of credit shall affect any other right the government may have. (Ord. of 12-5-95, § 1) 
Sec. 6-16-96. - Liquidated damages. (a)  Parties shall agree to specific liquidated damages to be paid by grantee for certain delays or nonperformance. Upon preparation and acceptance of a franchise agreement, a grantee shall indicate it understands and agrees with the government that failure to comply with any time and performance requirements as stipulated in the agreement will result in damage to the government, and that it is and will be impracticable to determine the actual amount of such damage in the event of delay or nonperformance; therefore, the parties shall negotiate the type and amount of liquidated damages to be specified in a franchise, but without prejudice to any other remedies available to the parties thereto. (b)  Procedures established to assure grantee of due process and opportunity to cure problem before damages assessed. If the manager, following prior reasonable notice to a grantee to cure any problem that might result in liquidated damages, concludes that a grantee is in fact liable for liquidated damages pursuant to this section, he/she shall issue to grantee by certified mail a notice of intention to assess liquidated damages. The notice shall set forth the basis of the assessment, and shall inform the grantee that liquidated damages will be assessed from the date of the notice unless the assessment notice is appealed for hearing before the commission and the commission rules (a) that the violation has been corrected, or (b) that an extension of the time or other relief should be granted. If the grantee desires a hearing before the commission, it shall send a written notice of appeal by certified mail to the manager within 10 days of the date on which the government sent the notice of intention to assess liquidated damages. After the hearing, if the commission sustains in whole or in part the manager's assessment of liquidated damages, the manager may at any time thereafter draw upon the letter of credit required by section 6-16-95. Unless the commission indicates to the contrary, said liquidated damages shall be assessed beginning with the date on which the government sent the notice of intention to assess liquidated damages and continuing thereafter until such time as the violation ceases, as determined by the manager. (Ord. of 12-5-95, § 1) 
Sec. 6-16-97. - Forfeiture and termination. (a)  Franchise may be terminated for material breach of terms and conditions—Examples given. In addition to all other rights and powers retained by the government, the government reserves the right to terminate a franchise and all rights and privileges of the grantee in the event of a material breach of its terms and conditions. Material provisions shall include all labeled as such and all others, which, under all the facts and circumstances indicated, are a significant provision of the franchise agreement or this Cable Ordinance. A material breach by a grantee shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following: (1)  Violation of any material provision of the cable ordinance or franchise agreement or any material rule, order, regulation or determination of the government made pursuant to a franchise; (2)  Attempt to evade any material provision of the cable ordinance or a franchise or practice any fraud or deceit upon the government or its subscriber or subscribers; (3)  Failure to begin or complete cable system construction, reconstruction or cable system extension as provided under a franchise agreement; (4)  Failure to maintain insurance, bonds and letters of credit required by government; (5)  Failure to restore cable service after 48 consecutive hours of interrupted cable service, except when there is just cause and/or when approval of such interruption is obtained from the government; (6)  Material misrepresentation of any fact in the application for or negotiation of a franchise; (7)  Substantial failure to provide the financial information required by the cable ordinance and/or agreement; (8)  Substantial failure to satisfy the requirements regarding system characteristics or repeated failure to meet the technical performance standards specified in an agreement; (9)  Abandonment of the system, in whole or in material part, without the prior written consent of the government; (10)  Substantial and repeated failure to comply with the leased access requirements of section 612 of the Cable Act; (11)  Substantial failure to supply the access channels and other support and any related services, equipment and facilities as required in an agreement; (12)  Repeated imposition of any fee, charge, deposit, or associated term or condition, for any service which is not consistent with the provisions of an agreement, or of which there has repeatedly and unjustifiably been no notification to the government; (13)  Substantial failure to comply with the interconnection requirements, as provided in the cable ordinance and agreement; (14)  Substantial and repeated failure to comply with the customer service standards and requirements set forth in the cable ordinance and agreement; (15)  The taking of any material action which requires the approval or consent of the government without having first obtained said approval or consent, as provided in the agreement; (16)  Engaging in a course of conduct intentionally designed to practice any fraud or deceit upon the government, any subscriber, or any other use of the system; (17)  Any material written misrepresentation, intentionally made by or on behalf of a grantee in it proposal to obtain a franchise, or in connection with the negotiation or renegotiation of, or any amendment or other modification to a franchise agreement, to the extent that any such misrepresentation was relied upon by the government; (18)  The conviction of a grantee, any affiliated person, any director or executive officer of a grantee or of an affiliated person, any person holding control of or a controlling interest in the grantee, or any employee or agent of a grantee or of any affiliated person acting under the express direction or with the actual consent of the grantee, its directors or officers, of any criminal offense, including, without limitation, bribery, fraud or obscenity, arising out of or in connection with a franchise agreement. Provided, however, that the right to terminate a franchise agreement in the event of said convictions shall arise only with respect to any of the foregoing convictions of the grantee itself and, in the event of the conviction of any other persons specified in this subsection if the grantee fails to disassociate itself from, or terminate the employment of, such other persons with respect to activities in the franchise area or any other activities affecting the system pursuant to the agreement, within 30 days after the time in which appeals from such conviction may be taken, if not taken, or within 30 days following the final determination of all appeals which are in fact taken. (19)  The grantee's becoming insolvent, unable or unwilling to pay its debts, or upon listing of an order for relief in favor of grantee in a bankruptcy proceeding. (b)  Violations that occur which are not the fault of grantee shall not constitute a material breach. The foregoing shall not constitute a material breach if the violation occurs but is without fault of a grantee or occurs as result of circumstance beyond its control. A grantee shall not be excused by mere economic hardship nor any misfeasance or malfeasance of its shareholders, partners, directors, officers, or employees. (c)  Pending litigation shall not excuse grantee from performance of its obligations. Except when enjoined by a court of law, litigation pending against a grantee shall not excuse the grantee from the performance of its obligations under an agreement. Failure of a grantee to perform its obligations solely because of pending litigation may result in the imposition of liquidated damages and/or revocation of its franchise. A grantee may petition the government to be excused from the performance of its obligation under an agreement because of pending litigation. (d)  Procedures outlined leading to possible termination of franchise. The manager may make a written demand that a grantee comply with any provision, rule, order, or determination under or pursuant to the cable ordinance or a franchise agreement. If the violation breach, failure, refusal or neglect by a grantee continues for a period of 30 days following such written demand without written proof that the corrective action has been taken or is being actively and expeditiously pursued, the manager may place the issue of termination of a franchise before the commission. The manager shall cause to be served upon grantee, at least 20 days prior to the day of such commission meeting, a written notice of intent to request such termination and the time and place of the meeting. Public notice shall be given of the meeting and the issue which the commission is to consider. (e)  Commission shall hear and consider issues and determine if a violation has occurred. The commission shall hear and consider the issue and shall hear any person interested therein, and shall determine, in its discretion, whether or not any violation by a grantee has occurred. (f)  Commission may declare franchise terminated if compliance does not occur within specified period. If the commission shall determine the violation by a grantee was the fault of the grantee and within its control, the commission, may, by resolution, declare that the franchise of the grantee be terminated, unless there is compliance within such period as the commission may fix. (g)  Receivership and foreclosure: (1)  Any franchise granted shall, at the option of government, cease and terminate 120 days after the appointment of a receiver or receivers or trustee or trustees to take over and conduct the business of grantee whether in a receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy, or other action or proceeding unless such receivership or trusteeship shall have been vacated prior to the expiration of said 120 days, or unless: a.  Such receivers or trustees shall have within 120 days, after their election or appointment to fully comply with all the terms and provisions of this chapter and a franchise granted pursuant hereto, and the receivers or trustees within said 120 days shall have remedied all defaults under the franchise; and, b.  Such receivers or trustees shall have within 120 days to execute an agreement duly approved by the court having jurisdiction on the premises, whereby such receivers or trustees assume and agree to be bound by each and every term, provision, and limitation of the franchise agreement. (2)  In the case of a foreclosure or other involuntary sale of the plant, property, and equipment of grantee, or any part thereof, government may serve notice of termination upon grantee and to the purchaser at such sale, in which event the franchise and rights and privileges of grantee shall cease and terminate 30 days after service of such notice unless: a.  Government has approved the transfer of the franchise, as and in the manner in this chapter provided; and b.  Such successful purchaser shall have covenanted and agreed with government to assume and be bound by all the terms and conditions of the franchise agreement. (Ord. of 12-5-95, § 1) 
Secs. 6-16-98—6-16-109. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 8. - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
Sec. 6-16-110. - Appeals.     In the event a grantee questions the reasonableness of any order, requirement, decision, or other action taken by the manager or shall be of the opinion that the manager lacks authority to take such action, a grantee shall be allowed to appeal the order, requirement, decision or other action to the commission. The notice of objection and request for an appeal shall be made in writing to the clerk of the commission within two (2) weeks of the objectionable order, requirement, decision or other action. (Ord. of 12-5-95, § 1) 
Sec. 6-16-111. - Reserved. 
Sec. 6-16-112. - Time is of the Essence.     Whenever a franchise or contract shall set forth any time for an act to be performed by or on behalf of the grantee, such time shall be deemed to be of the essence, and any failure of the grantee to perform within the time allotted shall always be sufficient grounds for the government to invoke liquidated damages or initiate procedures leading toward the revocation of a franchise. (Ord. of 12-5-95, § 1) 
Sec. 6-16-113. - Sundry provisions. (a)  Every direction, notice or order by the government to be served upon a grantee shall be delivered or sent by registered mail to the office responsible for the local cable system as designated in the franchise agreement. Every notice served upon the government shall be delivered or sent by registered mail, to the manager, Unified Government of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia, 30606. (b)  All provisions of this chapter shall apply to a grantee, its successors, and assignees, as may be approved by the commission in accordance with this chapter. (c)  The rights granted by this chapter are subject to all franchises and permits heretofore or hereafter granted by the commission to use the streets of the government by other public utility or public service corporations. It is not intended by the grant of a franchise to abridge the exercise of the police power heretofore or hereafter granted to the government by the state. The grant of a franchise is subject to all ordinances and resolutions of, or agreements adopted by, the commission of the government as the same now exist or may be hereafter amended, revised or codified, in the lawful exercise of any other power granted to the government. (d)  Specific mention of the materiality of any of the provisions herein is not intended to be exclusive of any others for the purpose of determining whether any failure of compliance hereunder is material and substantial. (e)  If any particular section of this chapter, or the particular application thereof, shall be held invalid, the remaining provisions, and their application, shall not be affected thereby. (f)  A grantee, upon its acceptance of a franchise, shall be bound by the provisions of this chapter, all responses, statements, and all matters agreed upon in a franchise agreement. (g)  A grantee shall assume the cost of any publications required by law and such is payable upon a grantee's filing of acceptance of a franchise. (h)  In the event that any provision of the Cable Act or other statute, law or regulation, which is relied on herein or in any agreement, and any definition or requirement, is repealed, then the language of such provision at the time of such repeal shall nevertheless continue to apply for purposes of this chapter or any agreement, regardless of such repeal, except as otherwise provided herein or in any agreement or as prohibited by such subsequent repeal or amendment. (i)  Any grantee shall warrant, represent and acknowledge, and agree that at or before the effective date of any agreement the grantee shall submit to the government, in a form reasonably acceptable to the government, an appropriate document evidencing its warranties, that, as of the effective date of the agreement: (1)  The grantee is duly organized, validly existing, and in good standing under the laws of the State of Georgia; (2)  The grantee has the requisite power and authority under applicable law and its by-laws and articles of incorporation or other organizational documents, is authorized by resolutions of its board of directors or other governing body, and has secured all consents which are required to be obtained as of the effective date of any agreement, to enter into and legally bind the grantee to such agreement and to take all actions necessary to perform all of its obligations pursuant to any such agreement. (3)  To the best of the grantee's knowledge, there is no action or proceedings pending or threatened against the grantee which questions its performance under the agreement; and (4)  Insofar as the legal capacity of the grantee to carry out any obligation pursuant to the agreement is concerned, the execution of, and performance pursuant to the agreement will not result in the breach or violation of any provision of the articles of incorporation or by-laws of the grantee or of any statute, regulation, agreement, judgment, or decree to which it is subject. (j)  At or before the acceptance of any agreement, the grantee shall submit to the government, in a form acceptable to the government, a statement from the grantee's chief executive officer (or equivalent), stating that, as of the effective date of the agreement, the performance of all terms and conditions of the agreement is commercially practical at the time of the signing of the agreement. (k)  The rights and remedies of the parties pursuant to an agreement are cumulative, except as otherwise provided in an agreement, and shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other rights or remedies which the parties may have with respect to the subject matter of an agreement. A waiver of any right or remedy by a party at one time shall not affect the exercise of said right or remedy or any other right or other remedy by such party at any other time. The failure of the government to take any action in the event of a material breach by the grantee shall not be construed or otherwise be deemed to constitute a waiver of the right of the government to take such action at any other time in the event that said material breach has not been cured, or with respect to any other material breach by the grantee. (l)  In the event that, after the effective date of any agreement, any court, agency, commission, legislative body, or other authority of competent jurisdiction: (i) declares an agreement invalid, in whole or in part, or (ii) requires the grantee either to: (a) perform any act which is inconsistent with any provision of an agreement or (b) cease performing any act required by any provision of an agreement, the government shall reasonably determine whether said declaration or requirement has a material and adverse effect on the agreement. When the grantee intends to exercise its rights pursuant to such declaration, the grantee shall so notify the government of said declaration or requirement. If the government determines that said declaration or requirement does have a material and adverse effect on an agreement, the grantee shall then enter into good faith negotiations with the government to amend the agreement to eliminate any inconsistency or conflict between said declaration or requirement and the provisions of the agreement and to meet the original intent of the parties as the circumstances warrant and unless prohibited by law. (m)  The headings contained in this chapter and any agreement are to facilitate reference only, do not form a part of this chapter or an agreement, and shall not in any way affect the construction or interpretation hereof. (Ord. of 12-5-95, § 1) 
Sec. 6-16-114. - Violation of ordinance.     Any person or entity violating any part of this chapter shall be guilty of an offense, and subject to punishment as provided in section 1-1-5 of the Code of Ordinances of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia. (Ord. of 12-5-95, § 1) 
CHAPTER 6-17. - ELECTRIC MEMBERSHIP CORPORATION FRANCHISES[12] Sec. 6-17-1. Grant of franchise to Rayle, Jackson and Walton EMC's. Sec. 6-17-2. Use of streets, public places, etc., conditioned on payment of franchise fees. Sec. 6-17-3. Considerations, terms and conditions. Footnotes: --- (12) --- Cross reference— Utility companies generally, Ch. 6-13. 
Sec. 6-17-1. - Grant of franchise to Rayle, Jackson and Walton EMC's.     The mayor and commission of the Unified Government of Athens-Clarke County hereby ordains by the authority of same that the authority, right, permission and consent are hereby granted to Rayle Electric Membership Corporation, Jackson Electric Membership Corporation, and Walton Electric Membership Corporation (hereinafter referred to as EMC's), which are electric membership corporations defined in O.C.G.A. title 46, chapter 3, article 2, their successors, lessees and assigns (the "company"), subject to the terms and conditions set forth hereinafter, for a period of 50 years, to occupy and use the streets, alleys and public places of the Unified Government of Athens-Clarke County (the "government") within the present and future limits of the government as from time to time the company may deem proper or necessary for the overhead or underground construction, maintenance, operation, and extension of poles, towers, lines, wires, cables, conduits, insulators, transformers, appliances, equipment, connections and other apparatus for the business and purpose of transmitting, conveying, conducting, using, supplying and distributing electricity for light, heat, power and other purposes for which electric current may be or become useful or practicable for public or private use, and to re-enter upon such streets, alleys and public places from time to time as the company may deem proper or necessary to perform these functions, and to cut and trim trees and shrubbery when and where necessary, in the judgment of the company, to ensure safe and efficient service. (Ord. of 6-23-95, § 1; Ord. of 7-2-96, § 1; Ord. of 7-6-99, § 1) 
Sec. 6-17-2. - Use of streets, public places, etc., conditioned on payment of franchise fees.     From and after the adoption of this chapter, the future use by Walton, Rayle, Jackson EMC of the streets, alleys, public places and other property of the government for the operation of EMC's electric distribution systems and the grant of the requisite street franchise rights is expressly conditioned upon payment of franchise fees pursuant to this chapter, and continued use and occupancy of such Athens-Clarke County property for said purpose without payment of such franchise fees shall be unlawful, and Athens-Clarke County shall be entitled to enforce compliance with this chapter by appropriate proceeding at law or in equity. (Ord. of 6-23-95, § 2) 
Sec. 6-17-3. - Considerations terms and conditions.     The rights, permission and consents herein contained are made for the following considerations and upon the following terms and conditions: (1)  The company shall pay to the government (a) on or before the first day of March, 1996, a sum of money equal to four percent of the gross sales of electric energy to all of the company's customers served within the corporate limits of the government during the period beginning on the first day of July, 1995, through and including December 31, 1995, and (b) on or before the first day of March, 1997, and the same day of each year thereafter during the term of the franchise herein granted a sum of money equal to four percent of the gross sales of electric energy to all of the company's customers served within the corporate limits of the government during the preceding calendar year; provided, however, that in the event the government shall grant to any other electric utility the right to use and occupy its streets for like purposes, such use and occupancy shall be upon the same terms and conditions as those herein contained, including the payment provisions hereof. (2)  The amount, if any, of any tax, fee, charge or imposition of any kind required, demanded or exacted by the government on any account, other than ad valorem taxes on property and license taxes on the sale of home appliances, shall operate to reduce to the extent of such tax, fee, charge or imposition the amount due from the percentage of gross sales as provided herein at paragraph (1). (3)  The company shall fully protect, indemnify and save harmless the government from all damages to persons or property caused by the construction, maintenance, operation or extension of poles, wires or other apparatus, or conditions of streets, alleys or public places resulting therefrom for which Athens-Clarke County would otherwise be liable. (4)  The company shall, in constructing, maintaining, operating and extending its poles, wires and other apparatus submit and be subject to all reasonable exercises of the police power by Athens-Clarke County. Nothing contained herein shall require the company to surrender or limit its property rights created hereby without due process of law, including adequate compensation, for any other purpose at the instance of the government or for any purpose at the instance of any other entity, private or governmental. (5)  The grant of the rights, permission and consents by the government to the company contained in this chapter are specifically conditioned upon the payment of all sums due the government in accordance with the rate, conditions and payment dates set forth in paragraph (1) above, and failure by the company to timely pay the franchise fees required by said paragraph (1) shall constitute a forfeiture of all rights granted by this chapter. From and after July 1, 1995, the company's continued use and occupancy of the streets, alleys and public places of the government for the aforesaid purposes shall evidence the company's acceptance of the franchise granted hereby and shall render the company liable for payment of all fees required by paragraph (1) hereof. In the event of a forfeiture for failure to comply with such requirements, the company shall nevertheless remain liable for all sums accrued until such time as the streets are vacated due to such forfeiture. (Ord. of 6-23-95, § 3) 
CHAPTER 6-18. - PUBLIC ENTERTAINMENT FACILITIES Sec. 6-18-1. Purpose. Sec. 6-18-2. Definitions: Sec. 6-18-3. Hours public entertainment prohibited; violation. 
Sec. 6-18-1. - Purpose.     The purpose of this chapter is to prevent the reoccurrence of early morning crime waves previously experienced in this jurisdiction that were associated with late-night live entertainment venues remaining open past the hours during which this jurisdiction allows alcohol sales. Accordingly, this chapter is adopted to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public. (Ord. of 5-1-2001, § 1) 
Sec. 6-18-2. - Definitions:     Dance hall: A "dance hall" for the purposes of this chapter shall include any business where one of its purposes is conducting, facilitating or promoting public dancing on the premises.     Live entertainment: For the purposes of this chapter live entertainment shall include, but is not limited to, any musical performance, theatrical performance, literary reading, and disc jockey performance, where the audience is present at the actual time of occurrence.     Public entertainment: For the purposes of this chapter, public entertainment shall include live entertainment and public dancing.     Public entertainment facility: A business which is open to the public and provides dancing or live entertainment, including but not limited to dance halls, is a public entertainment facility for the purposes of this chapter. (Ord. of 5-1-2001, § 1; Ord. of 12-4-2001, § 1) 
Sec. 6-18-3. - Hours public entertainment prohibited; violation.     It shall be unlawful for any public entertainment facility located within the boundaries of Athens-Clarke County to offer or provide public entertainment between the hours of 2:45 a.m. and 7:00 a.m.     Every person, whether acting as an individual owner, employee of an owner or operator for an owner or whether acting as an agent or independent contractor for the owner, employee or operator, who participates in or allows, directly or indirectly, the operation of a personal entertainment facility in violation of this section shall be guilty of an offense hereunder. Upon conviction such person shall be punished pursuant to the provisions of section 1-1-5 of the Code of Athens-Clarke County. (Ord. of 5-1-2001, § 1; Ord. of 12-4-2001, § 2) 
CHAPTER 6-19. - STATE CABLE AND VIDEO SERVICE FRANCHISES Sec. 6-19-1. Purpose. Sec. 6-19-2. Franchise fees. Sec. 6-19-3. Regulations pertaining to use of government streets and public rights-of-way. 
Sec. 6-19-1. - Purpose.     Athens-Clarke County considers collecting a franchise fee from a cable or video provider utilizing the public rights-of-way as compensation to the public for the use of the rights-of way and a means of promoting the public health, safety, welfare, economic development, and protection of the public works infrastructure of Athens-Clarke County. O.C.G.A. § 36-76-1 et seq., otherwise known as the Consumer Choice for Television Act (hereinafter referred to as "the Act,"), as amended from time to time by the Georgia General Assembly, authorizes a statewide franchising option for cable service providers and video service providers providing cable and video services as defined therein. As specifically applied to Athens-Clarke County, the Act further authorizes cable service providers and video service providers to obtain a state franchise to serve all or parts of Athens-Clarke County. In the event any cable service provider or video service provider operating within Athens-Clarke County, Georgia elects, after January 1, 2008, to obtain a state franchise to serve all or parts of Athens-Clarke County, it is the intention of the Mayor and Commission of Athens-Clarke County that such cable service providers or video service providers be subject to any franchise fees authorized by law. Athens-Clarke County is authorized by law to collect a franchise fee at a rate up to and including five percent of each cable or video service provider's gross revenues generated within Athens-Clarke County or the maximum amount established by federal and state law. Furthermore, Athens-Clarke County currently collects a franchise fee of five percent of annual gross revenues generated within Athens-Clarke County pursuant to existing franchise agreements and intends to collect that same amount on gross revenues generated pursuant to any state franchise or the maximum that may subsequently be allowed by law. (Ord. of 4-1-2008, § 1) 
Sec. 6-19-2. - Franchise Fees.     Athens-Clarke County shall require collection of franchise fees at the rate of five percent of annual gross revenues generated by any cable or video service provider providing cable or video services within Athens-Clarke County pursuant to a state franchise or the maximum fee that may be subsequently allowed by law. Such fees shall be paid directly to Athens-Clarke County as provided for by O.C.G.A. § 36-76-6 or as may be subsequently allowed by law. (Ord. of 4-1-2008, § 1) 
Sec. 6-19-3. - Regulations pertaining to use of Government Streets and Public Rights-of-Way.     All regulations set forth in sections 6-16-51 through 6-16-56 of this Code, concerning regulations pertaining to use of government streets and public rights-of-way, are hereby made applicable to any cable or video service provider providing cable and video services within Athens-Clarke County pursuant to a state franchise. (Ord. of 4-1-2008, § 1) 