Title 3 - PUBLIC SAFETY[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Cross reference— General government, Ch. 1-1 et seq.; drug and alcohol testing of employees, § 1-13-1 et seq.; vehicles for hire, § 6-14-1; wrecker services, § 6-15-1 et seq.; building and construction, Ch. 7-1 et seq. 
CHAPTER 3-1. - PUBLICATION RACKS LOCATED IN SPECIAL PUBLICATION RACK AREAS Sec. 3-1-1. Purpose—Scope. Sec. 3-1-2. Definitions. Sec. 3-1-3. Special publication rack areas designated. Sec. 3-1-4. Permit required. Sec. 3-1-5. Obtaining a permit. Sec. 3-1-6. Standards for maintenance and display of publication racks. Sec. 3-1-7. Violation—Enforcement. Sec. 3-1-8. Nuisance. Sec. 3-1-9. Removal and hearing. Sec. 3-1-10. Abandonment of publication racks. Sec. 3-1-11. Severability. 
Sec. 3-1-1. - Purpose—Scope.     The purpose and scope of the regulations in this chapter are as follows: (a)  The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all publication racks located on public sidewalks in certain locations designated "special publication rack areas" of Athens-Clarke County. (b)  It is in the public interest to establish regulations that balance the right to distribute information through publication racks with the right of persons to reasonably and safely access and use public sidewalks and the right to conserve the aesthetic beauty of Athens-Clarke County. (c)  The public health, safety, welfare and convenience require that interference with vehicular, bicycle, wheelchair or pedestrian traffic be avoided; obstruction of sight distance and views of traffic signs and street-crossing pedestrians be eliminated; damage done to sidewalks or streets be minimized and repaired; the good appearance of public property be maintained; trees and other landscaping be allowed to grow without disturbance; access to emergency and other public facilities be maintained; and ingress and egress from, and the enjoyment of store window displays on, properties adjoining public property be protected. (d)  The regulations on the time, place and manner of the placement, location and maintenance of publication racks set forth in this chapter are carefully tailored to ensure that the purposes stated in this section are implemented while still providing ample opportunities for the distribution of news to the public. (Ord. of 12-2-2003, § 1) 
Sec. 3-1-2. - Definitions.     For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases are defined and shall be given the meaning set out in this section unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended. (a)  "Abandoned publication rack" means any publication rack which remains not in active use for a period of 20 consecutive days; provided, that a publication rack remaining empty due to labor strike or any temporary and extraordinary interruption of distribution or publication by the newspaper or other publication sold or distributed from that publication rack shall not be deemed abandoned. A publication rack not occupied by the publication for which a permit is issued shall be deemed not in active use. (b)  "Athens-Clarke County" means the Unified Government of Athens-Clarke County or its duly authorized agents. (c)  "Commission" means the mayor and commission of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia. (d)  "Manager or manager's designee" means the director of the Athens-Clarke County Department of Central Services or his or her designee. (e)  "Publication rack" means any self-service or coin-operated box, container, storage unit, or other dispenser installed, used or maintained for the display and sale or distribution of newspapers, periodicals or other publications. (f)  "Permittee" means any person in whose name the publication rack permit is issued. (g)  "Person" means any individual, partnership, firm, association, corporation, limited liability company, or other legal entity. (h)  "Public sidewalk" means that portion of a street between the curb lines, or the lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines, intended for use by pedestrians and part of the right of way owned or controlled by Athens-Clarke County. (i)  "Special publication rack area" means any area of Athens-Clarke County so designated by the mayor and commission upon findings that the special circumstances of the area require special design, placement and other standards for publication racks. (j)  "Publication rack module" means a permanently affixed modular structure designed to hold either two, four or six publication racks, provided by or on behalf of Athens-Clarke County, which shall be the exclusive location for the placement of publication racks in a special publication rack area. (Ord. of 12-2-2003, § 1) 
Sec. 3-1-3. - Special publication rack areas designated. (a)  The commission hereby finds that special circumstances require special design, placement and other standards for publication racks located in the following area(s) of Athens-Clarke County; and such areas are hereby designated as "special publication rack areas": (1)  The downtown commercial area. a.  The commission hereby designates as a special publication rack area the portion of the commercial downtown zoning district bounded by and including both sides of the following streets (hereinafter referred to as the "downtown commercial area"): Broad Street, Thomas Street, Dougherty Street, and Pulaski Street, as shown on Attachment A hereto and incorporated herein by reference. b.  The Commission finds that the downtown commercial area comprises the heart of the Athens-Clarke County business district and is one of the major transportation routes through Athens-Clarke County, as well as the tourist industry center for Athens-Clarke County. The importance of a commercially-thriving downtown has been recognized by the citizens of Athens-Clarke County by their support for downtown improvements funded by a special purpose local option sales tax. Infrastructure and aesthetic improvements to the downtown commercial area have been on-going during the Downtown Streetscape Project since 1998. Said downtown commercial area has become congested with street furniture and fixtures, such as publication racks, and other sidewalk encroachments competing with pedestrians for the public space, obstructing ingress and egress from properties adjoining the public rights-of-way, interfering with the good appearance of, and access to, public sidewalks and streets. The public investment in the landscaping and sidewalk improvements made in the Downtown Streetscape Project needs to be protected from damage by and the detrimental effects of unbridled proliferation of publication racks ungoverned by any criteria for placement or design throughout the downtown district. The need for special standards for placement of publication racks on sidewalks and other public rights-of-way is greatest in the downtown commercial area due to the greater frequency of pedestrian and vehicular traffic and publication rack locations in such area, compared to other parts of Athens-Clarke County. Special standards for the design and location of publication racks, and the enforcement of existing regulations for other sidewalk encroachments in the downtown commercial area, will help to create a sense of order out of chaos and provide a friendly, pleasing and safe environment for those who come to the area. c.  The commission finds that the regulation of publication racks as set forth in this chapter provides the least intrusive and burdensome means for ensuring that the purposes stated in this chapter are carried out while still providing ample opportunities for the distribution of news and information to the citizens of Athens-Clarke County by means of publication racks located within public rights-of-way and public property in the downtown district. (b)  The following special standards shall apply to publication racks and the placement of publications in publication racks within any special publication rack area so designated pursuant to subdivision (a) of this section: (1)  No publication shall be placed in a publication rack located in a special publication rack area except within a publication rack permitted and provided by Athens-Clarke County in a publication rack module provided by Athens-Clarke County. (2)  Original placement of publication racks within a special publication rack area. a.  No publication rack shall be located in a special publication rack area unless a permit has been obtained in accordance with subsection b. or subsection c. below: b.  Within 30 days after the effective date of the ordinance designating a special publication rack area, or as soon as practicable thereafter, the manager or manager's designee shall establish a date (the "cut-off date") by which application shall be made to the manager or manager's designee for use of a publication rack located within a special publication rack area. No application shall be considered that is filed later than the cut-off date established for that area. The manager or manager's designee shall give notice of the cut-off date by publication once in a newspaper of general circulation in Athens-Clarke County. The manager or manager's designee shall also endeavor to mail notice of the cut-off date to the owners and/or distributors of publication racks existing as of the effective date of the ordinance designating a special publication rack area; provided, however, that failure to provide mailed notice to any person shall not invalidate any action taken pursuant to this section or this chapter. c.  The process for obtaining a permit shall be in accordance with section 3-1-5, provided, that where the number of publication racks for which application has been made exceed the number of publication racks available in publication rack modules in a special publication rack area, or in a particular location within a special publication rack area, the manager or manager's designee shall issue publication rack permits in the manner described in procedures established by the manager or manager's designee and approved by the mayor and commission. (3)  After the original placement of publication racks within a special publication rack area, as described in subparagraph (2) of this subsection (b), application may be made for use of a publication rack in a location within a special publication rack area for which no empty publication rack is available in a publication rack module. Such applications shall be placed on a waiting list. In the event a publication rack in a publication rack module becomes available, the manager or manager's designee shall issue a permit for that location to the applicant for the location, if there is only one applicant. In the case of multiple applicants for a single location, the manager or manager's designee shall determine which applicant shall receive the permit in the manner described in procedures established by the manager or manager's designee and approved by the commission. (Ord. of 12-2-2003, § 1) 
Sec. 3-1-4. - Permit required.     It is unlawful to install, place, maintain, use or cause to be placed, installed, maintained, or used a publication rack on, or projecting on, any public sidewalk located in a special publication rack area without first receiving a permit therefor from the manager or manager's designee and unless such publication rack is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. of 12-2-2003, § 1) 
Sec. 3-1-5. - Obtaining a permit. (a)  Exclusive requirements. The provisions of this chapter shall be the exclusive requirements for publication rack encroachments onto public sidewalks in special publication rack areas. (b)  Application. Applications for a publication rack permit for one or more publication racks shall be made to the manager or manager's designee on a form prescribed by the manager or manager's designee, which shall include, without limitation: (1)  The name, street and mailing address, and telephone number of the applicant, which shall be the duly authorized representative of both the publisher and, if applicable, any independent distributor authorized to service the publisher's publication rack for which the permit is sought; (2)  The name, street and mailing address and telephone number of the distributor or other responsible person whom Athens-Clarke County may notify or contact at any time concerning the applicant's publication rack(s); (3)  The number of publication racks proposed for use and a description of the exact proposed location(s) applied for and each proposed publication rack location indicated by the applicant on the publication rack locations map provided by Athens-Clarke County showing the locations of the publication racks to be installed by Athens-Clarke County as established by the manager or manager's designee and approved by the commission; (4)  A description of each proposed publication rack, including whether it will be sized for tabloids or broadsheets and whether it will contain a coin-operated mechanism; in addition, if applicable, a color copy of the proposed 8½" × 11" logo sticker to be placed on the side or front of each publication rack must be provided with the application; (5)  The name and frequency of publication of each publication proposed to be contained in each publication rack; (6)  A statement signed by the applicant that the applicant agrees to indemnify, defend and hold harmless, Athens-Clarke County and its representatives from all claims, demands, loss, fines or liability to the extent arising out of or in connection with the installation, use or maintenance of any publication rack on public property by or on behalf of any such person, except such injury or harm as may be caused solely and exclusively by the negligence of Athens-Clarke County or its authorized representatives. (c)  Issuance of permit. After the initial permit period, thereafter a permit shall be issued within ten working days from the date of filing the application with the manager or manager's designee if the application is properly completed and the type of publication rack and location proposed for each publication rack meet the standards set forth in this chapter and if a publication rack is available. A single permit shall be issued for all publication racks applied for by an applicant which meet the standards of this chapter. A permit shall not be transferable. During the initial permit period, the time period for issuing permits shall be provided for in the procedures for allocation of the initial newsracks approved by the mayor and commission. (d)  Permit fee. In order to allow for amortization of the costs of the existing privately-owned publication racks that are to be replaced by the publication racks provided for herein, there shall be no permit fee for the initial three-year permit period. Thereafter, fees shall be set by the mayor and commission and paid on a yearly basis for the period from January 1 to the following December 31. Payment of the fee for the first year of the permit period shall be made upon the issuance of the permit. Payment for the second and third year of the permit term shall be on or before January 1 of the second and third year, respectively. No refund of fees shall be made. Fees for permits issued after January 1 of any permit year in which fees are charged shall be prorated on a monthly basis. Nonpayment of the annual permit fee shall result in the cancellation of the permit for the remainder of the permit term, and the publication racks included in the permit shall be deemed abandoned. (e)  Period of permit validity. All permits issued within three years from the effective date of this section shall expire on the date three years from the effective date of this section, regardless of the date of issuance. All permits issued within the second and succeeding three-year periods shall, likewise, expire at the end of such three-year period. (f)  Issuance of permit sticker. Each permittee shall be issued a pre-printed sticker for each permitted publication rack, which shall be affixed to the lower right corner of the front of each publication rack. (g)  Denial of permit. If a publication rack permit is disapproved, in whole or in part, the manager or manager's designee shall notify the applicant within ten working days from the date of filing a complete application with the manager or manager's designee, explaining the reasons for the denial of the permit and notifying the applicant of the right to appeal the decision. The applicant shall have ten calendar days within which to appeal the decision to the administrative hearing officer in accordance with the appeal provisions set forth in subsection (h) of this section. (h)  Appeals. Any person or entity aggrieved by a finding, determination, notice, order or action taken under the provisions of this chapter may appeal and shall be apprised of the right to appeal to the administrative hearing officer, pursuant to the provisions of section 1-5-1 of the Athens-Clarke County Code. An appeal must be filed within ten days after receipt of notice of any protested decision or action by filing a letter of appeal briefly stating therein the basis of the appeal with the administrative hearing officer. A copy of said written appeal shall also be filed with the manager or manager's designee. A hearing on the appeal shall be held on a date no more than 30 days after receipt of the letter of appeal. (i)  Amendment to permit. In the event of a change in any of the information contained in the application, the permittee shall submit such change in writing to the manager or manager's designee. A permittee may be allocated additional publication racks by an amendment to the permit. The rules and procedures of this section shall also apply to the review and approval of any such amendment. (j)  No property rights conveyed. The issuance of a permit for approved locations for publication racks pursuant to this section shall not be construed or interpreted to convey any property rights or any lease holder rights to any permittee or to any other person. The provisions of this chapter are subject to change by the mayor and commission. (Ord. of 12-2-2003, § 1) 
Sec. 3-1-6. - Standards for maintenance and display of publication racks. (a)  Every permittee under this chapter shall comply with the following requirements: (1)  Every coin-operated publication rack shall be equipped with a coin-return device that is maintained in good repair and working order by the permittee. It shall be the responsibility of the holder of a permit for a coin-operated publication rack to keep such coin-operation device in proper maintenance and order. (2)  In addition, every coin-operated publication rack shall display information on how to secure a refund in the event of coin return malfunction. Such information shall be placed in a visible location on the front or top of the publication rack, and shall be legible. The permittee shall be responsible for the display of this information, including its current accuracy and maintenance. (3)  Other than the display of the publication contained therein, no publication rack shall display or be affixed with any words or pictures except that where feasible based on the location of the publication rack within the publication rack module, one 8½" × 11" decal with the logo of the publication on it is permitted; said decal shall also contain the required coin return information, if applicable. The logo sticker will be affixed to each publication rack that has adequate space on the side of the rack by the manager or his designee. Publications with more than one publication rack within the same publication rack module shall be required to have at least one of such publication racks within the center of the publication rack module. When the stickers become defaced or worn the permittee shall provide new stickers for Athens-Clarke County to place on the publication rack. (b)  Old or out-of-date material removed from any publication rack by any person who owns, maintains, or stocks the publication rack shall be recycled or disposed of in a lawful manner. Such material shall not be disposed of in any trash receptacle owned or rented by others, without the express written consent of the owner or renter of such receptacle. Such material shall be disposed of in a manner that does not cause the material to become litter. (Ord. of 12-2-2003, § 1) 
Sec. 3-1-7. - Violation—Enforcement. (a)  It shall be illegal to place, install, or maintain any publication rack or any material in a publication rack located in a "special publication rack area" in a manner contrary to any provision of this chapter. (b)  Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in section 1-1-5 of this Code. (c)  Employees in the positions designated in this section are authorized to issue citations for violations of this chapter. The designated employee positions are: (1) Athens-Clarke County Marshal and his or her designees; and (2) the Athens-Clarke County Police Department. (Ord. of 12-2-2003, § 1) 
Sec. 3-1-8. - Nuisance.     Any publication rack or any material in a publication rack placed, installed or maintained in violation of this chapter shall constitute a public nuisance and may be abated in accordance with applicable provisions of law. (Ord. of 12-2-2003, § 1) 
Sec. 3-1-9. - Removal and hearing. (a)  In addition to the enforcement remedies available to Athens-Clarke County, which are set forth in section 1-1-5 of this Code and in sections 3-1-7 and 3-1-8 of this chapter, any publication rack placed, installed or maintained in violation of this chapter without a permit may be removed by Athens-Clarke County subject to the notice and hearing procedures set forth in this section. (b)  Summary abatement. Prior notice and an opportunity to be heard shall not be required prior to removal of any publication rack that is installed or maintained in such a place or manner as to pose an immediate or clear and present danger to persons, vehicles or property or any publication rack that is placed in any location without a permit. In such case, Athens-Clarke County shall proceed in the following manner: (1)  Within the next working day following removal, the manager or manager's designee shall notify by telephone the permit tee or, in the case of an unpermitted publication rack, the owner of the publication rack or a person whose name is shown on the required identification. Within three business days, the manager or manager's designee shall send written confirmation of the telephoned notice. The written confirmation shall contain the reasons for the removal and information supporting the removal, and shall inform the recipient of the right to request, in writing or in person, a post-removal meeting within four business days of the date of such written notice. If the owner of an unpermitted rack cannot be determined and the rack does not contain the required identification, no notice of the removal shall be required. (2)  Upon timely request, the manager or manager's designee shall provide a meeting within two working days of receipt of the request, unless the requesting party agrees to a later date. The proceeding shall be informal, but oral and written evidence may be given by both sides. The manager or manager's designee shall give his or her decision in writing to the requesting party within 48 hours after such meeting. If the manager or manager's designee finds that the removal was proper, he or she shall notify the requesting party to pay any applicable penalties and costs and to recover the publication rack. If the manager or manager's designee finds that the removal was improper and that placement of the publication rack was lawful, the manager or manager's designee shall order that the publication rack be released and reinstalled without charge. (Ord. of 12-2-2003, § 1) 
Sec. 3-1-10. - Abandonment of publication racks. (a)  A publication rack deemed not in active use for 24 hours a day for a period of 20 consecutive days shall be deemed abandoned. (b)  A publication rack is deemed not in active use when it is not occupied by the publication for which a permit was issued for said publication rack. (c)  The manager or manager's designee shall notify the permittee of any publication rack deemed abandoned that such permittee must surrender the permit or provide written reasons why such permit should not be revoked or amended to delete the abandoned publication rack within ten days of the date of the written notification. (d)  Failure to respond or provide sufficient reason why the director should not revoke or amend said permit shall result in the manager or manager's designee revoking such permit or amending such permit to delete the abandoned publication rack. The publication rack under such revoked permit or deleted from the permit shall be made available for reassignment to another applicant under section 3-1-4 and 3-1-5 of this chapter. (e)  The permittee may surrender the permit to the director of central services prior to its expiration when the permittee no longer wishes to distribute the publication through the publication rack. The publication rack which becomes available under this subsection shall be reassigned to another applicant under the provision of section 3-1-4 and 3-1-5 of this chapter. (Ord. of 12-2-2003, § 1) 
Sec. 3-1-11. - Severability.     If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portion of this chapter. (Ord. of 12-2-2003, § 1) 
CHAPTER 3-3. - PARKING, MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC[2] Sec. 3-3-1. Traffic engineer. Sec. 3-3-2. Marked spaces. Sec. 3-3-3. Parking prohibited—Posted signs. Sec. 3-3-4. Reserved. Sec. 3-3-5. Meaning of curb markings. Sec. 3-3-6. Parking parallel to curb or shoulder in residential sections. Sec. 3-3-7. Parking near fire hydrants or driveways. Sec. 3-3-8. Parking on sidewalks or near driveways. Sec. 3-3-9. Parking in front of alleys and driveways. Sec. 3-3-10. Parking in middle of street. Sec. 3-3-11. Parking for the purpose of sale or repair. Sec. 3-3-12. Washing, greasing or repairing vehicle. Sec. 3-3-13. Parking for persons with disabilities. Sec. 3-3-14. Funeral parking. Sec. 3-3-15. Loading zones. Sec. 3-3-16. Loading zone parking for persons with disabilities. Sec. 3-3-17. Speed limits generally. Sec. 3-3-18. Parking, loading or unloading certain trucks in fire limits. Sec. 3-3-19. Parking certain trucks or trailers within or adjacent to single-family residential (RS) zones. Sec. 3-3-20. Parking for more than 48 hours in one place. Sec. 3-3-21. Multiple violations in one space in a single day. Sec. 3-3-22. Enforcement by towing and impoundment or immobilization; procedures. Sec. 3-3-23. Parking prohibited near intersections. Sec. 3-3-24. Double parking for delivery vehicles in the downtown area. Sec. 3-3-25. Definitions with regards to parking meters and meter spaces. Sec. 3-3-26. Legislative finding. Sec. 3-3-27. Reserved. Sec. 3-3-28. Zones established. Sec. 3-3-29. Designation and use of spaces. Sec. 3-3-30. Operation of meters; exceptions. Sec. 3-3-31. Parking time limits—Posted notices. Sec. 3-3-32. Same—Parking overtime; separate offenses; inoperative timing device. Sec. 3-3-33. Same—Deposit of additional coins to extend time beyond legal parking limit. Sec. 3-3-34. Taxicabs stands, etc. Sec. 3-3-35. Athens-Clarke County employees. Sec. 3-3-36. Disabled veterans. Sec. 3-3-37. Defacing, etc., meters. Sec. 3-3-38. Use of slugs, etc. Sec. 3-3-39. Fees for parking meters. Sec. 3-3-40. Items attached to parking meter posts. Sec. 3-3-41. Parking for persons with disabilities—Uniform Rules of the Road. Sec. 3-3-42. Same—Enforcement. Sec. 3-3-43. Fees for removal, storage, etc., of authorized vehicles from private property. Sec. 3-3-44. Legal parking zone violations. Sec. 3-3-45. Construction permit parking fees in the downtown area. Sec. 3-3-46. Controlled vehicular parking in residential areas—Purpose. Sec. 3-3-47. Same—Definitions. Sec. 3-3-48. Privileges and restrictions on residential parking permits. Sec. 3-3-49. Police department regulations; testing, temporary placement of traffic-control devices. Sec. 3-3-50. Traffic, speed, truck, parking and other zones, signs and traffic-control devices. Sec. 3-3-51. Speed detection devices. Sec. 3-3-52. Riding on portion of vehicle not designed for passengers. Sec. 3-3-53. School zones. Sec. 3-3-54. Through trucks. Sec. 3-3-55. Picketing and demonstrations, etc. Sec. 3-3-56. Restricted use of bus and taxicab stand zones. Sec. 3-3-57. Uniform Rules of the Road adopted; penalties generally. Sec. 3-3-58. Backing up to curb. Sec. 3-3-59. Controlled vehicular parking in residential areas; purpose. Sec. 3-3-60. Definitions. Sec. 3-3-61. Privileges and restrictions on residential parking zone. Sec. 3-3-62. Administrative regulations. Sec. 3-3-63. Automated red light enforcement. Sec. 3-3-64. Cruising on public streets. Sec. 3-3-65. Definitions. Sec. 3-3-66. Operation of non-traditional vehicles by government exempt operators. Sec. 3-3-67. Booting/immobilization of vehicles in private parking lots. Sec. 3-3-68. Shareable dockless mobility devices. Footnotes: --- (2) --- Charter reference— Power of Athens-Clarke County to regulate the operation and parking of motor vehicles, § 8-113(28); to regulate vehicles operated for hire, § 8-113(29). Cross reference— Emergencies, Ch. 3-4; bicycles, Ch. 3-10; alcoholic beverages, Ch. 6-3; vehicles for hire, Ch. 6-14; wrecker services, Ch. 6-15. State Law reference— Motor vehicles and traffic, O.C.G.A. Title 40; Uniform Rules of the Road, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq.; operation of vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-40; stopping, standing and parking, O.C.G.A. § 4-6-200 et seq.; prohibited parking, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(1); abandoned motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1. 
Sec. 3-3-1. - Traffic engineer.     The traffic engineer shall perform such functions in Athens-Clarke County as may be required by the manager. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 6) 
Sec. 3-3-2. - Marked spaces.     Whenever a space is marked off on any public street, highway or alley, or in an Athens-Clarke County parking deck, lot or garage, for the parking of an individual vehicle, every vehicle there parked shall be parked within the lines bounding that space. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 6; Ord. of 1-5-92, § 1; Ord. of 7-7-92, § 1) 
Sec. 3-3-3. - Parking prohibited—Posted signs.     It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any motor vehicle or other vehicle to park the vehicle or allow the vehicle to remain parked on any public street, highway or alley, or in an Athens-Clarke County parking deck, lot or garage, or on any other facility or property owned or leased by Athens-Clarke County in violation of any posted signs regulating or prohibiting parking in such location. The manager or manager's designee shall have authority to develop regulations governing parking, including establishing time limits and directing the posting of signs, for all Athens-Clarke County facilities. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 6; Ord. of 1-5-92, § 2; Ord. of 7-7-92, § 2; Ord. of 9-4-2012, § 1; Ord. of 9-6-2016(1), § 3 ) 
Sec. 3-3-4. - Reserved. Editor's note— Ord. of 2-2-2016(1) , § 2, repealed § 3-3-4, which pertained to taxicab zones and derived from Ord. of 4-7-92, § 6. 
Sec. 3-3-5. - Meaning of curb markings.     The following meanings shall be given to curb markings designating requirements and prohibitions governing parking, standing and stopping: (1)  White shall indicate the lines wherein which vehicles shall park in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (2)  Yellow paint shall indicate places where vehicles shall not park. (3)  Red paint shall indicate loading zones, taxicabs zones and other restrictive regulations indicated by posted signs. (4)  Blue paint shall indicate bus stops and places where parking is permitted for police vehicles and other Athens-Clarke County-owned vehicles as indicated by posted signs and in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 6) 
Sec. 3-3-6. - Parking parallel to curb or shoulder in residential sections.     In residential sections of Athens-Clarke County vehicles must be stopped or parked with the right-hand wheels parallel to and within 12 inches of the right-hand curb or as close as practicable to the right edge of the right-hand shoulder, except where the white lines indicate a different method of parking. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 6; Ord. of 3-1-2005, § 1) 
Sec. 3-3-7. - Parking near fire hydrants or driveways.     It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to be parked within ten feet of a fire hydrant or driveway. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 6) 
Sec. 3-3-8. - Parking on sidewalks or near driveways.     It shall be unlawful for any vehicle, or motorcycle or any other motorized vehicle, to be parked on the sidewalk or other public right-of-way in any space that is not a designated marked parking space nor shall any such vehicle be parked in front of any driveway so as to block access to the public portion thereof or within ten feet of such driveway. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 6) 
Sec. 3-3-9. - Parking in front of alleys and driveways.     No vehicle shall be parked in front of any alley, private driveway, theater driveway, fire station driveway or driveway entering a gasoline station; provided, that such persons may park a vehicle for a period of time not in excess of 15 minutes in a private driveway or driveway entering a gasoline station and in the area immediately adjacent to such driveway with the consent of the authorized occupant of the premises concerned if the key for operation of such vehicle is left therein. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 6) 
Sec. 3-3-10. - Parking in middle of street.     No vehicle shall be parked in the middle of any street within Athens-Clarke County unless otherwise authorized under this chapter. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 6) 
Sec. 3-3-11. - Parking for the purpose of sale or repair.     No vehicle shall be parked on the streets of Athens-Clarke County when the parked vehicle is for the purposes of sale or repair. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 6) 
Sec. 3-3-12. - Washing, greasing or repairing vehicle.     It shall be unlawful for any person to wash, grease or repair any vehicle in the streets of Athens-Clarke County. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 6) 
Sec. 3-3-13. - Parking for persons with disabilities. (a)  All spaces on the public streets of Athens-Clarke County which may be designated by the Mayor and Commission for use by persons with disabilities shall be marked with appropriate signs, and it shall be unlawful for any person to park in a space designated for persons with disabilities in a vehicle which is not displaying a valid parking permit for persons with disabilities, as required by O.C.G.A. § 40-6-226. (b)  It shall be unlawful for any vehicle displaying a valid parking permit for person with disabilities or having a specially designated disabled veteran or disabled person license plate to be parking in a space designated for persons with disabilities for more than three hours. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 6; Ord. of 12-5-95, § 1; Ord. of 7-2-96, § 1; Ord. of 7-6-99, § 1; Ord. of 3-3-2009, § 4) 
Sec. 3-3-14. - Funeral parking.     Any funeral director conducting a funeral in Athens-Clarke County shall have the right to place in the right-of-way adjacent to the home, church or funeral home in which such funeral is to be conducted, and prior to and on the day of such funeral, signs worded as follows: "Reserved for funeral from _____ o'clock ___.m"; provided, that such sign is completed by inserting therein a time two hours in advance of the time set for the funeral to which it is related. Unless otherwise permitted by the funeral director or law enforcement officer, it shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle in the portion of the right-of-way indicated as being reserved for such funeral between the time specified in such sign and the time of the dispersal of the persons assembled for such funeral, and it shall be unlawful for any person to utilize or display such signs except in conformity with the provisions of this section. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 6) 
Sec. 3-3-15. - Loading zones. (a)  Generally . It shall be unlawful for any person, except a handicapped individual possessing a valid permit, or having a specially designated disabled veteran or a specially disabled person license plate parking in a joint-use loading zone/handicapped parking space as provided for in Section 3-3-16 of this Code, to park any vehicle within a designated loading zone except for the purpose of loading or unloading such vehicle, which vehicle must be properly identified showing that it is a delivery or pickup vehicle. A delivery or pickup vehicle may park in a designated loading zone only during such time as materials are being loaded and/or unloaded from the vehicle, and in no case may such vehicle remain parked in a designated loading zone for longer than 30 minutes, unless a different time limit is indicated by sign or permitted by ordinance. A vehicle must be removed from a loading zone immediately upon completion of loading and/or unloading materials from such vehicle or the expiration of the time limit for that loading zone, whichever occurs first. It shall be unlawful for any person to park for loading or unloading at an angle other than that marked for regular parking or to leave the back gate of the vehicle lowered so as to extend beyond the body of such vehicle, or to park without doors opened back parallel with the body of the vehicle while loading or unloading. It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle within a properly marked loading zone between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. if said loading zone is also marked as a no parking tow zone between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. Any loading zone in front of an entrance to a hotel is exempt from the provisions of this section to the extent that guests of such hotel shall be permitted to use such loading zone for a maximum of ten minutes. At the discretion of a police officer, Athens-Clarke County may tow and impound or otherwise move vehicles which are parked by their owners or operators in any loading zone in violation of the regulations, at the owner's or operator's expense. (b)  Wall Street additional regulations. The loading zone on the portion of Wall Street between Clayton Street and Broad Street, as more particularly described in Attachment 1 of an ordinance adopted May 6, 2003, shall have the following additional regulations concerning hours of enforcement and permitted users of the loading zone: [] (1)  The effective hours for enforcement shall be 24 hours per day; and (2)  The exclusive permitted users shall be pickup or delivery vehicles at least 20 feet in length actively engaged in loading or unloading materials. (c)  Clayton Street and Washington Street additional regulations. The loading zones on the portion of Clayton Street between its intersection with Thomas Street and Lumpkin Street and on portions of Washington Street between its intersection with Thomas Street and College Avenue and its intersection with Lumpkin Street and Pulaski Street shall be center-lane loading zones as more particularly shown as "Proposed Loading Zones" on Attachment 1 of an ordinance adopted May 6, 2003, and shall have the following additional regulations concerning permitted users of the loading zone. In addition to the provisions of the paragraph (a) above: [] (1)  All delivery vehicles are prohibited from loading or unloading in the center lane within: a.  25 feet on either side of a mid-block crosswalk; b.  50 feet on the approach side of an intersection, except for 140 feet on Clayton Street at Thomas Street; or c.  25 feet on the departure side of an intersection, except for 70 feet on Clayton Street at Lumpkin Street and 45 feet on Washington Street at Jackson Street. (2)  All delivery drivers are required to place safety cones behind their delivery vehicles and in the immediate area of the points of access to the vehicles from the street, or activate flashing hazard lights to alert motorists to the loading or unloading activity that is under way in the center lane. (3)  The center lane on Clayton Street shall be used for loading and unloading only between the hours of 3:00 a.m. to 12:00 p.m. (4)  The center lane on Washington Street may be used for loading and unloading 24 hours per day. (5)  The use of center lane loading zones on Clayton Street and Washington Street shall be limited to vehicles at least 18 feet in length actively engaged in loading or unloading materials. (d)  Harris Street additional regulations. The freight loading zone located on the east side of Harris Street for approximately 180 feet beginning 50 feet north of its intersection with Broad Street, as more particularly described in Attachment 1 of an ordinance adopted April 1, 2008, incorporated herein by reference, shall have the following additional regulations concerning hours of enforcement and permitted users of the loading zone: (1)  The effective hours for enforcement shall be 8:00 a.m. through 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday; and (2)  The exclusive permitted users shall be delivery vehicles at least 20 feet in length. (e)  Reserved. (f)  Loading and unloading in metered parking spaces. A vehicle less than 18 feet in length that is properly identified as a delivery or pickup vehicle may utilize metered, curbside parking spaces for loading and unloading at no cost. Such vehicle may park free at no cost only during such time as materials are actively being loaded and/or unloaded from the vehicle, and in no case may such vehicle remain parked at no cost for longer than 30 minutes. Immediately upon completion of loading and/or unloading materials from such vehicle, or upon the expiration of 30 minutes, whichever comes first, such vehicle must be removed from the parking space, or appropriate payment made at the meter. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 6; Ord. of 5-5-92, § 2; Ord. of 7-2-2002, § 1; Ord. of 7-2-2002, § 1; Ord. of 5-6-2003, § 1; Ord. of 5-6-2003, § 1; Ord. of 12-7-2004, § 1; Ord. of 4-1-2008, § 1; Ord. of 9-2-2008, § 1; Ord. of 12-2-2014, §§ 8—12 ) Footnotes: --- () --- *Editor's note— Attachment 1 of an ordinance adopted May 6, 2003, relating to the loading zone located on Wall Street between Clayton Street and Broad Street, has not been included within the Code, but may be found attached to said ordinance on file in the office of the clerk of commission. --- () --- †Editor's note— Attachment 1 of an ordinance adopted May 6, 2003, relating to the loading zones located on Clayton Street between its intersection with Thomas Street and Lumpkin Street and on portions of Washington Street between its intersection with Thomas Street and College Avenue and its intersection with Lumpkin Street and Pulaski Street, has not been included within the Code, but may be found attached to said ordinance on file in the office of the clerk of commission. 
Sec. 3-3-16. - Loading zone parking for persons with disabilities. (a)  Vehicles displaying a valid parking permit for persons with disabilities, as required by O.C.G.A. § 40-6-222, or having a specially designated disabled veteran or disabled persons license plate, may park in all loading zones that are so designated for joint use by appropriate loading zone and parking for person with disabilities signs, except those loading zones also marked as no parking tow zones between the hours of 10:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m. Loading zones that do not display a parking for persons with disabilities sign may not be used for such parking. (b)  It shall be unlawful for any vehicle displaying a valid parking permit for persons with disabilities, or having a specially designated disabled veteran or disabled persons license plate, to be parked in any loading zone so designated for more than one hour between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., Sundays excepted. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 6; Ord. of 12-5-95, § 2; Ord. of 12-7-2004, § 2) 
Sec. 3-3-17. - Speed limits generally.     The maximum lawful speed limit in Athens-Clarke County shall be 25 miles per hour except where a different speed is established, designated and marked in accordance with section 3-3-49(a) or section 3-3-50(a)(1) of this Code. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 6; Ord. of 8-3-2010, § 1) 
Sec. 3-3-18. - Parking, loading or unloading certain trucks in fire limits. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park any truck or tractor-trailer combination unit or trailer having a length in excess of 35 feet on any street of Athens-Clarke County within the fire limits between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. (b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to load or unload any merchandise inside the fire limits of Athens-Clarke County from any truck or tractor-trailer combination unit or trailer having a length in excess of 35 feet. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 6) 
Sec. 3-3-19. - Parking certain trucks or trailers within or adjacent to single-family residential (RS) zones. (a)  All RS Zoning Districts. It shall be unlawful for any person to park any tractor, semi-trailer, or tractor-trailer combination unit or trailer having a weight greater than ten tons within any single-family residential (RS) zone or on any street adjacent to any single-family residential (RS) zone for a period of time in excess of one hour; provided, that any period of time which such truck or tractor-trailer combination unit is being loaded or unloaded shall be excluded in computing the period of one hour. (b)  RS-15, RS-8, and RS-5 Zoning Districts. It shall be unlawful for any person to park any trailer or semi-trailer, regardless or whether such trailer or semi-trailer is attached to another vehicle, on the street or right-of-way within any RS-15, RS-8, or RS-5 single-family residential zone. Third-party commercial providers of goods and services while actively engaged in providing goods or services to occupants or owners of adjoining residential properties are exempt from the restrictions of this paragraph during the hours of 7:00 a.m. through 7:00 p.m. For the purposes of this section, the following definitions apply:     Semi-trailer means every vehicle of the trailer type so designed and used in conjunction with a motor vehicle that some part of its own weight and that of its own load rests upon or is carried by another vehicle.     Trailer means every vehicle without motor power designed for carrying property or passengers wholly on its own structure and for being drawn by a motor vehicle. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 6; Ord. of 5-7-2002, § 1; Ord. of 10-6-2009, § 1) Editor's note— Ord. of Oct. 6, 2009, § 1, changed the title of § 3-3-19 from parking certain trucks within or adjacent to single-family residential (RS) zones for more than one hour to parking certain trucks or trailers within or adjacent to single-family residential (RS) zones. 
Sec. 3-3-20. - Parking for more than 48 hours in one place.     In addition to and cumulative of any provision of this Code, it shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to park the same continuously in one place for more than 48 hours on any public street, highway or alley, or in an Athens-Clarke County parking deck, lot or garage, or on any other facility or property owned or leased by Athens-Clarke County. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 6; Ord. of 9-6-2016(1), § 4 ) 
Sec. 3-3-21. - Multiple violations in one space in a single day.     Each violation of the provision of this Code and other ordinances of Athens-Clarke County relating to the parking of vehicles committed by the same person in the same parking space during the same day shall constitute a separate punishable offense against this Code or other ordinances of Athens-Clarke County and may be treated as such, though there may be multiple violations by the same person in the same parking space during the same day. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 6) 
Sec. 3-3-22. - Enforcement by towing and impoundment or immobilization; procedures. (a)  Designated officer defined . As used in this chapter, "designated officer" shall mean any Athens-Clarke County police officer, any authorized representative of a governmental entity performing parking management services pursuant to a contract with the Unified Government, or any employee of the Unified Government authorized by the manager or manager's designee. (b)  Towing and impoundment directed by designated officer. (1)  Whenever any vehicle shall be parked on any public street, highway or alley, or in an Athens-Clarke County parking deck, lot or garage, or on any other facility or property owned or leased by Athens-Clarke County in violation of (i) any provision of this chapter, (ii) section 1-10-18 of this Code, (iii) section 6-5-19 of this Code, and when a designated officer shall determine that such a vehicle is an impediment to traffic, is a hazard to public safety, or is an impediment to the operation of any Athens-Clarke County facility, or when such vehicle is in violation of section 3-3-20 or section 3-3-45 of this chapter, such designated officer shall have the authority to direct the towing and impoundment of the vehicle at the expense of the owner or other person responsible for such vehicle in accordance with the provisions of chapter 6-15 of this Code. (2)  Vehicles towed and impounded under sub-paragraph (1) may be released from such impoundment only upon payment in full of all towing and impound fees due pursuant to chapter 6-15 of this Code. After paying such fees, a registered owner or other responsible person may contest the validity of the towing and impoundment of his or her vehicle by submitting in writing a Request for Reimbursement of Towing and Impoundment Fees to the Athens-Clarke County Administrative Hearing Officer on a form available from the Clerk of the Athens-Clarke County Municipal Court. Such notice shall either be filed in person at the office of the Clerk of Athens-Clarke County Municipal Court, or sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, in either case no later than 30 days following the release from impoundment of his or her vehicle. Only requests for reimbursement of towing and impoundment fees meeting the requirements of this section shall be adjudicated by the Administrative Hearing Officer. If the Administrative Hearing Officer finds in accordance with the procedures set forth in Section 1-5-1 of this Code that the towing and impoundment was not authorized or that the provisions of this Code were not followed, he or she shall issue an order for reimbursement. Such reimbursement shall be limited to the fees actually paid for release of the subject vehicle from impoundment, plus certified mailing fees, if any. (c)  Immobilization by wheel lock device or towing and impoundment for accumulated parking violation notices or fines. (1)  Any vehicle that either (i) accumulates six or more parking violation notices, the penalties for which remain unpaid after the court dates shown on such parking violation notices, or for which no demand for a trial contesting liability for such parking violation notices has been made by the registered owner or other responsible party on or before the court dates shown on such parking violation notices, or (ii) that accumulates $200.00 or more in penalties for violations of this chapter that remain unpaid after the court dates shown on the parking violation notices alleging such violations, or for which no demand for a trial contesting liability for such parking violation notices has been made by the registered owner or other responsible party on or before the court dates shown on such parking violation notices may be subject to immobilization by wheel lock device or towing and impoundment in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. In addition to the penalties for parking violations specified in this chapter or under section 1-1-5 of this Code, a wheel lock fee in the amount of $50.00 shall be assessed whenever a vehicle is immobilized by wheel lock device. (2)  Once a vehicle has become subject to immobilization by wheel lock device or by towing or impoundment as provided in sub-paragraph (1), Athens-Clarke County or a designated officer shall make a good-faith attempt to determine the name and address of the registered owner of such vehicle by license tag number, vehicle identification number (VIN), or such other means as are reasonably ascertainable through inspection of the exterior of such vehicle. In those cases where the name and address of the registered owner of the subject vehicle are determined, written notice shall be sent to said owner by United States Postal Service First Class Mail, or by personal service acknowledged by signature of the registered owner or other responsible party. Notice by first class mail as described herein shall be deemed given as of the date of mailing as recorded by the designated officer giving such notice. Notice shall be given as prescribed in this Code section no less than ten days prior to the immobilization or impoundment. In the event that such notice is not given, the vehicle shall be released to the owner without payment of towing fees or wheel lock fees, as applicable. The written notice required by this section shall contain the following: a.  A description of the subject vehicle, including license tag number or vehicle identification number; b.  The name and address of the registered owner of such vehicle; c.  The dates and descriptions of the parking violations that establish the grounds for immobilization or towing and impoundment, and the unpaid amounts of the civil penalties for each violation. A copy of each parking ticket or other document providing the required information attached to the notice shall be sufficient to satisfy this requirement; d.  A date and time at least ten days from the date of mailing of the notice in which the registered owner or other responsible party may (i) appear in Athens-Clarke County Municipal Court during the Court's regular business hours or (ii) call the telephone number designated in the above-described letter to demand a bench trial to contest the pending immobilization or towing and impoundment. A demand for a bench trial made by telephone shall be valid only if the demand is made directly to a person receiving such call in real time and only if Athens-Clarke County or its authorized agent confirms such trial demand in writing to the caller. A demand may not be made by use of telephone answering machines. A date for such trial will be assigned upon receipt of the demand; e.  A statement that the subject vehicle is subject to immobilization by wheel lock device or by towing and impoundment for accumulated unpaid parking violation notices unless (i) the registered owner or other responsible party pays in full the unpaid amounts for all of the civil penalties described in the notice on or before the specified court appearance date, or (ii) the registered owner or other responsible party appears personally in Athens-Clarke County Municipal Court to demand a bench trial in which to contest such immobilization or towing and impoundment. (3)  If the registered owner or other responsible party fails to: (i) pay in full all unpaid penalties associated with the violations described in the notice of pending immobilization or towing and impoundment no later than the court date specified in the notice, or (ii) appear personally in Athens-Clarke County Municipal Court on or before the date and time specified in the notice to contest such immobilization or towing and impoundment, the vehicle subject to the notice may thereafter without further notice be immobilized by wheel lock device or towed and impounded. (4)  Any vehicle immobilized or towed and impounded under the provisions of this paragraph shall be released upon payment in full of all unpaid penalties and fees for parking violations as specified in this chapter, and the $50.00 wheel lock fee plus all towing and impound fees due pursuant to chapter 6-15 of this code, as applicable. After paying such fees, a registered owner or other responsible person may contest the validity of the immobilization or the towing and impoundment of his or her vehicle by submitting in writing a Request for Reimbursement of Immobilization or Towing and Impoundment Fees to the Athens-Clarke County Administrative Hearing Officer on a form available from the Clerk of the Athens-Clarke County Municipal Court. Such notice shall either be filed in person at the office of the Clerk of Athens-Clarke County Municipal Court, or sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, in either case no later than 30 days following the release from impoundment of his or her vehicle. Only requests for reimbursement of immobilization or towing and impoundment fees meeting the requirements of this section shall be adjudicated by the Administrative Hearing Officer. If the Administrative Hearing Officer finds in accordance with the procedures set forth in Section 1-5-1 of this Code that the immobilization or the towing and impoundment was not authorized or that the provisions of this Code were not followed, he or she shall issue an order for reimbursement. Such reimbursement shall be limited to the fees actually paid for release of the subject vehicle from impoundment, plus certified mailing fees, if any. (5)  Towing and impoundment after 48 hours . Any vehicle immobilized under this chapter that has not been released under the provisions herein within 48 hours of such immobilization may be ordered towed and impounded by a designated officer under the provisions of chapter 6-15 of this code. (6)  Illegal to remove wheel lock device . It shall be a violation of this code for any unauthorized person to remove any wheel lock device placed upon a vehicle under the provisions of this section. Such violations shall be punished as provided for in section 1-1-5 of this code. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 6; Ord. of 9-6-2016(1), § 5 ; Ord. of 10-2-2018(4), §§ 1, 2 ) 
Sec. 3-3-23. - Parking prohibited near intersections.     It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to be parked within 50 feet of any intersection of Athens-Clarke County specifically designated by posted signs or painted curbs indicating such prohibition. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 6) 
Sec. 3-3-24. - Double parking for delivery vehicles in the downtown area.     The operator of a delivery vehicle shall be permitted to double park for the sole purpose of making deliveries in the downtown area only in the following described locations. (1)  In the right-hand lane on Clayton Street at each intersection crosswalk at: Pulaski Street to Hull Street; Hull Street to Lumpkin Street; (2)  In the left-hand lane on Washington Street at each intersection crosswalk at: College Avenue to Lumpkin Street. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 6; Ord. of 5-6-2003, § 2) 
Sec. 3-3-25. - Definitions with regards to parking meters and meter spaces.     For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:     Operator: Every individual who shall operate a vehicle as the owner thereof, or as the agent, employee or permittee of the owner.     Parking meter: Any mechanical device or meter not inconsistent with this chapter placed or erected for the regulation of parking by authority of this chapter, including pay-and-display parking meters.     Parking meter space: The space along side the curb in which a vehicle shall be properly parked, which shall be indicated clearly by painted lines or otherwise, and adjacent to which a parking meter is installed within four feet of the front line of such space.     Pay-and-display parking meter: A device that issues time-limited pay-and-display parking tickets for display on a vehicle to permit parking within a pay-and-display parking space for the period of time specified on the parking ticket.     Pay-and-display parking space: The space along side the curb in which a vehicle shall be properly parked, which shall be indicated clearly by painted lines or otherwise, which is not adjacent to a parking meter, and which is located on streets, or portions thereof, that have pay-and-display parking meters.     Public holidays: The holidays of Christmas, Thanksgiving, New Year's Day, the Fourth of July, Labor Day, Martin Luther King, Jr. Day and Memorial Day.     Vehicle: Any device in or upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported upon a highway, road or street, except a device which is operated upon rails or tracks. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 6; Ord. of 2-3-2009, § 1; Ord. of 12-4-2018(3), § 1 ) 
Sec. 3-3-26. - Legislative finding.     It is the finding of the mayor and commission that the proper regulation of parking in the parking meter zones established by this chapter can best be accomplished by the use of parking meters as authorized in this chapter. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 6; Ord. of 7-2-96, § 1; Ord. of 7-6-99, § 1) 
Sec. 3-3-27. - Reserved. Editor's note— Ord. of 12-4-2018(3), § 2, repealed § 3-3-27, which pertained to holidays and derived from Ord. of 4-7-92, § 6. 
Sec. 3-3-28. - Zones established.     The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to any portions of streets or parking lots upon which parking meters have been installed by authority of Athens-Clarke County. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 6) 
Sec. 3-3-29. - Designation and use of spaces.     Lines or markings shall be painted or placed upon the curb or upon the street adjacent to each parking meter for the purpose of designating the parking space for which such meter is to be used, and each vehicle parking adjacent or next to any parking meter shall park within the lines or markings so established. It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle across any such line or marking or to park any vehicle in such position that the vehicle shall not be entirely within the area so designated by the lines or markings. When a parking space in any parking meter zone is parallel with the adjacent curb or sidewalk, any vehicle parked in such parking space shall be parked with the foremost part of the vehicle nearest to the meter. Each of the meters shall be so arranged as to show or display a signal which shall indicate whether the time limits during which parking in that space is permitted has expired.     This section shall also apply to pay-and-display parking spaces, except that the time limits during which parking in that space is permitted shall be shown on a pay-and-display parking ticket that was issued by a pay-and-display parking meter and that is clearly displayed on or through the front windshield of the vehicle. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 6; Ord. of 2-3-2009, § 2) 
Sec. 3-3-30. - Operation of meters; exceptions.     Except in a period of emergency determined by an officer of the fire department or the police department, or except in compliance with directions of a police officer or traffic-control signal, when any vehicle shall be parked in a space regulated by a parking meter, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on any day except Sunday and public holidays, the owner, operator or driver of such vehicle shall, upon entering such parking space, immediately deposit the appropriate coins required by the parking meter regulating such place as set forth in section 3-3-39 of this Code. At the discretion of the Mayor, organizations holding a meeting, where people from outside Athens-Clarke County will convene in Athens-Clarke County, shall be, upon the Mayor's order, excluded from complying with the foregoing terms of this section and shall not be required to deposit coins in parking meters; provided, that such persons are identified by some prominent and readily identifiable label or sticker approved by the Mayor and attached in a prominent place on the vehicle of the person who wishes to park without paying the parking meter fee. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 6; Ord. of 7-2-96, § 1; Ord. of 7-6-99, § 1; Ord. of 3-3-2009, § 1; Ord. of 6-7-2011, § 1) 
Sec. 3-3-31. - Parking time limits—Posted notices.     Any vehicle parking or standing in any designated parking space in a parking meter zone shall be parked within the lines marked on the street or curb and may occupy such space during the parking limit provided by this chapter for the part of the street in which such parking space is located. Parking or standing a vehicle in a designated space in a parking meter zone shall be lawful for the period of time designated either upon such meter on deposit of the coin or coins specified on such meter therein or upon a pay-and-display parking ticket when parked within a pay-and-display parking space. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 6; Ord. of 2-3-2009, § 3) 
Sec. 3-3-32. - Same—Parking overtime; separate offenses; inoperative timing device. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in the name of or operated by such person to be parked overtime or beyond the period of legal parking time established for any parking meter zone as described in this chapter. (b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, allow or permit any vehicle to stay parked in any designated metered parking space beyond the designated unit of time specified on such meter or beyond the time limit shown on a pay-and-display parking ticket. (c)  The exceeding of each segment of time or fraction thereof beyond the initial lawful unit of time shall constitute a separate violation of this section. (d)  The fact that the timing device on any parking meter is not in operation shall be presumptive evidence, as to a parked vehicle then found in the parking space regulated by such parking meter, that the owner or driver failed to deposit or cause to be deposited the required coin or coins in such meter, and the mechanical indication by such meter of a "violation" shall be presumptive evidence of unlawful parking. (e)  Use of a pay-and-display parking ticket is valid only in a designated pay-and-display parking space for the time shown on the ticket. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 6; Ord. of 2-3-2009, § 4) 
Sec. 3-3-33. - Same—Deposit of additional coins to extend time beyond legal parking limit. (a)  Extending lawful parking period prohibited. It shall be unlawful and a separate offense for any person to use multiple pay-and-display parking tickets, or to deposit or cause to be deposited in a parking meter any coins, for the purpose of extending the parking meter time beyond the total lawful parking period fixed for such parking space. Appropriate notice that such would be a violation shall be posted on the individual meters or at conspicuous locations in close proximity to the meters where all users of the meters and parking spaces may view the same. (b)  Notice. If any vehicle shall remain in any parking space beyond the time fixed for that parking space, notice, as provided in this section, that such is in violation of law will be presumed to the user where the appropriate notice is posted on the individual meter or in close proximity to the same, although the meter may indicate time remaining thereon where the legal parking time period specified for the space has been exceeded. (c)  Marking system. An appropriate marking system for identifying cars shall be adopted by the police department in order that this section may be enforced adequately by the employees of Athens-Clarke County. (d)  Determination of illegal parking; punishment. Where the meter itself does not indicate illegal parking, but the legal time period specified for that space has been exceeded, and where the notice provided for in this section has been posted and such vehicle has been accurately marked and identified as being in violation of this chapter by exceeding the time limit specified for the parking space, such vehicle shall be considered as illegally parked in any part of the street where the same is located, and each offense may be punished as a separate violation as the same accrues. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 6; Ord. of 11-2-99, § 1; Ord. of 2-3-2009, § 5; Ord. of 9-3-2013, § 1; Ord. of 10-2-2018(3), § 1 ) 
Sec. 3-3-34. - Taxicabs stands, etc.     Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as prohibiting Athens-Clarke County from providing for taxicab stands and for other matters of similar nature, including the loading or unloading of trucks, vans or other commercial vehicles. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 6) Cross reference— Taxicab zones, § 3-3-4; restricted use of taxicab stands, § 3-3-56; vehicles for hire, Ch. 6-14. 
Sec. 3-3-35. - Athens-Clarke County employees.     Any clearly marked vehicle belonging to Athens-Clarke County, the driver of which is engaged in the performance of his duties as an employee of Athens-Clarke County, is hereby exempted from the provisions of this chapter and the driver of any such vehicle is authorized to park the vehicle on any parking space governed by a parking meter without the necessity of placing any coin in the meter and without liability for any failure to do so. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 6) 
Sec. 3-3-36. - Disabled veterans.     Any vehicle bearing a license tag issued by the state indicating that the owner of such vehicle is a disabled veteran is hereby exempted from the provisions of this chapter relating to parking meters and the driver of any such vehicle is authorized to park the vehicle on any parking space governed by a parking meter without the necessity of placing any coin in the meter and without liability for doing so. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 6) 
Sec. 3-3-37. - Defacing, etc., meters.     It shall be unlawful for any person to deface, injure, tamper with or open or willfully break, destroy or impair the usefulness of any parking meter installed under the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 6) 
Sec. 3-3-38. - Use of slugs, etc.     It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, or cause to be deposited, in any parking meter any slug, device or metallic substance, or any other substitute for lawful money of the United States of America. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 6) 
Sec. 3-3-39. - Fees for parking meters.     The fee for all parking meters shall be as indicated on the parking meter. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 6) 
Sec. 3-3-40. - Items attached to parking meter posts.     It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this chapter for any person to attach animals or other objects, including bicycles, mopeds and motorcycles, to any parking meter post. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 6) 
Sec. 3-3-41. - Parking for person with disabilities—Uniform Rules of the Road. (a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-220 through 40-6-228 (as amended), entitled, "Parking Law for Persons with Disabilities," are hereby incorporated herein by reference with the like effect as if recited in this section. (b)  The sign designations for parking places for persons with disabilities shall be in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 40-6-221. (c)  Notwithstanding the failure of the property owner to properly mark and sign such parking places for persons with disabilities in accordance with law, it shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park any motor vehicle in any area on public or private property which has been clearly designated and reserved for use by persons with disabilities in vehicles displaying a valid parking permit for persons with disabilities. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 6; Ord. of 12-5-95, § 3) 
Sec. 3-3-42. - Same—Enforcement. (a)  Authority to appoint enforcement agent. The chief of police, or his designee, shall have the authority to appoint any person who is a citizen of the United States, is of good moral character, has not been previously convicted of a felony, and is a person with disabilities as defined by paragraph (5) of O.C.G.A. § 40-6-221 to enforce the provisions of the parking laws for persons with disabilities. (b)  Requirements. Each person appointed pursuant to this section shall complete an application, satisfactorily complete a course of training on persons with disabilities parking enforcement, and take and subscribe an oath of office as prescribed by the appointing authority. (c)  Investigation. Upon receipt of the application, the chief of police, or his designee, shall cause a complete and thorough investigation to be made of the applicant to determine his or her moral, physical and mental qualifications. (d)  Service of citations, limitations. Any person appointed and sworn shall have the power to serve citations for violations for failure to comply with the parking laws for persons with disabilities in the same manner as any law enforcement officer of Athens-Clarke County subject to the following limitations: (1)  No person so appointed shall be deemed a peace officer, nor have the general powers of a police officer, nor an employee of Athens-Clarke County, nor receive any compensation therefrom; (2)  No person appointed shall be required to complete training to be a certified police officer; (3)  No person appointed shall have the power or duty to enforce any other traffic or criminal laws; (4)  No person appointed shall have the power to possess and carry firearms and other weapons for the purpose of enforcing the parking laws for persons with disabilities; (5)  No person appointed shall be entitled to any indemnification from Athens-Clarke County for any injury or property damage sustained as a result of enforcement activities. Each authorized person shall specifically acknowledge that such person has no rights to any claim of injury or property damage resulting from enforcement activities of the parking laws for persons with disabilities; (6)  Athens-Clarke County shall not be liable or accountable for or on account of any act or omission of any person appointed pursuant to this Code section in connection with such person's enforcement of the parking laws for persons with disabilities. Each authorized person shall specifically hold harmless Athens-Clarke County and its employees and agents from any liability for any such act or omission by such authorized person. (e)  Badge. Every person appointed shall be required to wear a lapel badge for identification purposes while in the performance of his or her duties. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 6; Ord. of 12-5-95, § 3) 
Sec. 3-3-43. - Fees for removal, storage, etc., of authorized vehicles from private property. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to authorize, direct or otherwise engage in the towing or removal of a vehicle or trespassing personal property from private property except in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 44-1-13. (b)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 44-1-13, the fees for the removal, relocation or storage of unauthorized vehicles or trespassing personal property removed from private property by towing and storage firms shall be as follows: Daytime tow ..... $ 60.00 Nighttime tows ..... 70.00 Storage, per day ..... 5.00 Whether the day or night schedule of fees applies shall be determined by the time the police dispatcher initiates the call for service. Provided, however, that no storage fees shall be charged for the first 24-hour period running from the time the vehicle or trespassing personal property is removed from such private property and no such fees shall be allowed for the removal and storage of vehicles or trespassing of personal property in violation of this section. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 6; Ord. of 3-7-95, § 1) 
Sec. 3-3-44. - Legal parking zone violations. (a)  Generally. The owner of a motor vehicle shall be subject to the following civil fines for the violations enumerated herein. Except as otherwise specified, all other violations under this chapter shall be within the limits permitted under section 1-1-5. Any violations enumerated herein that are not otherwise punishable by section 1-1-5 shall be deemed non-criminal, shall be determined by a showing of preponderance of the evidence, and shall not be deemed to be a conviction. Such civil violations are inapplicable to a person's motor vehicle driving record for insurance purposes in the provision of motor vehicle insurance coverage. (b)  Legal parking zone violations. The civil fine for the following legal parking zone violations shall be as follows: (1)  Expired meter or expired pay-and-display parking ticket ..... $20.00 (2)  Overtime parking ..... 25.00 (3)  Loading zones ..... 50.00 (c)  Nonmoving violations. The civil fine for the following nonmoving violations shall be as follows: (1)  Yellow curb ..... $50.00 (2)  Sidewalk ..... 30.00 (3)  Fire hydrant ..... 100.00 (4)  Parking on wrong side of street ..... 10.00 (5)  Double parking ..... 50.00 (6)  Blocking driveway ..... 50.00 (7)  Parking during restricted times in Central Business District ..... 20.00 (8)  Parking too far from curb or shoulder in residential section ..... 20.00 (9)  No parking zone ..... 50.00 (10)  Parking illegally in space for persons with disabilities ..... 200.00 (11)  Parking in fire lane ..... 100.00 (12)  Parking in violation of posted signs in Athens-Clarke County owned deck, lot or garage ..... 50.00 (13)  Parking outside the lines of a designated parking space ..... 50.00 (d)  Double fine. Any civil fine imposed pursuant to this section shall automatically double upon: (1)  Failure of the registered owner of a vehicle or other responsible person who receives a parking violation notice for a parking violation to pay the civil fine indicated thereon or to appear personally in Municipal Court to contest such alleged violation on the date and time specified on the parking violation notice; or (2)  Failure of the registered owner of a vehicle or other responsible person who, after contesting a parking violation in Municipal Court and being found liable therefor, to pay a civil fine found to be due by the court within thirty days after final adjudication of such violation, or sooner upon order of the Court.     The Commission may, from time to time, declare by resolution defined periods of time during which said doubling shall be waived. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 6; Ord. of 3-1-94, § 1; Ord. of 8-1-2000, § 1; Ord. of 10-2-2001, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 6-4-2002, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 3-1-2005, § 2; Ord. of 2-3-2009, § 6; Ord. of 3-3-2009, § 2; Ord. of 12-7-2010, § 1; Ord. of 9-4-2012, § 2; Ord. of 11-4-2014, § 2 ; Ord. of 6-5-2018(1), § 1 ; Ord. of 10-2-2018(3), § 2 ) 
Sec. 3-3-45. - Construction permit parking fees in the downtown area; penalty for violation. (a)  There shall be a construction permit parking fee for the use of parking spaces in the downtown area by contractors in the performance of their work as follows: Per parking space, per day ..... $ 6.00 (b)  It shall be a violation of this chapter for any motor vehicle to be located in any space which has been designated under subsection (a) for construction parking. Parking spaces temporarily designated for use by construction personnel under the provisions of this section shall be clearly marked as such, and such marking shall contain the statement, "No parking after (date & time). Unauthorized vehicles present after that time are subject to towing and impoundment." The fine for violation of this section shall be $50.00. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 6; Ord. of 7-5-94, § 1; Ord. of 3-3-2009, § 3; Ord. of 6-7-2011, § 2; Ord. of 9-6-2016(1), § 6 ) 
Sec. 3-3-46. - Controlled vehicular parking in residential areas—Purpose.     The mayor and commission hereby finds and declares that it is in the best interest of Athens-Clarke County to reduce vehicular congestion on Henderson Avenue and to facilitate the efficient movement of traffic that residential parking permit regulation is necessary to promote the health, safety and welfare of the residents of such street by providing adequate parking spaces adjacent to or close by their places of residence; that it is in the public interest to reduce hazardous traffic conditions resulting from use of such street for the parking of vehicles by persons using the residential area to gain access to other places; to protect those areas from excessive noise; to protect the residents from unreasonable burdens in gaining access to their residences; to preserve the character of the area; to promote efficiency in the maintenance of the street in a clean and safe condition; to preserve the value of property in the area; to preserve the safety of children and other pedestrians; and to promote traffic safety, health, convenience and welfare of the residents. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 6; Ord. of 7-2-96, § 1; Ord. of 7-6-99, § 1) 
Sec. 3-3-47. - Same—Definitions.     Whenever in this chapter the words hereinafter are used, they shall, unless the context requires otherwise, be deemed to have the following meanings:     Controlled parking residential area: A contiguous area containing streets or parts thereof primarily abutted by property which is designated for restricted residential parking by Athens-Clarke County.     Residential parking permit: A special permit issued hereunder for the privilege of parking on a street designated as a "controlled parking residential area." (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 6) 
Sec. 3-3-48. - Privileges and restrictions on residential parking permits. (a)  Permit bestows privilege; display of permit. The holder of a residential parking permit shall be permitted to stand or park a motor vehicle displaying the permit and operated by him or her in a designated residential controlled parking area. While a vehicle for which a residential parking permit has been issued is so parked, such permit shall be prominently displayed in front window of the vehicle. (b)  Where parking prohibited. A residential parking permit shall not authorize the holder thereof to stand or park a motor vehicle in such places where the stopping, standing or parking of a motor vehicle is prohibited or set aside for specific types of vehicles, nor exempt the holder from the observance of any traffic regulation within the controlled residential area. (c)  Where parking permitted. A residential parking permit shall permit such residents to park in a designated place for such permit. (d)  Use by persons other than permittee regulated. No person other than the permittee named thereon shall use the residential parking permit or display it on a vehicle operated or parked, and any such use or display by a person other than the permittee shall constitute a violation of this chapter by the permittee and by the person who so used or displayed such parking permit. Bona fide visitors of the permittee shall be allowed to use the permit with permission of the permittee. (e)  False representation. It shall constitute a violation of this chapter for any person to falsely represent himself as eligible for a residential parking permit and to furnish any false information in an application in order to obtain a residential parking permit. (f)  Revocation of permit. Athens-Clarke County is authorized to revoke the residential parking permit of any permittee found to be in violation of this chapter and upon written notification thereof, the permittee shall surrender such to Athens-Clarke County. Failure, when so requested, to surrender a residential parking permit so revoked shall constitute a violation of this chapter. (g)  User fee. The residents shall be required to pay an annual user fee of $10.00 per space. (h)  Administrative regulations. The Department of Transportation and Public Works and the Police Department shall have the authority to develop and implement administrative regulations for the enforcement of this section in accordance with the policy entitled "Athens-Clarke County Transportation and Public Works Policy/Procedure Statement Policy #TE-005," approved by the Mayor and Commission on December 4, 2007, amended on July 5, 2017, and as may be amended thereafter from time to time, incorporated herein by reference, and on file and available for public inspection in the office of the Clerk of Commission, Room 204, City Hall, 301 College Avenue, Athens, Georgia and in the office of the Department of Transportation and Public Works, 120 W. Dougherty Street, Athens, Georgia. The Police Department shall have the authority to enforce the provisions of the residential parking permit program. (i)  It is a violation to park in a designated residential controlled parking area without a residential parking permit prominently displayed in the front window of the parked vehicle. The civil fine for each violation shall be $50.00. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 6; Ord. of 4-1-2008, § 1; Ord. of 2-1-2011, § 1; Ord. of 7-5-2017(1) , § 1) 
Sec. 3-3-49. - Police department regulations; testing, temporary placement of traffic-control devices. (a)  The chief of police is hereby empowered to make regulations necessary to make effective the provisions of the traffic ordinances of Athens-Clarke County and to make and enforce temporary or experimental regulations to cover emergencies or special conditions. No temporary or experimental regulation shall remain in effect for more than 90 days. (b)  The traffic engineer may test traffic-control devices under actual conditions of traffic. (c)  The chief of police may authorize the temporary placing of official traffic-control devices when required by an emergency. The chief shall notify the traffic engineer of his or her action as soon thereafter as is practical. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 6) 
Sec. 3-3-50. - Traffic, speed, truck, parking and other zones, signs and traffic-control devices. (a)  The traffic-control devices listed below shall be designated as follows: (1)  The mayor and commission shall, by ordinance, after engineering and traffic investigations, designate the following: a.  Speed zones; b.  Through highways; c.  One-way streets and other directional control devices; d.  Freight loading zones and regulations; e.  Parking and no-parking zones and regulations thereon; f.  Stop signals and other traffic signals; g.  Taxicab zones; h.  Particularly dangerous railroad grade crossings; and i.  Any other sign, marking or zone necessary for orderly and safe conditions on the streets of Athens-Clarke County. (2)  The manager, or his/her designee, after the completion of a traffic engineering study and analysis, shall administratively approve the installation of a stop, yield, and other right-of-way assignment signs if warranted by the standards set forth by the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices, (current edition), a copy of which is on file and available for public inspection in the office of the Athens-Clarke County Director of Transportation and Public Works, 120 West Dougherty Street, Athens, Georgia, or by Policy Number TE-003, entitled "Policy and Procedure Statement of the Department of Public Works of the Unified Government of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia," approved September 6, 1994, concerning residential traffic control, a copy of which is attached hereto as Exhibit A. (b)  The traffic engineer shall maintain or cause to be recorded a current schedule of all traffic rules, regulations and orders under this section, which record shall be available for inspection by the public. Such schedule is hereby incorporated herein, and such copies thereof shall be available for public inspection in the offices of the traffic engineer, the clerk of commission and the police department. (c)  All traffic-control signs, signals, devices and markings shall conform to specifications in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices adopted by the state transportation board. All signs and signals required hereunder for a particular purpose shall, so far as practicable, be uniform as to type and location throughout Athens-Clarke County. All traffic-control devices so erected, when consistent with state law and this Code, shall be official traffic-control devices of Athens-Clarke County. (d)  Any violation of any traffic zone, marking, sign or other traffic-control device established hereunder shall be a violation of this Code. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 6; Ord. of 7-2-96, § 1; Ord. of 7-6-99, § 1; Ord. of 5-7-2002, § 1) Editor's note— Exhibit A of an ordinance adopted May 7, 2002, referred to in § 3-3-50(a) above, has not been included within this Code, but may be found on file in the office of the clerk of commission. 
Sec. 3-3-51. - Speed detection devices.     The mayor and commission hereby approve of and authorize the use of speed detection devices by the police department in the use of traffic control within Athens-Clarke County. The mayor and commission hereby name all of the streets, roads or public ways inside Athens-Clarke County in which such devices are to be used, as set forth in a schedule which shall be maintained in the office of the clerk of commission, the traffic engineer and the police department. The schedule is hereby incorporated herein and made a part of this section by reference. The mayor may apply to the state department of public safety for a permit to authorize the use and employment of speed detection devices on the streets above referred to and to take any other action that may be appropriate to authorize the use of same. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 6; Ord. of 7-2-96, § 1; Ord. of 7-6-99, § 1) State Law reference— Permit for radar speed detection device, O.C.G.A. § 40-14-2 et seq. 
Sec. 3-3-52. - Riding on portion of vehicle not designed for passengers.     It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or allow any passenger(s) to ride on any vehicle or upon any portion thereof not designed or intended for the use of passengers when the vehicle is in motion. This provision shall not apply to any employee in the necessary discharge of his or her duties or within truck bodies in space intended for merchandise. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 6) 
Sec. 3-3-53. - School zones.     The area of Athens-Clarke County within a radius of 200 feet from the school property line or school crosswalk on all streets, boulevards, alleys, intersections and roads surrounding each school for general education in Athens-Clarke County is hereby designated as a school zone. The traffic engineer shall place and maintain appropriate signs indicating all school zones, and all vehicles shall slow down to a speed not greater than 25 miles per hour when in any school zone at any time during which children are assembling at and departing from schools on the days the schools are in session. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 6) 
Sec. 3-3-54. - Through trucks. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or park any through truck having a gross weight in excess of 10,000 pounds on any street or highway within Athens-Clarke County other than a state or national highway, unless in route to or from a specific location for purposes of pickup or delivery. A "through truck," within the meaning of this section, shall mean either a truck not loading or unloading in Athens-Clarke County or a truck which has loaded or unloaded in Athens-Clarke County and will not do so again on the trip in question. In instances where there has been a loading or unloading as contemplated herein, such trucks shall be returned to the permitted state or national highway by the most direct practical route, subject to the additional restrictions set forth in paragraph (b) below. (b)  In addition, trucks having a gross weight in excess of 10,000 pounds are prohibited from using the following routes within Athens-Clarke County, except for the express purpose of pickup or delivery thereon with a manifest to prove it: (1)  State Road 15ALT (Prince Avenue, North Milledge Avenue, South Milledge Avenue and Macon Highway), beginning at Hawthorne Avenue and extending in a southerly direction to Moose Club Drive. (2)  Timothy Road. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 6; Ord. of 11-3-92, § 1; Ord. of 5-1-2001, § 1) 
Sec. 3-3-55. - Picketing and demonstrations, etc.     Any picketing, demonstration, assembly, gathering or procession of any kind, whether required to be permitted under this chapter or not, shall be prohibited from blocking the ingress and egress of any public or private place. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 6) 
Sec. 3-3-56. - Restricted use of bus and taxicab stand zones.     No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus stop, or other than a taxicab that has been permitted in accordance with Chapter 6-14 of this Code in a taxicab stand zone when any such zone has been officially designated and appropriately signed, except that the driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of and while actually engaging in loading or unloading passengers when such stopping does not interfere with any bus or taxicab waiting to enter or about to enter such zone. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 6; Ord. of 2-2-2016(1), § 1 ) Cross reference— Taxicab zones, § 3-3-4; taxicab stands, § 3-3-34; vehicles for hire, Ch. 6-14. 
Sec. 3-3-57. - Uniform Rules of the Road adopted; penalties generally. (a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A., §§ 40-6-372—40-6-376, §§ 40-6-1—40-6-395 of that chapter, known as the Uniform Rules of the Road, and the definitions contained in section 41-1 are hereby adopted as and for the traffic regulations of Athens-Clarke County with like effect as if recited in this section. A copy of the Uniform Rules of the Road shall be on file in the office of the clerk of commission. (b)  Unless another penalty is expressly provided by law, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 or by imprisonment for not more than six (6) months, or by both this fine and imprisonment. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 6) 
Sec. 3-3-58. - Backing up to curb.     No person shall back a vehicle to a curb except when actually loading or unloading, and then shall cause the vehicle to remain in such position no longer than necessary. (Ord. of 5-5-92, § 3) 
Sec. 3-3-59. - Controlled vehicular parking in residential areas; purpose.     The mayor and commission hereby find and declare that it is in the best interest of Athens-Clarke County to reduce vehicular congestion on various residential streets and to facilitate the efficient movement of traffic; that a residential parking zone regulation is necessary to promote the health, safety and welfare of the residents of such streets by providing adequate parking spaces adjacent to or close by their places of residence; that it is in the public interest to reduce hazardous traffic conditions resulting from use of such street for the parking of vehicles by persons using the residential area to gain access to other places; to protect those areas from excessive noise; to protect the residents from unreasonable burdens in gaining access to their residences; to preserve the character of the area; to promote efficiency in the maintenance of the street in a clean and safe condition; to preserve the value of property in the area; to preserve the safety of children and other pedestrians; and to promote traffic safety, health, convenience and welfare of the residents. (Ord. of 10-4-94, § 1; Ord. of 7-2-96, § 1; Ord. of 7-6-99, § 1) 
Sec. 3-3-60. - Definitions.     Whenever in these sections (section 3-3-59 through 3-3-62) the following words are used, they shall, unless the context requires otherwise, be deemed to have the following meanings:     Controlled parking residential area: A contiguous area containing streets or parts thereof upon which there may be designated restricted residential parking by Athens-Clarke County.     Residential parking zone: A special area for the restricted parking of residents and guests on a street designated as being within a controlled parking residential area. (Ord. of 10-4-94, § 1) 
Sec. 3-3-61. - Privileges and restrictions on residential parking zones. (a)  Parking where prohibited. A residential parking zone shall not authorize the resident or guest to stop, stand or park a motor vehicle in such places where the stopping, standing or parking of a motor vehicle is prohibited or set aside or specific types of vehicles, or exempt the resident or guest from the observance of any traffic regulation within the controlled parking residential area. (b)  Use of on-street parking; nonresidents. No person other than residents or authorized guests of the controlled parking residential area shall park on streets properly marked as a residential parking zone. (Ord. of 10-4-94, § 1) 
Sec. 3-3-62. - Administrative regulations.     The police department shall have the authority to develop and implement administrative regulations for the enforcement of these sections (section 3-3-59 through 3-3-62). (Ord. of 10-4-94, § 1) 
Sec. 3-3-63. - Automated red light enforcement. (a)  Definitions. (1)  Owner means the registrant of a motor vehicle, except that such term shall not include a motor vehicle rental company when a motor vehicle registered by such company is being operated by another person under a rental agreement with such company. (2)  Operator means any individual driving and/or in possession of a vehicle. (3)  Traffic-control signal monitoring device means a device with one or more motor vehicle sensors working in conjunction with a traffic-control signal to produce recorded images of motor vehicles being operated in disregard or disobedience of a circular red or red arrow signal. (4)  In operation means operating in good working condition. (5)  System location means the approach to an intersection toward which a photographic, video, digital or electronic camera is directed and is in operation. (6)  Recorded images means images recorded by a traffic-control signal monitoring device: a.  On: 1.  Not less than two photographs. 2.  Not less than two microphotographs. 3.  Not less than two electronic images. 4.  Videotape. b.  Showing a traffic-control signal displaying a circular red or red arrow signal along with the rear of a motor vehicle apparently operated in disregard or disobedience of such signal and, on at least one image or portion of tape, clearly revealing the number or other identifying designation of the license plate displayed on the motor vehicle. c.  A picture of the operator shall be taken, and may be introduced as evidence of the identity of the operator of the vehicle. (7)  Signature means any manual or facsimile of a person's signature. (b)  Monetary penalty. (1)  Vehicular traffic facing a steady circular red signal alone shall stop at a clearly marked stop line or, if there is no stop line, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if there is no crosswalk, before entering the intersection, and shall remain standing until an indication to proceed is shown by a steady circular green signal. (2)  Vehicular traffic facing a steady red arrow signal indication shall stop at a clearly marked stop line or, if there is no stop line, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if there is no crosswalk, before entering the intersection, and shall remain standing until an indication to proceed is shown by a steady green arrow signal indication. (3)  The driver of a motor vehicle shall be liable for a civil monetary penalty imposed pursuant to this section if such motor vehicle is found, as evidenced by information obtained from a traffic-control signal monitoring device, to have failed to comply with a traffic light signal as designated in subsections (1) and (2) of this subsection within Athens-Clarke County. (c)  Proof; certificate. (1)  Proof that a particular vehicle entered an intersection in violation of section 3-3-63(b)(1) or (2) of the Athens-Clarke County Code, as detected by a traffic-control signal monitoring device, together with proof that the particular vehicle is registered with the Georgia Department of Public Safety (or any other state or local vehicle registration office) in the charged person's name, shall raise the evidentiary presumption and constitute prima facie evidence in any prosecution of a violation of that section that the charged person was the person driving the vehicle depicted in the recorded image. (2)  A certificate, sworn to or affirmed by a trained law enforcement officer or a technician employed by the Athens-Clarke County Police Department, or a copy thereof, based on inspection of recorded images produced by a traffic-control signal monitoring device shall be considered prima facie evidence of the facts contained therein. (3)  Recorded images made for the purpose of this subsection shall not be a public record. (4)  The provisions of this section shall not limit law enforcement agencies to the use of traffic-control signal monitoring devices in enforcing Code section 40-6-20(a) of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated; and, when there is evidence obtained from another source or sources which constitutes a prima facie case of a violation of section 40-6-20(a) of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, such violation may be prosecuted as otherwise provided by law in lieu of, but not in addition to, enforcement under this section. (5)  Such presumption shall be rebutted if the owner, or lessee of the vehicle files a sworn notarized statement with the clerk of the municipal court prior to the return date established on the citation identifying the name and address of the operator of the vehicle at the time of the alleged violation. Upon review of the notarized statement by the prosecuting attorney for Athens-Clarke County, a hearing may be set for prosecution of the alleged violation. (6)  Such presumption shall be rebutted if the charged person can prove that they were not the operator of the vehicle through photographic evidence produced and maintained by Athens-Clarke County when the vehicle owned by the charged person was in violation of section 3-3-63(b)(1) or (2) of the Athens-Clarke County Code. (7)  Such presumption shall be rebutted if the owner, or lessee of the vehicle testifies under oath in open court that he or she was not the operator of the vehicle at the time of alleged violation. (8)  Such presumption shall be rebutted if a certified copy of a police report, showing that the vehicle had been reported to the police as stolen prior to the time of the alleged violation, is presented, prior to the return date established on the citation issued pursuant to this section, to the court adjudicating the alleged violation. Upon review of the notarized statement by the prosecuting attorney for Athens-Clarke County, a hearing may be set for prosecution of the alleged violation. (9)  Such presumption shall be rebutted if the recorded image depicts the vehicle passed through the intersection in violation of section 3-3-63(b)(1) or (2) of the Athens-Clarke County Code as part of a funeral procession. (10)  Such presumption shall be rebutted if the recorded image depicts the vehicle passed through the intersection in violation of section 3-3-63(b)(1) or (2) of the Athens-Clarke County Code in order to avoid impeding the efforts of an emergency vehicle to pass through the intersection. (11)  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained herein, the prosecution and conviction for a violation of this section shall not require a picture of the driver described in section 3-3-63(a)(6)c. above. (d)  Penalty; effect of a conviction. (1)  Imposition of a penalty pursuant to this section shall not be deemed a criminal conviction as an operator and shall not be made a part of the operating record of the person upon whom such liability is imposed nor shall it be used for insurance purposes in the provision of motor vehicle insurance coverage. The civil monetary penalty imposed by this section for each violation shall be no greater than $70.00. (2)  Upon a failure to respond to any notice of violation by the prescribed date shall be considered a judgment and shall carry interest at the legal rate. (e)  Summons. (1)  A summons for a violation of this section may be executed by Athens-Clarke County and sending by first-class mail a copy thereof to the address of the owner or lessee of the vehicle as shown, in the case of vehicle owners, in the records of the Georgia Department of Public Safety (or any other state vehicle registration office) or, in the case of vehicle lessees or renters, in the records of the lessor. Said summons shall be postmarked not later than ten days after the date of the alleged violation. (2)  No proceedings for contempt or arrest shall be instituted for failure to appear on the return date of the summons. (f)  Private entities. (1)  A private entity may enter into an agreement with Athens-Clarke County to be compensated for providing the traffic light signal violation monitoring system or equipment, and all related support services, to include consulting, operations and administration. However, only a trained law enforcement officer or a technician employed by the Athens-Clarke County Police Department may swear to or affirm the certificate required by subsection (c)(2) of this section. (2)  No portion of any fine collected through the use of a traffic-control signal monitoring devices may be paid to the manufacturer or vendor. Compensation to the manufacturer or vendor shall be based on the value of such equipment and shall not be based on the number of traffic citations issued or the revenue generated by traffic-control signal monitoring devices. (g)  Signage. (1)  Athens-Clarke County shall erect signs on every highway, which comprises a part of the state highway system at that point on the highway, which intersects the jurisdictional limits of Athens-Clarke County. A sign shall be erected also by the city on each public road on the approach to the next traffic-control signal for such road when a traffic-control signal-monitoring device is monitoring such next signal for such road. (2)  Such signs shall be at least 30 inches by 30 inches in measurement and shall warn motorists that traffic-control signal monitoring devices are being employed. (h)  Warning period. Only warning notices and not citations shall be sent during the 30-day period commencing with each installation of a traffic-control signal monitoring device. (Ord. of 12-3-2002, § 1) 
Section 3-3-64. - Cruising on public streets. (a)  Findings and purpose. It is hereby found that a threat to the public health, safety and welfare arises from the congestion created by the repetitive, unnecessary driving of motor vehicles, also known as cruising, at certain times on certain streets within Athens-Clarke County. The purpose of this ordinance is to reduce the dangerous traffic congestion, as well as the noise, air pollution, obstruction of streets, sidewalks and parking lots, impediment of access to shopping or other commercial enterprises or other buildings open to the public; interference with the use of property or conduct of business resulting from cruising, and to insure access for emergency vehicles to and through said streets. (b)  Definitions. The following words and phrases whenever used in this section shall be construed as defined below: (1)  Cruise or cruising means to operate a motor vehicle, or to permit the operation of a motor vehicle under one's care, custody, or control, so as to pass the same traffic points within a no-cruising zone more than three times within any one-hour period. (2)  No-cruising zone means the area bounded by and including the following streets or portions of streets in Athens-Clarke County: Broad Street between Foundry Street and Pulaski Street; Pulaski Street between Broad Street and Hancock Avenue; Hancock Avenue between Pulaski Street and Foundry Street; Foundry Street between Hancock Avenue and Broad Street; and the streets or portions of streets enclosed thereby including Clayton Street and Washington Street between Foundry Street and Pulaski Street; Thomas Street, Jackson Street, College Avenue, Lumpkin Street and Hull Street between Hancock Avenue and Broad Street. The department of transportation and public works shall mark a no-cruising zone by conspicuously posting appropriate signs that designate the area as a no-cruising zone at each entrance to the zone. (3)  Traffic-control point means any point established by the chief of police or his designee within a no-cruising zone for the purpose of monitoring cruising and enforcing this section. (c)  Violations . A person commits an offense if, between midnight and 4:00 a.m. on any day of the week, he or she cruises in an area marked in accordance with this section as a no-cruising zone. A citation will be issued under this section any time after the three passages of the vehicle by the traffic-control point. (d)  Exclusions. This section shall not apply to: (1)  An official public safety or emergency vehicle; (2)  A licensed public transportation vehicle; (3)  A vehicle being used for business purposes; (4)  A resident of the no-cruising zone traveling to a specific destination; or (5)  Any special event that has been permitted pursuant to the requirements of chapter 6-5. (e)  Penalties . Any person violating the provisions of this section upon conviction shall be punished as provided in section 1-1-5, except that the fines for such violation shall be as follows: (1)  The sum of $50.00 upon the first conviction under this section within a one-year period. (2)  The sum of $100.00 upon the second conviction under this section within a one-year period. (3)  The sum of $500.00 upon the third and each subsequent conviction under this section within a one-year period. (f)  Continuing violations. Each successive trip within the same one-hour period past a traffic-control point after a violation has occurred shall constitute a separate violation. (Ord. of 12-6-2006, § 1) Editor's note— An ordinance of December 6, 2006 amended the Code by adding a new § 3-3-64. Former § 3-3-64 pertained to similar subject matter, and carried a provision that it expire 12 months from its effective date, July 5, 2005. 
Sec. 3-3-65. - Definitions.     Whenever in these sections 3-3-65 through 3-3-66 the following words are used, they shall, unless the context requires otherwise, be deemed to have the following meanings:     All-terrain vehicle shall have the same definition as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1(3).     Government exempt operators shall include employees and duly authorized agents of the Unified Government of Athens-Clarke County, Clarke County School District, Downtown Athens Development Authority, State of Georgia (including without limitation the Board of Regents of the University System of Georgia and any association or foundation affiliated therewith), and the United States of America.     Personal Transportation Vehicle shall have the same definition as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1(43.1). ( Ord. of 8-7-2018(1), § 1 ) 
Sec. 3-3-66. - Operation of non-traditional vehicles by government exempt operators. (a)  Use and operation. (1)  No person shall operate any personal transportation vehicle or all-terrain vehicle on public property, roadways, or highways within Athens-Clarke County except for: a.  Government exempt operators utilizing said vehicles during the course of their official duties; and b.  Individuals with a disability as defined by the Americans with Disabilities Act, 42 U.S.C. § 12102, operating a mobility aid or mobility device. (2)  All authorized users shall exercise reasonable care in the operation of the aforementioned vehicles and devices at all times. (b)  Penalty. Any person violating this chapter shall be punished pursuant to the provisions of section 1-1-5 of the Code of Athens-Clarke County. ( Ord. of 8-7-2018(1), § 1 ) 
Sec. 3-3-67. - Booting/immobilization of vehicles in private parking lots. (a)  Purpose . The Mayor and Commission of Athens-Clarke County hereby establish the ordinance set forth in this section to provide for the protection of the public health and safety as it relates to the parking of vehicles on private property and to the immobilization of those vehicles by applying an immobilization device, commonly referred to as a "boot," to a vehicle. To this end, this section provides for the regulation of private vehicle immobilization services to be administered in a manner that protects the public health and safety and promotes the public convenience and necessity. Nothing herein shall be interpreted as authorizing or condoning immobilization of vehicles on private property, but this ordinance serves as a regulation of persons as herein defined who elect to engage in booting on private property to prevent or discourage unauthorized cars from parking where prohibited or in violation of published notices. (b)  Definitions . For the purposes of this section, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this subsection:     Boot, booting or vehicle immobilization means the act of placing on a parked motor vehicle a lockable vehicle wheel clamp or similar device that is designed to be placed on a parked vehicle to prevent the operation of the vehicle until the device is unlocked and removed. The term "boot" shall include the devices used for this purpose. Such devices shall be a high-visibility color, such as yellow, orange or red. No cables, chains, ropes or other similar means of vehicle immobilization shall be allowed.     Chief of police shall mean the chief of police of Athens-Clarke County or his or her designee.     Immobilize means to place a boot on a parked vehicle to prevent the operation of the vehicle until the boot is unlocked and removed. The term includes any installation or adjustment of a boot.     Owner/operator . For the purposes of this section, an owner/operator is defined as a person other than a lienholder, possessing or holding title to a vehicle. The term includes a person authorized to use, operate and possess a vehicle which may be subject to the business or commercial interest of another, permission, rental, lease, or security interest in another person or entity.     Private property owner means a person, or the person's agent or lessee, who holds legal title or the right to occupy or possess private property. The term includes an agent authorized to operate or manage the property but does not include a vehicle immobilization service licensee or an employee or representative of a vehicle immobilization service licensee.     Person shall mean any natural person, firm, partnership, association, company, corporation or other entity of any kind whatsoever.     Private parking lot means private property that is used, wholly or in part, for parking or storing motor vehicles for the residents, tenants, employees, customers, members or guests of an establishment such as, but not limited to, a multi-family dwelling complex, business, or church.     Unauthorized vehicle means a vehicle parked, stored, or located on a parking lot without the consent of the parking lot owner.     Vehicle shall mean an automobile, truck, bus, trailer, semitrailer, truck tractor semitrailer combination, recreational vehicle, camper, motorcycle, moped, golf cart, off road vehicle or any other device used to transport persons or property; provided, however, that the term does not include bicycles.     Vehicle immobilization service or service shall mean a person, including a sole proprietor, independent contractor, corporation, partnership, limited liability company, or similar business entity, offering services anywhere in the territorial limits of Athens-Clarke County whereby vehicles are immobilized by the installation of a vehicle immobilization device. Such term shall not include Athens-Clarke County or any other government entity authorized to enforce parking ordinances or laws.     Vehicle immobilization service operator or service operator shall mean an employee, agent or contractor acting on behalf of a vehicle immobilization service to immobilize vehicles. (c)  Applicability . This section applies to the process for the immobilization of unauthorized vehicles parked on private property and the fees charged to remove vehicle immobilization devices. (d)  Compliance with article; license or permit required . (1)  It shall be unlawful for any vehicle immobilization service or vehicle immobilization service operator to operate within Athens-Clarke County without first having obtained a vehicle immobilization service license or a service operator license pursuant to this section. (2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to immobilize or boot any vehicle within Athens-Clarke County or to impose or collect a fee for release of a boot without first complying with all applicable provisions of this section. (3)  All services and operators engaged in business in Athens-Clarke County shall comply with licensing requirements imposed by the state or Athens-Clarke County, and shall provide evidence of such upon request by any representative of Athens-Clarke County authorized to enforce the provisions of this section. (4)  No license under this section shall be issued to any person who has been convicted in this or any other state, prior to the application for a license, of any violent crime, crime involving moral turpitude, or any sexual offense as defined by O.C.G.A. § 16-6. Violent crime is defined as murder, nonnegligent manslaughter, forcible rape, robbery and aggravated assault. If at any time during the application process the applicant is charged with any violent crime, consideration of the application shall be suspended until entry of a judgement on or dismissal of the charge. (5)  Vehicle immobilization service license or service operator license application. a.  Every person desiring to obtain a vehicle immobilization service license or service operator license required by this section shall file an application with the Athens-Clarke County police department on forms to be prepared and approved by the department. The application shall state the name, address and telephone number of the applicant; name and telephone number of the owner and/or manager of the vehicle immobilization service; driver's license number or state issued identification number of the applicant; the telephone number that will be used for responding to requests to remove boots; and such other information as may be required by the chief of police or his or her designee. b.  It shall be the responsibility of the chief of police or his or her designee to cause an investigation to be made of the applicant's character, reputation, driving record, record of arrests and convictions, if any, and to secure such information as may be required to insure compliance with the requirement of this section. c.  It shall be the responsibility of the chief of police or his or her designee to issue and receive payment for the vehicle immobilization service license and the service operator's license. The cost of the vehicle immobilization service license shall be $30.00 plus the actual cost of obtaining necessary state and federal background checks, and the cost of the service operator license shall be $30.00 plus the actual cost of obtaining necessary state and federal background checks. d.  No vehicle immobilization license referred to in this section shall be issued or continued in effect unless the applicant for or holder of said license has paid for an Athens-Clarke County occupation tax certificate pursuant to the requirements of chapter 6-1 of the Code of Athens-Clarke County. Such occupation tax certificate and vehicle immobilization license shall be for the calendar year and must be renewed prior to the expiration date. e.  Any person aggrieved by the action of the chief of police, in refusing to issue a license may appeal to Athens-Clarke County administrative hearing officer by filing notice of such appeal within five (5) days after receiving notification that such person's vehicle immobilization service license application or service operator's license application has been refused. The administrative hearing officer may issue a license, reissue a license, or affirm the decision of the chief of police. f.  Any change in the information furnished in the application for a license pursuant to this section must be reported to the police department in writing within ten (10) days of the change(s) in business license information. Failure to so report shall be cause for suspension or revocation of the license. g.  It shall be unlawful for any person to procure a vehicle immobilization license by fraudulent conduct or a false statement of material fact and shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of the license. h.  Once issued, service operators shall carry with them and display their license, which shall include a photo of the service operator thereon, at all times when they are in the process of installing or removing a vehicle immobilization device. (e)  Insurance . (1)  No license shall be issued to any vehicle immobilization service applicant and no service operations shall commence until the applicant deposits with the chief of police on the Acord form certificates of insurance written by an insurance company qualified to do business in the state and having an A.M. Best rating not less than A and Financial Size Category not less than Class VII, providing coverage as required by this subsection. (2)  The insured must add Athens-Clarke County and its officers and employees as additional insureds to be endorsed on the policies. The coverage provisions must provide coverage for any loss or damage that may arise to any person or property by reason of the operation of a vehicle immobilization service by the licensee, including but not limited to, damage to an immobilized vehicle caused directly or indirectly by improper installation or removal of a boot. (3)  Commercial general liability insurance providing liability coverage for property damage or personal injury in an amount not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence and two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) annual aggregate covering damages caused by the private property owner, vehicle immobilization service, or any of their employees or agents in the course of conducting vehicle immobilization services for the private property owner. (4)  Automobile liability insurance with a minimum combined single limit of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00). (5)  Umbrella liability insurance with minimum coverage of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00). (6)  Worker's compensation insurance in the minimum coverage required by Georgia law, with Employer's Liability limits of no less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per accident for bodily injury or disease. (7)  Failure of a licensee to meet or maintain the insurance requirements of this section, including providing the above-described insurance coverage from the private property owner shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of the license. (f)  Requirements for posting signs. (1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to immobilize or cause the immobilization of a vehicle on private property without signs being posted and maintained on the private property in accordance with this section at the time of immobilization and/or towing. Such signs must have been continuously maintained on the property for not less than twenty-four (24) hours prior to the immobilization, towing or removal of any vehicles. (2)  Signs shall be located at each designated entrance to a parking lot or parking area where parking prohibitions are to be effective. Where there is no designated entrance, such signs shall be erected so as to be clearly visible from each and every parking space. There shall be no fewer than one sign erected for every seven (7) parking spaces in the parking lot or parking area. (3)  Such signs shall be a minimum of seven and one-half square feet in area (two and one half feet by three feet). (4)  Such signs located at a designated entrance to a parking lot shall be at least four feet above the site grade. Where there is no designated entrance, such signs shall be six feet above site grade. (5)  Such signs shall state in letters at least three inches high that "Unauthorized vehicles may be impounded (towed or booted) at owner's risk and expense." Such signs shall also include the following language in letters at least two and one-half inches high: a.  Cost to remove boot $50.00 per day; b.  Fee payable by cash, check, and credit or debit card. c.  Boot Removal—Call 000-000-0000. d.  Tow information—Call 000-000-0000. e.  Vehicle may not be impounded if owner/operator returns before boot or tow is attached. f.  Booted vehicles may be towed after 24 hours. g.  Private booting regulated by the Code of Athens-Clarke County. h.  Complaints may be made to: Parking Company 000-000-0000 or Athens-Clarke County Police Department 000-000-0000. i.  This lot is owned and operated by (Name of legal entity owning parking lot/area) and can be reached at 000-000-0000 for resolution of any disputes. (g)  Vehicle immobilization equipment. (1)  Each boot used by a vehicle immobilization service must be maintained in a safe and good working condition. (2)  The chief of police or his or her designee may, at any reasonable time, inspect a boot or other equipment used by a licensee for vehicle immobilization to determine whether the equipment complies with this section. (h)  Apparel to be worn by vehicle immobilization operators. (1)  Vehicle immobilization operators must wear apparel of such distinctive and uniform design as to readily identify the licensee's vehicle immobilization service and must bear the name of the licensee's vehicle immobilization service. (2)  While on duty, an operator may not wear: apparel with offensive or suggestive language; cut offs; tank tops or halter tops. (3)  Shoes must be worn at all times which shall not include sandals or flip flops. (4)  A vehicle immobilization operator and the operator's clothing must conform to basic standards of hygiene and be neat, clean, and sanitary at all times. (i)  Fees charged by vehicle immobilization service. (1)  Any vehicle immobilization service engaged in the business of the immobilization of vehicles shall not charge the owner of any immobilized vehicle or personal property in excess of fifty dollars ($50.00) per day for the removal of the vehicle immobilization device or devices. The fifty dollars ($50.00) fee shall be all inclusive; no additional fees may be charged for using other equipment or for any other reason. (2)  Fees may be paid by cash, check, credit card, or debit card at no additional charge, and the vehicle immobilization service may not require that fees be paid only in cash. Proof of the ability to accept these forms of payment must be submitted prior to obtaining a license. At each and every location where a booting operation is conducted, the licensee shall have available means of collecting any fees via cash, check, credit card and debit card. (3)  If the means to accept any one form of payment is unavailable at the time of immobilization or release of the vehicle, any immobilized vehicles must be released without charge. (j)  Vehicle not immobilized upon operator of vehicle returning. (1)  The operator of any vehicle immobilization service shall not immobilize a vehicle and shall not charge a fee if the driver of the vehicle returns before the installation of the vehicle immobilization device is complete. (2)  It shall be unlawful to immobilize any motor vehicle occupied by a person without giving the person, if a licensed driver, the opportunity to remove the vehicle from the lot or if requested to do so pay the appropriate fee to park if a pay to park lot. (3)  The operator shall immediately notify the Athens-Clarke County police department of the immobilization of any vehicle occupied by an incapacitated person or a live animal. (k)  Vehicle immobilization generally. (1)  It shall be unlawful for any person, his agent or employee, to: a.  Engage in vehicle immobilization service within Athens-Clarke County without a valid vehicle immobilization service license or engage as a service operator without a service operator license; b.  Cause a vehicle to be immobilized within Athens-Clarke County by a vehicle immobilization service that does not hold a valid vehicle immobilization service license under this section; or c.  Employ or contact with a vehicle immobilization service not licensed under this section for the purpose of having a vehicle immobilized within Athens-Clarke County. (2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to immobilize a vehicle unless the boot is installed on a tire located on the driver's side of the vehicle. (3)  It shall be unlawful for either a vehicle immobilization service or its service operator, agent or employee to immobilize vehicles on any private property without having a valid written contract specifically for such services entered into with the private property owner or lawful lessee thereof and valid license to operate at said location. A licensee shall conduct booting operations exclusively on private property, and only pursuant to a written agreement with the owner or manager of the property. Said contract must indicate the length of the term of the contract, including the dates that services are to begin and end, and a copy must be deposited with the Athens-Clarke County police department. (4)  A vehicle immobilization service must maintain a twenty-four (24) hour a day, three hundred sixty-five (365) days per year phone number that is staffed by a live operator to communicate immediately with a driver of any vehicle that has been immobilized by the vehicle immobilization service. (5)  Immediately after a vehicle is booted, the person booting such vehicle shall affix at the rearmost portion of the window adjacent to the driver's seat of such vehicle a sequentially numbered notice sticker or decal measuring no less than eight (8) by four (4) inches containing a warning that any attempt to move the vehicle may result in damage to the vehicle, and stating the date and time the vehicle was booted; the name, business address and the permit number of the person who booted such vehicle; the business telephone number which will facilitate the dispatch of personnel responsible for removing the boot; the make, model, color and license tag number of the immobilized vehicle; the reason for immobilization; and the immobilization device number. Provided that the sticker may be affixed in a location that is immediately and reasonably visible to the operator of a motor vehicle if there is no window adjacent to the driver's seat. Such sticker shall be a high-visibility color, such as yellow or orange, and lettering shall be black. The chief of police may prescribe the basic design and format of the notice. (6)  It shall be unlawful for a vehicle immobilization service or service operator to fail to arrive on the site where the vehicle was immobilized within thirty (30) minutes of being contacted by the owner, driver or person in charge of the vehicle. (7)  It shall also be unlawful for either a vehicle immobilization service or a service operator to fail to immediately release vehicles from immobilization after receipt of payment of the fee for removal from the owner, driver or person in charge of a vehicle that has been immobilized by a vehicle immobilization device. It shall be a defense to this subsection if the immediate release cannot be achieved due to a mechanical failure of the device that is outside the control of the vehicle immobilization service or service operator. (8)  It shall be unlawful for a vehicle immobilization service or service operator to fail to provide a signed receipt of payment of the booting fee to the owner, driver or person in charge of a vehicle. Such receipt shall be individually and sequentially numbered and state the name, business address, business telephone number and license number of the person who has booted such vehicle as such information appears on the license to engage in booting, the amount of money received, the method of payment, the location, time of release and identifying information for the vehicle booted, the name of the person from whom the payment was received and shall be signed by the operator receiving such payment. Such receipt shall also include a telephone number for the office within the Athens-Clarke County police department responsible for receiving complaints with respect to booting licensees. The chief of police may prescribe the basic design and format of the receipt. A copy of the signed receipt shall be retained by the vehicle immobilization service. (9)  It shall be unlawful for either a vehicle immobilization service to charge fees in excess of those set out in subsection (i)(1) of this section or to demand payment for any service or for any other reason than boot removal. (10)  In the event that the application of a vehicle immobilization device damages a vehicle, then the vehicle immobilization service is responsible for the cost of repairs for that damage as well as any damages arising out of said immobilization. Any damage done to a vehicle by a vehicle immobilization device shall be reported to the chief of police or his/her designee and returned to the file of the operator which will be maintained by the chief of police or his/her designee. (11)  In the event that the owner or operator of a vehicle, to which an immobilization device has been applied, attempts to operate said vehicle or remove the device, then the vehicle immobilization service is not liable for any damage to that vehicle. Additionally, the driver or person in charge of the vehicle will be liable to the vehicle immobilization service for the cost of damage to the vehicle immobilization device where the device is rendered unusable; mere cosmetic damage to the device shall not impose liability for the purposes of this section. However, liability may not be imposed when the immobilization device is not readily visible to the driver of the vehicle and/or the sticker notice has not been properly affixed to the rear-most portion of the window adjacent to the driver's seat of the vehicle or other location where the sticker is immediately and reasonably visible to the operator of the vehicle. This subsection shall not be construed to create the right to collect for damage to any immobilization device at the time of the immobilization, and it shall be unlawful to require payment for any such damage as a prerequisite to removal of the immobilization device. (12)  No release or waiver of any kind purporting to limit or avoid liability for damages to a vehicle that has been booted shall be valid. (l)  Activity reports. A vehicle immobilization service shall electronically provide a monthly activity report to the Athens-Clarke County Police Department which shall contain a record of the following for each vehicle immobilization device installed within the calendar month: (1)  The date, time and location of installation; (2)  The reason for the installation; (3)  The date and time of removal; and (4)  The name of the operator installing and removing the device. (m)  Compliance; violations; penalties . (1)  Violations; penalties. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate the provisions of this section. Upon conviction for the violation thereof each person shall be subject to the punishment allowed under section 1-1-5, after hearing before the judge of municipal court. In addition, upon conviction for the violation thereof by a licensee, the licensee's agents or employees, any license may be revoked, suspended or put on probation under conditions. (2)  Civil fines; probation, suspension, revocation of license. Any person holding any license issued pursuant to this section or any employee or agent of such person who violates any provision of this section, or directs, consents to, permits, or acquiesces in such activity either directly or indirectly shall, by such conduct, subject the license to suspension, revocation or probation upon conditions. In addition, a maximum civil fine of $1,000.00 may be imposed on the licensee for each violation. In considering the amount of the civil fine, if any, the administrative hearing officer shall consider the following factors: a.  The gravity of the violation; b.  Any previous violations within a two-year period; c.  The cost to Athens-Clarke County related to compliance or enforcement efforts undertaken by Athens-Clarke County in pursuing the case; d.  Actions of the licensee, its employees, subcontractors or agents in connection with the violation.     The imposition of a civil fine under the provisions of this section shall not prevent the suspension, revocation, or non-renewal of any license issued hereunder or the taking of punitive or remedial action for any other violation of the ordinances of Athens-Clarke County or for subsequent violations of this section. No license shall be renewed if any civil fines imposed pursuant to this section have not been paid by the licensee prior to renewal.     For purposes of administering and enforcing this section, any act committed by an employee, agent or representative of a licensee shall be deemed to be an act of such licensee. ( Ord. of 12-4-2017(7), § 1 ) 
Sec. 3-3-68. - Shareable dockless mobility devices. (a)  Purpose . The purpose of this ordinance is to prohibit Shareable Dockless Mobility Devices from being placed in the public right-of-way or on public property, operated in the public right-of-way or on public property, or offered for use anywhere in Athens-Clarke County, for a maximum period of twelve (12) months. This will allow for adequate pedestrian traffic flow and will protect the traveling public until additional regulations can be put in place through a franchise or licensing system to safeguard the community and establish a pilot program to test the operation of these devices within Athens-Clarke County in a controlled and safety-conscious manner that ensures compliance with all local and state laws. (b)  Definitions . For purposes of this ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivatives shall have the meanings set forth in this section. (1)  Shareable dockless mobility device means any dockless wheeled device, whether it be human-powered, electric, or otherwise motorized, that permits an individual to move or be moved freely, including but not limited to, a bicycle, scooter, or skateboard; is accessed via an on-demand portal, whether a smartphone application, membership card, or similar method; is operated by a private entity that owns, manages, and maintains devices for shared use by members of the public; and is available to members of the public in unstaffed, self-service locations. (2)  Dockless means that the device does not require the individual user to return and lock the device to an authorized fixed station once the user has completed their use of the device. (c)  General requirements. It is unlawful to park, leave standing, leave lying, abandon, or otherwise place a shareable dockless mobility device in a public right-of-way or on public property anywhere within Athens-Clarke County. It is unlawful to operate a shareable dockless mobility device in a public right-of-way or on public property anywhere within Athens-Clarke County. It is unlawful to provide or offer for use a shareable dockless mobility device anywhere within Athens-Clarke County. (d)  Notice . Notice shall be mailed by certified mail to the registered agents of any and all companies currently operating shareable dockless mobility devices within Athens-Clarke County upon the adoption of this ordinance. Said companies shall be given 10 days to remove all shareable dockless mobility devices, after which, any such devices found in the public right-of-way or on public property shall be in violation of this ordinance. (e)  Violations; impoundment. Violations of this ordinance shall be punishable as provided for in Title 1, Chapter 1, Section 1-1-5 of this Code. Police officers, parking enforcement officers, code enforcement officers, those county officials otherwise designated by the Manager, and any party contracted by the Athens-Clarke County to specifically impound shareable dockless mobility devices are authorized to impound any shareable dockless mobility device that has been offered for use, placed in a public right-of-way or on public property, or operated in a public right-of-way or on public property in violation of this ordinance. The impoundment shall be subject to an initial impound fee of $40.00 and a daily storage and administration fee, as applicable, of $5. (1)  Once a shareable dockless mobility device has been impounded as provided for in subsection (e), Athens-Clarke County or a designated officer shall make a good-faith attempt to determine the name and address of the owner of such device by serial number, vehicle identification number (VIN), or such other means as are reasonably ascertainable through inspection of the exterior of such device. In those cases where the name and address of the owner of the subject vehicle are determined, written notice shall be sent to said owner by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by personal service acknowledged by signature of the registered owner or other responsible party. Notice by certified mail as described herein shall be deemed given as of the postmark date. The written notice required by this section shall contain the following: a.  A description of the subject vehicle, including serial numbers, vehicle identification number, or other identifying information; b.  The name and address of the owner of such vehicle; c.  The dates and descriptions of the parking violations that establish the grounds for impoundment, the unpaid amounts of the civil penalties for each violation, and the process by which the device(s) may be reclaimed. A copy of each parking ticket or other document providing the required information attached to the notice shall be sufficient to satisfy this requirement. Where multiple devices owned by the same company are impounded on a single day, a single notice listing all impounded devices is sufficient; d.  A date and time at least seven days from the postmark date of the notice in which the registered owner or other responsible party may appear in Athens-Clarke County Municipal Court to demand a bench trial to contest the impoundment. (2)  Vehicles towed and impounded under sub-section (e) may be released from such impoundment only upon payment in full of all impound and storage fees accrued. After paying such fees, a registered owner or other responsible person may contest the validity of the towing and impoundment of his or her vehicle by submitting in writing a Request for Reimbursement of Towing and Impoundment Fees to the Athens-Clarke County Administrative Hearing Officer on a form available from the Clerk of the Athens-Clarke County Municipal Court. Such notice shall either be filed in person at the office of the Clerk of Athens-Clarke County Municipal Court, or sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, in either case no later than 30 days following the release from impoundment of his or her vehicle. Only requests for reimbursement of impoundment fees meeting the requirements of this section shall be adjudicated by the Administrative Hearing Officer. If the administrative hearing officer finds in accordance with the procedures set forth in section 1-5-1 of this Code that the towing and impoundment was not authorized or that the provisions of this Code were not followed, he or she shall issue an order for reimbursement. Such reimbursement shall be limited to the fees actually paid for release of the subject vehicle from impoundment, plus certified mailing fees, if any. (3)  Shareable dockless mobility devices that are not reclaimed within 120 days of impound pursuant to the procedures outlined in subparagraph (2) shall be deemed at that time to be abandoned and discarded by the owner thereof and shall thereafter be disposed of pursuant to written policies established by the Manager. ( Ord. of 12-4-2018(8), § 2 ) Editor's note— Ord. of 12-4-2018(8) , § 2, set out provisions intended for use as § 3-3-67. Since § 3-3-67 was previously added by Ord. of 12-4-2018(7) , § 1, these provisions have been included as § 3-3-68. 
CHAPTER 3-4. - EMERGENCIES[5] ;adv=1; Article 1. Emergency Management Organization Sec. 3-4-1. Definition of emergency management. Sec. 3-4-2. Emergency management office; director. Sec. 3-4-3. Organization. Sec. 3-4-4. Volunteers. Article 2. Governmental Powers During Emergencies Sec. 3-4-5. Powers in the state of emergency. Sec. 3-4-6. Proclamation of emergency; when effective. Sec. 3-4-7. Termination of emergency. Sec. 3-4-8. Offenses. Sec. 3-4-9. Penalties. Footnotes: --- (5) --- Editor's note— Ord. No. 92-11-128, § 1, adopted Nov. 3, 1992, amended the Code by repealing §§ 3-4-1—3-4-4, being the substantive provisions of former Ch. 3-4, and which pertained to emergencies and were derived from Ord. No. 92-04-53, § 7, adopted April 7, 1992. Ord. No. 92-11-128, § 1, adopted Nov. 3, 1992, also amended the Code by enacting new provisions dealing with emergencies which have been set out herein as a new Ch. 3-4, §§ 3-4-1—3-4-9. Charter reference— Power of Athens-Clarke County in relation to emergencies, § 8-113(36). Cross reference— Motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 3-3. State Law reference— State militia, O.C.G.A. § 38-2-1 et seq.; emergency management, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq.; emergency funds for local government, O.C.G.A. § 50-8-2. 
ARTICLE 1. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT ORGANIZATION 
Sec. 3-4-1. - Definition of emergency management.     As used in this chapter, the term "emergency management" shall mean the preparation for and the carrying out of all emergency and disaster functions, other than those functions for which military forces or state and federal agencies are primarily responsible, to prevent, minimize, and repair injury and damage resulting from emergencies or disasters, or the imminent threat thereof, of man-made or natural origin. These functions include, without limitation, firefighting services; police services; medical and health services; rescue, engineering, warning services; communications; protection against the effects of radiological, chemical, and other special weapons; evacuation of persons from stricken areas; emergency welfare services; emergency transportation; plant protection; shelter; temporary restoration of public utility services; and other functions related to civilian population, together with all other activities necessary or incidental to total emergency and disaster preparedness for carrying out the foregoing functions. (Ord. of 11-3-92, § 1) 
Sec. 3-4-2. - Emergency management office; director.     There is hereby established the Athens-Clarke County Emergency Management Agency. The manager of Athens-Clarke County shall nominate, for appointment by the governor, an emergency management program director for Athens-Clarke County. When appointed, the emergency management program director is charged with the following duties: (1)  To represent the mayor and commission of Athens-Clarke County on matters pertaining to emergency management. (2)  To assist Athens-Clarke County officials in organizing Athens-Clarke County departments for emergency operations. (3)  To develop, in conjunction with Athens-Clarke County departments and agencies, the Athens-Clarke County Plan for emergency functions set forth in section 3-4-1. Such plan will be in consonance with the Georgia Natural Disaster Operations Plan and Nuclear Emergency Operations Plan and shall be submitted to the mayor and commission of Athens-Clarke County for approval, and thence to the Georgia Emergency Management Agency for approval. (4)  To maintain the emergency management agency and carry out the day-to-day administration of the Athens-Clarke County emergency management program, including the submission of required reports to the Georgia Emergency Management Agency. (5)  To submit reports as required by the mayor and commission in keeping with good management practices. (6)  To obtain, with the authority of mayor and commission, a facility to be used as the Athens-Clarke County Emergency Operating Center. (7)  To coordinate the activities of the Athens-Clarke County Emergency Operating Center staff during periods of an emergency, and under the supervision of Athens-Clarke County officials. (Ord. of 11-3-92, § 1; Ord. of 7-2-96, § 1; Ord. of 7-6-99, § 1) 
Sec. 3-4-3. - Organization. (a)  The Athens-Clarke County Emergency Management Agency shall be established around existing Athens-Clarke County departments and the emergency functions listed in section 3-4-1 hereinabove are assigned as shown in the Basic Plan, Athens-Clarke County Emergency Operations Plan. (b)  Heads of departments listed in the Basic Plan of the Athens-Clarke County Emergency Operations Plan are responsible for developing appropriate annexes to the local Emergency Operations Plan (EOP) for their assigned emergency function(s). Such annexes will be submitted to the emergency management program director for inclusion in the local EOP for submission to appropriate local officials for approval. (Ord. of 11-3-92, § 1) 
Sec. 3-4-4. - Volunteers.     All persons, other than officers and employees of Athens-Clarke County, performing emergency functions pursuant to this chapter, shall serve with or without compensation. While engaged in such emergency functions, duly assigned volunteers shall have the same immunities as Athens-Clarke County officers and employees. (Ord. of 11-3-92, § 1) 
ARTICLE 2. - GOVERNMENTAL POWERS DURING EMERGENCIES 
Sec. 3-4-5. - Powers in the state of emergency. (a)  Whenever, in the judgment of the manager, it is determined than an emergency exists within Athens-Clarke County as a result of riots, riotous conduct or threat thereof, or other civil disobedience causing danger of injury to or damages to persons or property, he or she shall have the power to impose by proclamation any or all of the following regulations necessary to preserve the peace and good order of Athens-Clarke County: (1)  To impose a curfew upon all or any portion of Athens-Clarke County, thereby requiring all persons in the designated curfew areas to forthwith remove themselves from vacant premises, public streets, alleys, parks or other public places; provided, that persons in need of medical care while in actual transit to or from a doctor's office, hospital or other place of medical treatment; any person in actual transit to or from his or her abode to his or her place of business; any person on lawful business having obtained written permission of the manager; physicians, nurses and ambulance operators performing medical services; utility personnel, requested law enforcement officers and personnel or other duly authorized governmental agency personnel may be exempted from the curfew; (2)  To the extent allowed by law, order the closing of any business establishments anywhere within Athens-Clarke County for such period; (3)  To designate any public street, thoroughfare or vehicle parking areas closed to motor vehicle and pedestrian traffic; (4)  To call upon regular law enforcement agencies and organizations or other appropriate governmental agencies with or within Athens-Clarke County to assist in preserving and keeping the peace within Athens-Clarke County; or (5)  To take such other measures as he or she may deem necessary in his or her judgment to maintain peace and order in Athens-Clarke County and to preserve life and property. (b)  In the event of man-made or natural disaster, actual enemy attack upon the United States, or any other emergency which may affect the lives and property of the citizens of Athens-Clarke County, the manager may declare that an emergency or disaster exists and thereafter shall have and may exercise for such period as such emergency or disaster exists or continues, the following powers: (1)  To enforce all rules, laws, and regulations relating to emergency management and to assume direct operational control over all emergency management resources; (2)  To seize or take for temporary use any private property for the protection of the public; (3)  To sell, lend, give or distribute all or any such property or supplies among the inhabitants of Athens-Clarke County and to maintain a strict accounting of property or supplies distributed and for funds received for such property or supplies; and (4)  To perform and exercise such other functions and duties and take such emergency actions as may be necessary to promote and secure the safety, protection, and well-being of the inhabitants of Athens-Clarke County. (Ord. of 11-3-92, § 1; Ord. of 8-5-2008, § 1) 
Sec. 3-4-6. - Proclamation of emergency; when effective.     The proclamation of an emergency, as provided in section 3-4-5(a) hereinabove, shall become effective upon its issuance and dissemination to the public by appropriate news media. (Ord. of 11-3-92, § 1) 
Sec. 3-4-7. - Termination of emergency.     Any emergency proclaimed in accordance with the provisions of subsection 3-4-5(a) hereinabove shall terminate after 48 hours from the issuance thereof or upon the issuance of a proclamation determining that an emergency no longer exists, whichever occurs first; provided, that the emergency period may be extended for additional periods of time as determined necessary by resolution of the mayor and commission of Athens-Clarke County. (Ord. of 11-3-92, § 1; Ord. of 7-2-96, § 1; Ord. of 7-6-99, § 1) 
Sec. 3-4-8. - Offenses.     It shall be unlawful for any person during an emergency that may affect the lives and property of the citizens of Athens-Clarke County: (1)  To willfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the emergency management organization in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter or in the performance of any duty imposed upon him or her by virtue of this chapter; (2)  To do any act forbidden by any lawful rules and regulations issued pursuant to this chapter if such act is of such a nature as to give assistance to the enemy or to imperil the life or property of any inhabitant of Athens-Clarke County to prevent, hinder or delay the defense or portion thereof; or (3)  To wear, carry or display without authorization any mark or identification specified by the emergency management organization. (Ord. of 11-3-92, § 1) 
Sec. 3-4-9. - Penalties.     Any person violating any provision of this chapter, or any rule, order or regulation made pursuant hereto, shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as set forth in section 1-1-5 of this Code. (Ord. of 11-3-92, § 1) 
CHAPTER 3-5. - OFFENSES—MISCELLANEOUS[6] Sec. 3-5-1. Disorderly conduct generally. Sec. 3-5-2. Disruption of meetings, processions, or gatherings. Sec. 3-5-3. Hindering or obstructing Athens-Clarke County officials, employees or agents. Sec. 3-5-4. Intoxication. Sec. 3-5-5. Firearms; special permits. Sec. 3-5-6. Swimming, bathing in Athens-Clarke County reservoirs. Sec. 3-5-7. Setting fire to brush or grass. Sec. 3-5-8. Junked vehicles on private property. Sec. 3-5-9. Control of vegetation. Sec. 3-5-10. Tattoos restricted; renewal fee. Sec. 3-5-11. Cemeteries—Disturbing, etc. Sec. 3-5-12. Same—Shooting firearms. Sec. 3-5-13. Air guns—Definitions. Sec. 3-5-14. Same—Playing with. Sec. 3-5-15. Same—Shooting. Sec. 3-5-16. Slingshots. Sec. 3-5-17. Trespassing, etc. Sec. 3-5-18. Bullet wound reports. Sec. 3-5-19. Alcoholic beverages; transportation, etc., onto public school property. Sec. 3-5-20. Alcoholic beverages on public transportation system vehicles. Sec. 3-5-21. Theft and diversion of Athens-Clarke County and public utility services. Sec. 3-5-22. Urinating in public, etc. Sec. 3-5-23. Obstructing public sidewalks and streets; prowling. Sec. 3-5-24. Noise control. Sec. 3-5-25. Domestic violence. Sec. 3-5-26. Parties to a crime. Sec. 3-5-27. Penalties. Sec. 3-5-28. Interference with property of Athens-Clarke County. Sec. 3-5-29. Interference with property of Housing Authority of Athens-Clarke County. Sec. 3-5-30. Interference with property of another. Sec. 3-5-31. Disturbing or endangering use of fireworks. Sec. 3-5-32. Reserved. Sec. 3-5-33. Removal of certain construction, etc., violating view regulations—Required. Sec. 3-5-34. Same—Service of notice. Sec. 3-5-35. Same—Failure to obey notice. Sec. 3-5-36. Reserved. Footnotes: --- (6) --- Charter reference— Powers of unified government, § 1-104; powers of commission, § 2-105; examples of powers of unified government, § 8-114. Cross reference— Nuisances, Ch. 3-13. State Law reference— Crimes and offenses, O.C.G.A. Title 16; limitations on home rule power, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6; abatement of nuisances in cities, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5. 
Sec. 3-5-1. - Disorderly conduct generally.     Any of the following behaviors or activities shall constitute the offense of disorderly conduct and shall be punished as provided by section 1-1-5: (a)  Any person who, without authority of law, purposely or recklessly obstructs free pedestrian or vehicular access to any public school parking area or building designated for use of persons attending or participating in an athletic event in such a way as to deny access or in such a way as to create a hazard and fails or refuses to remove such obstruction after receiving a reasonable official request or order of a police officer or principal or his assistant or duly authorized agent of such public school that he or she do so; (b)  Any person who shall act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another whereby any person is placed in fear of safety of his life, limb or health; (c)  Any person who shall act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another whereby the property of any person is placed in danger of being destroyed or damaged; and (d)  Any person who shall endanger the lawful pursuits of another by acts of violence, threats of violence or abusive conduct; (e)  Any person who shall cause, provoke or engage in any fight, brawl or riotous conduct so as to endanger the life, limb, health or property of another; (f)  Any person who shall assemble or congregate with another or others for the purpose of causing, provoking or engaging in any fight or brawl; (g)  Any person who shall be found jostling or roughly crowding or pushing any person in any public place; (h)  Any person who shall assemble or congregate with another or others for unlawful purposes as defined by the current ordinances for Athens-Clarke County; (i)  Any person who shall assemble or congregate with another or others for the purpose or with the intent to engage in gaming; (j)  Any person who shall go to or be at any public place with intent to obtain money from other person by illegal and fraudulent schemes, tricks, artifices or devices; (k)  Any person who shall assemble or congregate with another or others for the purposes of engaging in any fraudulent scheme, device or trick to obtain any valuable thing in any place or from any person in Athens-Clarke County, or who shall aid or abet therein; (l)  Any person who shall without provocation use to or of another, in his or her presence, "fighting words," that are opprobrious or abusive words which by their very utterance tend to incite an immediate breach of the peace or such words which, as a matter of common knowledge under ordinary circumstances, will, when used to or of another person in his or her presence, naturally tend to provoke violent resentment; (m)  Any person operating a motor vehicle upon any parking facility, public or private, vehicle access or pedestrian walkway of any parking facility by sudden starting, stopping or turning so as to endanger the person or property of another; (n)  Any person operating a motor vehicle upon any parking facility, public or private, vehicle access or pedestrian walkway of any parking facility at a speed great enough to endanger the person or property of another; or (o)  Any person who aids or abets or encourages a minor to do any act which constitutes disorderly conduct or a breach of the peace. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 8; Ord. of 8-4-92, § 1) Cross reference— Noises and disturbances, § 3-5-24. State Law reference— Offenses against public order and safety, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-1 et seq. 
Sec. 3-5-2. - Disruption of meetings, processions, or gatherings.     A person commits an offense if, with the intent to prevent or disrupt a lawful public meeting, procession, or gathering, the person substantially obstructs or interferes with the meeting, procession, or gathering by physical action or verbal utterance. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 8; Ord. of 7-5-2006, § 1) State Law reference— Preventing or disrupting lawful meetings, gatherings or processions, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-34. 
Sec. 3-5-3. - Hindering or obstructing Athens-Clarke County officials, employees or agents. (a)  Obstructing or hindering officials prohibited. No person shall, by violence, threat of violence or by fleeing, or by any other unlawful means, obstruct or hinder an official, employee or agent of the mayor and commission of Athens-Clarke County, when such official, employee or agent has properly identified either himself or herself or is otherwise identifiable as such and is engaged in the lawful performance of his or her official duties. (b)  Threats, abusive language, etc., prohibited. No person shall communicate, personally or by telephone or other means of communication, any threats, opprobrious words, abusive language or words tending to cause a breach of the peace to any official, employee or agent of the mayor and commission charged with enforcing the laws or ordinances of Athens-Clarke County with the intent of harassing, preventing and obstructing such official, agent or employee in the enforcement of such laws or ordinances. (c)  Threats, etc., to family members prohibited. No person shall communicate, personally or by telephone or other means of communication, any threats of violence, abusive language or words tending to cause a breach of the peace, or opprobrious words to the spouse or children or family of any official, agent or employee of Athens-Clarke County with the intent to thereby obstruct, hinder and prevent such official, employee or agent from enforcing the laws or ordinances of Athens-Clarke County. (d)  Discharge of duties by officials, agents or employees. This section shall in no way free such officers, agents or employees of Athens-Clarke County from penalties imposed by laws or ordinances of Athens-Clarke County, or regulations of any board thereof, for failure to discharge their official duties. (e)  Giving false identification. No person shall give a false name, address or date of birth, or any other information, to any Athens-Clarke official, employee or agent in the lawful discharge of his or her official duties with the intent to mislead such official, employee or agent in any way. (f)  Violation of provisions. A violation of subsections (a), (b), (c) or (e) of this section shall be deemed a separate offense, and each offense shall be punished as provided by section 1-1-5. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 8; Ord. of 8-4-92, § 4; Ord. of 7-2-96, § 1; Ord. of 7-6-99, § 1) State Law reference— Obstruction of public administration and related offenses, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-20; terroristic threats and acts, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-37; harassing telephone calls, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-39. 
Sec. 3-5-4. - Intoxication.     A person who shall be and appear in an intoxicated condition in any public place or within the curtilage of any private residence not his own other than by invitation of the owner or lawful occupant, which condition is made manifest by boisterousness, by indecent condition or act, or by vulgar, profane, loud or unbecoming language, shall be punished as provided for in section 1-1-5. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 8; Ord. of 8-4-92, § 5) Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, Ch. 6-3. State Law reference— Public drunkenness, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-41; ordinances relating to drinking, intoxication, etc., O.C.G.A. §§ 37-8-11, 37-8-53. 
Sec. 3-5-5. - Firearms; special permits. (a)  Discharging over or across property of another prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any firearm onto or across the property of another without the express permission of the owner or other person in legal possession of such property. (b)  Adult supervision of minors. It shall be unlawful for anyone under 16 years of age to discharge any firearm in Athens-Clarke County unless such child is under the direct supervision of an adult. It shall also be unlawful for a parent or legal guardian of a child under 16 years of age to permit such child to discharge any fire arm without direct adult supervision. As used herein, "under the direct supervision of an adult" shall mean that such child must be within an arm's length of the adult at any time that the firearm is discharged. (c)  Discharge of center fire rifles restricted. It shall be unlawful to fire a center fire rifle within 900 feet of any structure reasonably capable of habitation or occupation in the legal possession of another without express permission of such other. (d)  Discharge of other firearms restricted. It shall be unlawful to fire any other type of firearm within 600 feet of any structure reasonably capable of habitation or occupation in the legal possession of another without express permission of such other. (e)  Discharge of firearms near streets. It shall be unlawful to discharge any firearm within 150 feet of any public street, thoroughfare, way or alley. (f)  Shooting birds or animals restricted. Except where permitted by state law, it shall be unlawful within the confines of Athens-Clarke County to shoot with any firearm any bird or animal except when such bird or animal is endangering a person or one's own property. (g)  Special permits for shooting animal pests. Not withstanding paragraphs (d) and (f), the chief of police may issue a special written permit to a citizen over the age of 18 to use a firearm for the limited purpose of shooting animal pests. Any firearm and/or ammunition used under this paragraph shall be first approved by the chief of police or designee. The permit shall be for a limited time not to exceed 90 days and for use only upon the applicant's property. The permit may be revoked for cause by the chief of police at any time without notice. No person holding such permit shall at any time discharge such firearm in such a way as to encroach on any street, public way, house or property or person of another. The application for such permit shall be signed by the applicant and give his correct name, age and address, the use intended and the period and place desired for such proposed use as well as the type of firearm and ammunition to be used. No person shall give false information in his written application. No permit shall be issued by the chief of police to any person that has been convicted of any felony, assault of an aggravated nature, or crimes involving the person or property of another. The application and a duplicate of the permit, if issued, shall be kept of record in the office of the chief of police. Any person who is refused a permit may appeal to the administrative hearing officer. The fee for a 90-day permit shall be $5.00. (h)  Application of section to commercial firing ranges. Paragraphs (c) and (d) shall not apply to any commercial firing range which has a valid business license from Athens-Clarke County and is in compliance with all applicable zoning, safety and building codes and all other applicable laws and ordinances of Athens-Clarke County, the State of Georgia and the United States of America, nor shall it apply to any private firing range of any club which was organized and in existence prior to December 1, 1992. (i)  Application to self-defense. Paragraphs (b) through (e) shall not apply when a firearm is discharged by any person in defense of self in accordance O.C.G.A § 16-3-21 or in defense of habitation in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 16-3-23. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 8; Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1) State Law reference— Offenses relating to firearms, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-101 et seq. 
Sec. 3-5-6. - Swimming, bathing in Athens-Clarke County reservoirs.     It shall be unlawful for any person to swim, bath or enter into the water of the Athens-Clarke County waterworks lake on Sandy Creek or other Athens-Clarke County reservoir which is for storage of water; provided, that nothing in this section shall prohibit any duly authorized Athens-Clarke County waterworks employee or person authorized thereby from making any required inspections or tests or doing other work in connection with such water supply. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 8) State Law reference— Water resources, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-1 et seq. 
Sec. 3-5-7. - Setting fire to brush or grass.     It shall be unlawful for any person to set fire to any grass or brush pile without permission from the Athens-Clarke County Fire Department. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 8) 
Sec. 3-5-8. - Junked vehicles on private property. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park, store, leave, or permit the parking, storing or leaving of any junked vehicle upon any private property within Athens-Clarke County for a period in excess of 30 days. This section shall not apply to any vehicle enclosed within a building on private property or to any vehicle held by an automotive maintenance, repair, or salvage facility, or similar business enterprise, lawfully operated within Athens-Clarke County and properly operated within an appropriate business zone, pursuant to the zoning laws of Athens-Clarke County, or to any motor vehicle in operable condition specifically adapted or designed for operation on raceways or drag strips.     If a basis for the violation is that the vehicle is inoperative, then the officer serving said citation on the owner or occupant of private property on which a vehicle is located shall request the person served to demonstrate the operability of the vehicle to the officer. In the event that the person who is served shall demonstrate that the vehicle can be started and operated lawfully upon the roadway to the officer, then the officer shall make a note of same. However, in the event that the person served shall refuse or is unable to demonstrate the operability of the vehicle to the officer, then the officer shall make a note of same and shall introduce said note into evidence at any hearing or trial on the matter, and such evidence shall constitute a rebuttable presumption that the vehicle is inoperative. (b)  For purposes of this section, a "vehicle" shall mean any means of conveyance, whether self-propelled or not, that is designed to travel on the ground or on water or in the air, including, but not limited to, automobiles, buses, motorbikes, motorcycles, motorscooters, trucks, tractors, go-carts, golf carts, campers, recreational vehicles, boats, airplanes, train cars and any means of conveyance which are designed to be pulled by motorized vehicles upon the roadway such as boat trailers, wagons, balers, motorcycle trailers, auto transport trailers, and any other trailer designed to haul specific items attached to motor vehicles on the roadway.     For purposes of this section, a "junked vehicle" is any vehicle defined above which vehicle either does not have lawfully affixed on it an unexpired license plate or tax stamp, or which vehicle is wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled, inoperative, abandoned, or discarded. (c)  Nothing in this section shall authorize the maintenance of a public or private nuisance as defined under other provisions of law. (d)  This section shall not be the exclusive regulation of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicles within Athens-Clarke County and shall be supplemental and in addition to the other ordinances, statutes or provisions of law heretofore or hereinafter enacted by Athens-Clarke County, the state, or other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction. (Ord. of 12-2-2003, § 5) Editor's note— Ord. of Nov. 4, 1997, § 4, repealed § 3-5-8, pertaining to adult bookstores and movie houses, and derived from an ordinance of April 7, 1992, § 8. An ordinance adopted Dec. 2, 2003, § 5, added new provisions to the Code as § 3-5-8 as herein set out. Cross reference— Junked and abandoned vehicles—Nuisance abatement, § 3-9-1 et seq. 
Sec. 3-5-9. - Control of vegetation. (a)  Definitions . The following definitions shall apply to this section: (1)  Managed natural landscapes means a designed, intentional and maintained cultivation of native or non-native grasses, sedges, wildflowers, forbs, ferns, shrubs, or trees that is self-sustaining with minimal resort to artificial methods of plant care and that serves at least one of the following purposes: a.  The attraction and aid of wildlife; b.  The offset and control of a potential or existing soil loss program; c.  The enrichment or stabilization of soil fertility; d.  Pest control; e.  Governmental programs, including without limitation stormwater control; f.  Educational studies; g.  Food production; h.  Establishment of or restoration of native plant habitats. (2)  Ornamental plants means perennials, annuals, shrubs and woody plants, and groundcovers purposefully planted, cultivated and managed for aesthetic reasons. (3)  Owner means the current owner of record as shown by the records of the tax commissioner and by the deed records of the clerk of superior court for the current calendar year. (4)  Person in possession of property means a person or persons or entity in physical possession or control of a property pursuant to lease or other lawful possessory interest. (5)  Structure shall mean any structure attached to the ground which has a roof and which is designed for the shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, animals or property of any kind. (6)  Turf grass means grasses commonly used in regularly-cut lawns or play areas, whether alive, dormant or dead, including the following types: fescue, Bermuda, ryegrass, centipede, bluegrass or zoysia or blends thereof, intended to be maintained at a height of no more than 10 inches. (7)  Weeds means any and all vegetation, including without limitation honeysuckle, kudzu, jimson, burdock, ragweed, thistle, cocklebur, dandelion, crabgrass, or Johnson grass, that is not managed or maintained by the owner or person in possession of property on which all such vegetation is located which exceeds the height restrictions in this section, but shall exclude trees, ornamental plants, vegetable gardens and managed natural landscapes. (b)  Height restrictions. (1)  Except as otherwise provided in subparagraph (2), every owner or person in possession of a lot or lands within Athens-Clarke County shall cause the lot or lands to be kept free from weeds and turf grasses over 10 inches in height by cutting and disposing of said cut weeds and turf grasses immediately. Such cut weeds and turf grasses may be removed from the lot or parcel and disposed in accordance with applicable law or maintained onsite as mulch. (2)  The prohibition in the preceding sub-paragraph shall not apply to the following: a.  Any parcel in the Agricultural Residential (AR) zone greater than one acre in size; b.  Any parcel within a single-family residential zoning classification that is greater than three acres in size; c.  Forest regeneration areas or future forest areas established and approved in accordance with Chapter 8-7 of this code; d.  A parcel that is undeveloped as defined in § 5-5-3 (a) of this Code; e.  Stormwater management facilities permitted in accordance with Chapter 5-4 of this Code. (c)  Vegetation adjacent to structures . Every owner or person in possession of a lot or lands within Athens-Clarke County shall maintain such property so that any type of vegetation described in this section (i) shall remain clear of a structure's windows, doors, eaves, soffits, fascia, roof, utility meters, or exterior air conditioning units, or (ii) shall not obstruct or impede pedestrian or vehicular passage upon driveways and at least one pedestrian walkway serving an entrance door of a structure. (d)  Managed natural landscapes. (1)  Vegetation within managed natural landscapes shall not be permitted to overhang or encroach onto any public or private properties or public sidewalks or streets adjacent to such lots or lands. (2)  Managed natural landscapes shall not include turf grass lawns or areas left unattended for the purpose of returning to a natural state. (e)  A violation of this section shall be punished as provided for in section 1-1-5 of this Code. No citation shall be issued for a violation of this section until oral or written notice of such violation has first been given to the owner or person in possession of the property that is the subject of the violation. ( Ord. of 3-7-2017(1), § 1 ) 
Sec. 3-5-10. - Reserved. Editor's note— Section 3-5-10, restricting tattoos and derived from § 8 of an ordinance of April 7, 1992, was repealed by an ordinance of July 5, 1994, § 1. 
Sec. 3-5-11. - Cemeteries—Disturbing, etc.     No person shall disturb any grave or injure, mutilate or deface or remove any tomb, monument, shrubbery, railing, or other ornamental improvement within the Old Cemetery, Oconee Hill Cemetery or the burial ground of the Children of Israel, or any other cemetery in Athens-Clarke County which has been or may be established, nor the fencing or enclosure of either, or use any of such cemeteries or burial grounds as a sink, privy or similar convenience. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 8) State Law reference— Damage to and intrusion upon property, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-1 et seq. 
Sec. 3-5-12. - Same—Shooting firearms.     No person shall discharge any gun, pistol or other firearm within the enclosure of the Oconee Hill Cemetery, the Old Cemetery or the burial ground of the Children of Israel or any other cemetery in Athens-Clarke County. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 8) State Law reference— Cemeteries, O.C.G.A. § 44-3-130 et seq. 
Sec. 3-5-13. - Air guns—Definitions.     As used in sections 3-5-13 through 3-5-15, the words and phrases set out below shall have the following meanings ascribed to them unless the context clearly requires a different meaning:     Air gun: Any BB or similar gun or any other gun or pistol designed to expel a pellet or bullet therefrom by means of compressed air.     Play with any air gun: To pretend to shoot another therewith or pretend to prepare to shoot another therewith.     Shoot any air gun: The discharge of the air gun irrespective of whether loaded with a bullet or pellet or not. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 8) 
Sec. 3-5-14. - Same—Playing with.     It shall be unlawful for any person to play with any air gun within the urban service district. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 8) 
Sec. 3-5-15. - Same—Shooting.     It shall be unlawful for any person to shoot any air gun within urban service district. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 8) 
Sec. 3-5-16. - Slingshots.     No person shall use for amusement or otherwise any Alabama slingshot or any slingshot or similar thing in the urban service district. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 8) 
Sec. 3-5-17. - Trespassing, etc. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to intrude, enter or go upon any public monument, or the grounds belonging to the same, in Athens-Clarke County. (b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of trash or garbage in a hydraulically loadable sanitation trash container without the permission of the owner or lessee of such container. (c)  It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to rummage in any garbage can or to hunt for any materials in any garbage can for any purpose whatsoever on the streets of Athens-Clarke County. For the purpose of this section, "unauthorized person" shall not mean a person in the employ of Athens-Clarke County, or an owner, or an employee of any store placing garbage and trash in a garbage can near the place of the owner or the employee's place of employment. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 8) State Law reference— Criminal trespass, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-21. 
Sec. 3-5-18. - Bullet wound reports.     All physicians and all hospital superintendents in Athens-Clarke County are required to report to the police department all patients treated by physicians or diagnosed or known to be suffering from the result of a bullet wound or knife wound. Such report may be made in writing or by telephone, giving the name of the reporting person and the patient and any other pertinent data requested by the police department. All reports shall be made within 24 hours after treatment by a physician or after admission to the hospital. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 8) State Law reference— Reports of nonaccidental injuries, O.C.G.A. § 31-7-9. 
Sec. 3-5-19. - Alcoholic beverages; transportation, etc., onto public school property.     It shall be unlawful for any person to transport or carry any alcoholic beverages (whether malt beverage, wine, spirituous or distilled spirits) onto any property of any public school operated by the Clarke County Board of Education or possess such on such school property where an athletic event is to take place during a period of time two hours before such event and ending two hours following the same. Any such prohibited items shall be confiscated by the police officer and upon completion of its use as evidence, it shall be destroyed by the police department. (Ord. of 5-5-92, § 1) 
Sec. 3-5-20. - Alcoholic beverages on public transportation system vehicles.     It shall be unlawful for any person to use alcoholic beverages on any vehicle used by any public transportation system operated by Athens-Clarke County. (Ord. of 5-5-92, § 1) 
Sec. 3-5-21. - Theft and diversion of Athens-Clarke County and public utility services. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, intentionally and without authority, to destroy, damage or tamper with any meter, pipe, conduit, wire, line, post, lamp or other apparatus owned by Athens-Clarke County or by any company engaged in the manufacture or sale of electricity, gas, water, telephone, cable television or other public service. (b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, intentionally and without authority, to prevent a meter from properly registering the quantity of such service supplied or in any way to interfere with the proper action of Athens-Clarke County or of a company engaged in the manufacture or sale of electricity, gas, water, telephone, cable television or other public service, or intentionally to divert any of the services of Athens-Clarke County or such company, or otherwise intentionally and without authority to use or cause to be used, without consent of Athens-Clarke County or such company, any service manufactured, sold or distributed by Athens-Clarke County or such company. (c)  No person shall knowingly receive the benefits of acts of diversion or of tampering with electricity, gas, water, telephone, cable television or other public service without the proper charge. (d)  Proof that any of the acts specified in this section was done on premises in possession of an accused, or that the accused received the benefit of any such act, shall be prima facie evidence that the accused committed such act or aided and abetted in the commission thereof. (Ord. of 5-5-92, § 1) 
Sec. 3-5-22. - Urinating in public, etc.     It shall be unlawful for any person to urinate or defecate on the streets or sidewalks or any other public or private property which is open to public view. (Ord. of 8-4-92, § 6) 
Sec. 3-5-23. - Obstructing public sidewalks and streets; prowling. (a)  Obstructing public sidewalks or streets. It shall be unlawful for any person to remain upon any public sidewalk, street or road so as to obstruct, hinder, or impede free passage upon or along same or to obstruct, hinder or impede free ingress or egress to or from any place of business, institution, or public building or property, after having been directed by a police officer to move away therefrom, depart or give free passage. (b)  Prowling. A person commits the offense of prowling when he or she is in a place, at a time or in a manner not usual for law-abiding individuals under circumstances that warrant a justifiable and reasonable alarm or immediate concern for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity. (1)  The circumstances which may be considered in determining whether alarm or concern is warranted include, but are not limited to, the following: the fact that the person takes flight upon the appearance of a law enforcement officer; refuses to identify himself or herself; or manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or any object. (2)  Unless flight by the person or other circumstances makes it impractical, a law enforcement officer shall, prior to arrest for an offense under this section, afford the person an opportunity to dispel any alarm or immediate concern which would otherwise be warranted by requesting the person to identify himself or herself and explain his or her presence and conduct. (3)  No person shall be convicted of an offense under paragraph (b) if the law enforcement officer failed to comply with the foregoing procedure or if it appears at trial that the explanation given by the person was true and would have dispelled the alarm or immediate concern. (Ord. of 7-6-2004, § 1) Editor's note— Section 1 of an ordinance adopted July 6, 2004, deleted former § 3-5-23 of the Code in its entirety and added new provisions as § 3-5-23 as herein set out. Former § 3-5-23 pertained to loitering or prowling and derived from an ordinance adopted Aug. 4, 1992, § 6; an ordinance adopted March 2, 1993, § 1; and an ordinance adopted Aug. 1, 2000, § 1. 
Sec. 3-5-24. - Noise control. (a)  Purpose. This section is enacted to protect, preserve and promote the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Athens-Clarke County through the control of noise. It is the intent of this section to establish standards that will reduce excessive community noises, which are harmful and otherwise detrimental to individuals and to the community in the enjoyment of life and property and in the conduct of business. (b)  Sound measurement standards for law enforcement personnel. For the purposes of this section 3-5-24, "plainly audible" shall mean any sound emanating from the specific sound-producing sources set forth below which can be heard from the distances set forth below, using the following sound measurement standards: Measurement shall be by the auditory senses of a person standing at a distance no less than the required minimum distance from the source of the sound. For music and other noise, words and phrases need not be discernable. For music and other noise, bass reverberations are included. (c)  Prohibited conduct. (1)  Restrictions of 300 feet for 7:00 a.m. through 11:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday and 7:00 a.m. through 12:00 midnight on Friday and Saturday. a.  Mechanical sound-making devices. It is unlawful for any person or persons to play, use, operate, or permit to be played, used, or operated any radio receiving device, television, stereo, musical instrument, phonograph sound amplifier or other machines or devices for the producing, reproducing or amplifying of sound and/or noise at such a volume and in such a manner so as to create, or cause to be created, any noises or sounds which are plainly audible at a distance of 300 feet or more from the building, structure or vehicle, or in the case of real property, beyond the property limits, in which it is located, whichever is farthest, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday and between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight on Friday and Saturday. b.  Human-produced sounds. It is unlawful for any person or persons to yell, shout, hoot, whistle, or sing on the public streets or sidewalks or on private property so as to create, or cause to be created, any noises or sounds which are plainly audible at a distance of 300 feet or more from the place, building, structure, or in the case of real property, beyond the property limits, in which the person is located, whichever is farthest, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday and between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight on Friday and Saturday. c.  Commercial advertising. It is unlawful for any person or persons to use, operate, or permit to be used or operated any radio receiving device, musical instrument, phonograph, loud speaker, sound amplifier or other machine or device for the production or reproduction of sound which is cast upon the public streets or other public property for the purpose of commercial advertising or which serves to attract the attention of the public to any building, structure or vehicle in such a manner so as to create, or cause to be created, any noises or sounds which are plainly audible at a distance of 300 feet or more from the source of the sound cast upon the public streets or other public property or from the building, structure, or in the case of real property, beyond the property limits, in which it is located, whichever is farthest, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday and between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 12 midnight on Friday and Saturday. d.  Party noise. It is unlawful for any person or persons in charge of a party or other social event that occurs on any private property to allow that party or social event to produce noise in such a manner that such noise is plainly audible at a distance of 300 feet or more from the building or structure from which the noise is emanating or in the case of real property, beyond the property limits, on which the party or social event is located, whichever is farthest, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday and between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 12 midnight on Friday and Saturday. For the purposes of this subsection, a "person in charge of a party or other social event" shall mean any adult person who resides in or on the premises involved in such party or social event and is present at such party or social event. For the purposes of this subsection, "noise" shall mean the same sounds, or any combination thereof, as described in paragraphs a. or b. above. (2)  Restrictions of 100 feet for 11:00 p.m. through 7 a.m. Sunday through Thursday and 12:00 midnight through 7:00 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday. a.  Mechanical sound-making devices. It is unlawful for any person or persons to play, use, operate, or permit to be played, used, or operated any radio receiving device, television, stereo, musical instrument, phonograph sound amplifier or other machines or devices for the producing, reproducing or amplifying of sound and/or noise at such a volume and in such a manner so as to create, or cause to be created, any noises or sounds which are plainly audible at a distance of 100 feet or more from the building, structure, or motor vehicle or in the case of real property, beyond the property limits, in which it is located, whichever is farthest, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Sunday through Thursday and between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday. b.  Human-produced sound. It is unlawful for any person or persons to yell, shout, hoot, whistle, or sing on the public streets or sidewalks or on private property so as to create, or cause to be created, any noises or sounds which are plainly audible at a distance of 100 feet or more from the place on public streets and sidewalks, or in the case of private real property, beyond the property limits, on which the person is located, whichever is farthest, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Sunday through Thursday and between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday. c.  Commercial advertising. It is unlawful for any person or persons to use, operate, or permit to be used or operated any radio receiving device, musical instrument, phonograph, loud speaker, sound amplifier or other machine or device for the production or reproduction of sound which is cast upon the public streets or other public property for the purpose of commercial advertising or which serves to attract the attention of the public to any building, structure or vehicle in such a manner so as to create, or cause to be created, any noises or sounds which are plainly audible at a distance of 100 feet or more from the source of the sound cast upon the public streets or other public property or from the building, structure, or in the case of real property, beyond the property limits, in which it is located, whichever is farthest, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Sunday through Thursday and between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday. d.  Party noise. It is unlawful for any person or persons in charge of a party or other social event that occurs on any private property to allow that party or event to produce noise in such a manner so as to such noise is plainly audible at a distance of 100 feet or more from the building or structure from which the party noise is emanating or in the case of real property, beyond the property limits, on which the party or social event is located, whichever is farthest, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Sunday through Thursday and between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday. For the purposes of this subsection, a "person in charge of a party or other social event" shall mean any adult person who resides in or on the premises involved in such party or social event and is present at such party or social event. For the purposes of this subsection, "noise" shall mean the same sounds, or any combination thereof, as described in paragraphs a. or b. above. (3)  Restrictions for areas within apartments, condominiums, townhouses, duplexes, or other such residential dwelling units. Except for persons within commercial enter prises that have an adjoining property line or boundary with a residential dwelling unit, it is unlawful for any person to make, continue, or cause to be made or continued any noise in such a manner as to be plainly audible to any other person a distance of five feet beyond the adjoining property line wall or boundary of any apartment, condominium, townhouse, duplex, or other such residential dwelling units with adjoining points of contact. For the purposes of this subsection, "noise" shall mean human-produced sounds of yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, singing, or mechanically-produced sounds made by radio-receiving device, television, stereo, musical instrument, phonograph sound amplifier or other machines or devices for the producing, reproducing, or amplifying of sound, or any combination thereof. For the purposes of this subsection, "property line or boundary" shall mean an imaginary line drawn through the points of contact of (1) adjoining apartments, condominiums, townhouses, duplexes or other such residential dwelling units with adjoining points owned, rented, or leased by different persons; or (2) adjoining common areas or adjoining exterior walls. Said property line or boundary includes all points of a plane formed by projecting the property line or boundary including the ceiling, the floor, and the walls. (4)  Exclusions. The prohibitions of this section shall not apply to the following: a.  Noises and/or sounds caused to be made by manufacturing, governmental, or commercial entities in the normal course of their business; b.  Noises and/or sounds emanating from any official University of Georgia event on University of Georgia property or any official Clarke County School District event on Clarke County School District property; c.  Noises and/or sounds that are permitted by a special event permit pursuant to section 6-5-6; provided, however, that the producer or coordinator of the special event must comply with the terms, restrictions and conditions of the special event permit; d.  Noises or sounds made by domestic animals, which noises or sounds are controlled by section 4-1-4; e.  Noises or sounds made by wireless telecommunication facilities, the noise levels of which are controlled by section 9-18-6 A.10.; f.  Noises or sounds caused by industrial uses in the Employment-Industrial (E-I) and Industrial (I) zones established in the Zoning Code, the noise levels of which are controlled by section 9-11-5 A.1.h.; g.  Sound volumes produced by radio, tape player, or other mechanical sound making device or instrument from within a motor vehicle on a street or highway, which sound is controlled by the O.C.G.A. § 40-6-14; or h.  Noises or sounds made by law enforcement and other public safety officials performing their public functions. (5)  Time restrictions on use of landscape maintenance motorized Devices such as leaf blowers, lawn mowers, or chain saws. It is unlawful for any person to use or operate any noise-generating, motorized landscape maintenance devices, including, but not limited to, leaf blowers, lawn mowers, or chain saws, within any residential zoning district or in areas within 300 feet of any residential zoning district from 8:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m. except that within the agricultural-residential zone no person shall use or operate any such devices within 300 feet of any residential dwelling on adjacent property between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. (6)  Construction noise. Between the hours of 11 p.m. and 6 a.m., construction noise of any type, including, but not limited to, noise caused by the erection (including excavation), demolition, alteration, or repair of any building, as well as the operation of any earth-moving equipment, crane, saw, drill, pile driver, steam shovel, pneumatic hammer, hoist, automatic nailer or stapler, or any similar equipment, shall not be plainly audible within any residential zoning district more than 100 feet beyond the property boundary of the property from which the noise emanates. A variance from the above-referenced hours of operation for construction noise may be requested, in writing, at least 48 hours prior to the proposed construction operation, for consideration by the Director of the Building Inspections and Permit Department. Such a request shall state: 1)  The reasons that support a claim of urgent need based on specific loss or inconvenience for such a variation from the allowable work hours; 2)  The impact that the denial of this request would have on the applicant's project and the surrounding properties; 3)  The steps which have been taken by the applicant to communicate those needs and impacts to owners of surrounding and nearby properties; 4)  The steps that have or will be taken to limit the impact of the proposed activity upon surrounding and nearby properties; and 5)  The possible risks to public health and safety. If the Director finds that the application adequately demonstrates the urgent need for a variance from the above allowable work hours, adequately provides for mitigation of the impact upon surrounding and nearby properties, and poses no additional risk to public health and safety, then permission shall be granted for a variance to alter the allowable work hours during one ten-day period. The prohibitions of this subparagraph (6) shall not apply to government road, water, sewer, stormwater construction or maintenance projects or to utility company construction or maintenance projects. (7)  Commercial Entities near Single-Family Residential Zoning Districts. a.  Notwithstanding any provisions of this section concerning noises and/or sounds caused to be made by commercial entities in the normal course of their business, the provisions and prohibitions of paragraph (c), "Prohibited Conduct," subparagraph (1), concerning "Restrictions of 300 feet for 7:00 a.m. through 11:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday and 7:00 a.m. through 12:00 midnight on Friday and Saturday" and its subparts a. through c. shall apply to noises and/or sounds generated by a commercial entity that are plainly audible within any single-family residential zoning district more than 300 feet beyond the property boundary of the property from which the noises and/or sounds emanate. b.  Notwithstanding any provisions of this section concerning noises and/or sounds caused to be made by commercial entities in the normal course of their business, the provisions and prohibitions of paragraph (c), "Prohibited Conduct," subparagraph (2), concerning "Restrictions of 100 feet for 11:00 p.m. through 7:00 a.m. Sunday through Thursday and 12:00 midnight through 7:00 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday," and its subparts a. through c. shall apply to noises and/or sounds generated by a commercial entity that are plainly audible within any single-family residential zoning district more than 100 feet beyond the property boundary of the property from which the noises and/or sounds emanate. (d)  Registration of outdoor entertainment events. Registration is required of all outdoor entertainment events that have commercial entertainment and/or electronic amplification. Registration of the event must be 72 hours prior to the event, and must be by the person or persons responsible for the event. Registration is to be with the Athens-Clarke County Police Department, Monday through Friday, from 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m., on an application specified by the chief of police and shall include the organization sponsoring the event, the location, the date and time of the event, and security provisions. Registration shall not be accepted for events that include the hours between 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Sunday through Thursday, and between 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday mornings. Failure to register may result in a fine, forfeiture of the right of future registrations, or both. Registration does not exempt the person or persons registering the event from ensuring that the event complies with the requirements of this section. Failure to register shall be a violation of this subsection. (e)  Penalties. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be punished as provided by section 1-1-5. (f)  Severability clause. A determination of the invalidity or unconstitutionality by a court of competent jurisdiction of any clause, sentence, paragraph, subsection or part of this section shall not affect the validity of the remaining parts of this section. (Ord. of 9-16-91, § 1; Ord. of 5-1-2001, § 1; Ord. of 3-4-2003, § 1; Ord. of 8-5-2003, § 1; Ord. of 11-5-2008, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 5-4-2010, § 1) Cross reference— Disorderly conduct generally, § 3-5-1. 
Sec. 3-5-25. - Domestic violence. (a)  A person commits the offense of domestic violence when he or she does any of the following between past or present spouses, parents and children, step-parents and step-children, foster parents and foster children, and any other person currently or previously living in the same household: (1)  Intentionally makes physical contact of an insulting and provoking nature with the person of another; (2)  Intentionally causes physical harm to another; (3)  Attempts to commit a violent injury to the person of another; (4)  Commits an act which places another in reasonable apprehension of immediately receiving a violent injury; (5)  Threatens to commit any crime of violence with the purpose of terrorizing another; (6)  Intentionally damages the property of another without the consent of the owner; (7)  Knowingly and without authority enters upon the land or premises of another or into any part of any vehicle of another person for an unlawful purpose; (8)  Knowingly and without authority enters upon the land or premises of another person or into any part of any vehicle of another person after receiving prior to such entry notice from the owner, rightful occupant or, upon proper identification, an authorized representative of the owner or rightful occupant that such entry is forbidden; or (9)  Knowingly and without authority remains upon the land or premises of another person or within the vehicle of another person after receiving notice from the owner, rightful occupant, or, upon proper identification, an authorized representative of the owner or rightful occupant, to depart. (b)  The term "domestic violence" shall not be deemed to include reasonable discipline administered by a parent to a child in the form of corporal punishment, restraint or detention. (Ord. of 8-4-92, § 6) 
Sec. 3-5-26. - Parties to a crime. (a)  With regard to the offenses set forth in title 3, chapter 5 of this Code, every person concerned in the commission of a crime is a party thereto and may be charged with and convicted of commission of the crime. (b)  A person is concerned in the commission of a crime only if he or she: (1)  Directly commits the crime; (2)  Intentionally causes some other person to commit the crime under such circumstances that the other person is not guilty or any crime either in fact or because of legal incapacity; (3)  Intentionally aids or abets in the commission of the crime; or (4)  Intentionally advises, encourages, hires, counsels or procures another to commit the crime. (Ord. of 8-4-92, § 6) 
Sec. 3-5-27. - Penalties.     A violation of this chapter shall be punished as provided for in section 1-1-5 of this Code. (Ord. of 8-4-92, § 6) 
Sec. 3-5-28. - Interference with property of Athens-Clarke County.     It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with any property of Athens-Clarke County by doing any of the following acts: (1)  Intentionally damage any property, whether realty or personalty, of Athens-Clarke County without authority; (2)  Knowingly and without authority, enter or remain upon any land, building or premises of Athens-Clarke County for an unlawful purpose; (3)  Knowingly and without authority, enter upon any land, building or premises of Athens-Clarke County after receiving, prior to such entry, notice from Athens-Clarke County or, upon proper identification, notice from an authorized official, employee or agent of Athens-Clarke County that such entry is forbidden; (4)  Knowingly and without authority, remain upon any land, building or premises of Athens-Clarke County after receiving notice, upon proper identification, from an authorized official, employee or agent of Athens-Clarke County to depart; (5)  Knowingly, intentionally and without authority, obstruct, block or impede any pedestrian traffic on any sidewalk or any entrance or exit to any Athens-Clarke County building or conveyance after receiving notice, upon proper identification, from an authorized official, employee or agent of Athens-Clarke County to remove such obstruction, blockage or impediment. Any Athens-Clarke County police officer or code enforcement officer is authorized to give the notice required in this paragraph. Notice as used herein shall include oral notice given by such authorized official. (Ord. of 9-1-92, § 1; Ord. of 10-3-2006) 
Sec. 3-5-29. - Interference with property of Housing Authority of Athens-Clarke County.     It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with any property of the Housing Authority of Athens-Clarke County by doing any of the following acts: (1)  Intentionally damage any property, whether realty or personalty, under the control of the Housing Authority of Athens-Clarke County without authority; (2)  Knowingly and without authority, enter or remain upon any land, building or premises of the Housing Authority of Athens-Clarke County for an unlawful purpose; (3)  Knowingly and without authority, enter upon the land, building or premises under the control of the Housing Authority of Athens-Clarke County after receiving notice, upon proper identification, from an authorized official, employee or agent of Athens-Clarke County or of the Housing Authority of Athens-Clarke County that such entry is forbidden; (4)  Knowingly and without authority, remain upon the land, building or premises under the control of the Housing Authority of Athens-Clarke County after receiving notice, upon proper identification, from an authorized official, employee or agent of Athens-Clarke County or of the Housing Authority of Athens-Clarke County to depart. (Ord. of 9-1-92, § 1) 
Sec. 3-5-30. - Interference with property of another.     It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with the property of another by doing any of the following acts: (1)  Knowingly and without authority, enter upon the land, building or premises of another person or into any part of any vehicle of another person after receiving, prior to such entry, notice from the owner, rightful occupant or, upon proper identification, an authorized representative of the owner or rightful occupant that such entry is forbidden; provided, that such notice was given either verbally or in writing by or in the presence of any law enforcement officer of Athens-Clarke County; (2)  Knowingly and without authority, remain upon the land, building or premises of another person or within the vehicle of another person after receiving notice from the owner, rightful occupant, or, upon proper identification, an authorized representative of such owner or rightful occupant to depart; provided, that such notice was given either verbally or in writing by or in the presence of any law enforcement officer of Athens-Clarke County. (Ord. of 9-1-92, § 1) 
Sec. 3-5-31. - Disturbing or endangering use of fireworks. (a)  Fireworks defined. As used in this chapter, the term "fireworks" means any combustible or explosive composition or any substances or article prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration or detonation, including blank cartridges, balloons requiring fire underneath to propel them, firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets, Roman candles, bombs, sparklers, and other combustibles and explosives of like construction, as well as articles containing an explosive substance. The term "fireworks" shall not include model rockets and model rocket engines designed, sold and used for the purpose of propelling recoverable aero models, toy pistol paper caps in which the explosive content does not average more than 0.25 grains of explosive mixture per paper cap; nor toy pistols, toy cannons, toy canes, toy guns or other devices using such paper caps; not shall the term "fireworks" include ammunition consumed by weapons used for sporting and hunting purposes. (b)  Prohibition. It shall be unlawful for any person to use, explode or cause to be exploded any fireworks to the disturbance of the public tranquility, except as authorized by O.C.G.A. chapter 25-10, or to use, explode or cause to be exploded any fireworks in such a manner so as to endanger the safety of life, limb, health or property of any person within Athens-Clarke County. (c)  Authority to seize, destroy, etc. All fireworks being used or exploded or about to be used or exploded in violation of this section are declared to be contraband and may be seized, taken, removed and destroyed or caused to be removed and destroyed by any authorized official, employee or agent of Athens-Clarke County or by the State Fire Marshal, any such removal and destruction being at the expense of any person charged with and convicted of the violation of this section for which such fireworks were the subject of such violation. (Ord. of 9-1-92, § 1) 
Sec. 3-5-32. - Reserved. Editor's note— Section 3-5-32, pertaining to public indecency and derived from Ord. No. 92-11-143, § 1, adopted Nov. 3, 1992, was repealed by Ord. No. 93-03-184, § 1, adopted March 2, 1993. 
Sec. 3-5-33. - Removal of certain construction, etc., violating view regulations—Required.     Any person who is the owner of any property within Athens-Clarke County whereon is located any construction, fence, hedge, other landscape feature or other obstruction to a clear view in violation of the zoning ordinance is required to remove the same. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1) 
Sec. 3-5-34. - Same—Service of notice.     Any person violating the duty imposed by section 3-5-33 shall be served a written notice requiring the removal of such construction, fence, hedge, other landscape feature, or other obstruction, which notice shall specify the things to be removed and the property whereon the same are located. The notice shall be served upon the owner or custodian of the property in any one of the following ways: (1)  By making personal delivery of the notice by such owner or custodian; (2)  By leaving the notice with some person of suitable age and discretion on the premises; (3)  By fixing a copy of the notice upon the premises; or (4)  By publishing a copy of the notice in the newspaper in which sheriff's advertisements are published in Athens-Clarke County once a week for two weeks. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1) 
Sec. 3-5-35. - Same—Failure to obey notice. (a)  If any person upon whom notice requiring the removal of any construction, fence, hedge, other landscape feature, or other obstruction shall have been given as provided in section 3-5-34 shall fail to remove same within two weeks following the completion of the giving of such notice, the director of public works shall cause the same to be removed and shall ascertain the cost of removal and certify the same in writing to the finance director. (b)  The finance director shall cause the sum certified to him to be added to the next annual ad valorem tax statement submitted to the owner of the property from which such removal is effected and shall collect the same at the time of the payment of the taxes by the owner of the property. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1) 
Sec. 3-5-36. - Reserved. Editor's note— Ord. of Nov. 4, 1997, repealed § 3-5-36, which pertained to nude performances, and derived from an ordinance of March 2, 1993, § 1. 
CHAPTER 3-6. - ALARMS[7] Sec. 3-6-1. Alarm defined. Sec. 3-6-2. Reserved. Sec. 3-6-3. False alarms limited. Sec. 3-6-4. Audible false alarms. Sec. 3-6-5. Reserved. Footnotes: --- (7) --- Charter reference— Power of Athens-Clarke County regarding fire safety, police and fire protection, and emergencies, § 8-113(19), (35), (36). Cross reference— Emergencies, Ch. 3-4; fire, Ch. 3-7. 
Sec. 3-6-1. - Alarm defined.     For the purposes of this chapter, the word "alarm" shall mean any equipment, device or system used for the purpose of providing burglar alarms, fire alarms, or other security alarms. (Ord. of 11-4-2003, § 1) Editor's note— Section 1 of an ordinance adopted Nov. 4, 2003, deleted former §§ 3-6-1, 3-6-2, and 3-6-5 of the Code and added new provisions as 3-6-1. Former §§ 3-6-1, 3-6-2, and 3-6-5 pertained to alarm system operation, maintenance, transmission and equipment standards, alarm system service fees; administration, automatic dial-ins prohibited, and alarm system generally, respectively, and derived from section 1 of an ordinance adopted April 7, 1992. 
Sec. 3-6-2. - Reserved. Note— See the editor's note following § 3-6-1. 
Sec. 3-6-3. - False alarms limited.     It shall be unlawful for the owner of an alarm to have over four false alarms per calendar year transmitted from a central or relay office to the Athens-Clarke County Police Department. It shall be the duty of the owner of the alarm to comply with this section. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 1; Ord. of 11-4-2003, § 2) 
Sec. 3-6-4. - Audible false alarms. (a)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of an alarm to have over four false audible alarms per calendar year. (b)  It shall be unlawful for a false audible alarm to be active in excess of 15 minutes. (c)  It shall be the duty of the owner of the alarm to comply with the provisions of this section. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 1) 
Sec. 3-6-5. - Reserved. Note— See the editor's note following § 3-6-1. 
CHAPTER 3-7. - FIRE[8] Sec. 3-7-1. Fire codes adopted. Sec. 3-7-2. Turning in false fire alarm. Sec. 3-7-3. Fire hydrants generally. Sec. 3-7-4. Parking in Firelanes; Authority to prevent blocking of private ways and alleys. Sec. 3-7-5. Fee Schedule. Sec. 3-7-6. Automatic fire sprinklers in fraternity and sorority houses. Sec. 3-7-7. Construction Plans Approval. Sec. 3-7-8. Permits. Sec. 3-7-9. Hazardous materials response cost recovery. Footnotes: --- (8) --- Charter reference— Power of Athens-Clarke County to fix fire limits and to prescribe and enforce fire-safety regulations, § 8-114(19); police and fire protection powers, § 8-114(35). Cross reference— Emergencies, Ch. 3-4; alarms, Ch. 3-4. 
Sec. 3-7-1. - Fire codes adopted. (a)  There is hereby adopted the following fire codes which are incorporated herein by reference as if fully written out in this section: (1)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. Section 25-2-1 et seq., and as may hereafter be amended, there is hereby adopted the state fire safety rules now and as may hereafter be promulgated by the Georgia Safety Fire Commissioner as set forth in Chapter 120-3-3 of Rules and Regulations of the State of Georgia State Fire Commissioner. (2)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. Section 8-2-20 and Section 8-2-25 and as may hereafter be amended, there is hereby adopted the International Fire Code (I.F.C.), including Chapter 1, Administration, as amended. As allowed in O.C.G.A. Section 8-2-25, the provisions of the International Fire Code are modified and amended in paragraphs (b) through (e) and Sections 3-7-3 through 3-7-7 below. (3)  O.C.G.A. Section 8-2-200 et seq., and as may hereafter be amended, is adopted by reference as if fully set forth herein. (4)  Copies of the codes adopted in Paragraph (a) shall remain on file at the headquarters building of the Athens-Clarke County Fire and Emergency Services, located at 700 College Avenue, Athens, Georgia. (5)  All adopted Fire Codes shall be known as "Fire Codes." In the event the fire marshal determines that the provisions of the state fire safety rules and the provisions of the International Fire Code adopted hereinabove conflict, then the most restrictive provision as determined by the fire marshal shall govern. (6)  Authority and Scope. Athens-Clarke County is responsible for the application and enforcement of the Georgia State Minimum Fire Codes for buildings in Athens-Clarke County Georgia, as set forth in title 25-2-12. The provisions of this chapter shall apply equally to both public and private property, and to all structures and their occupants, except as otherwise specified herein or by other applicable law. Employees of the Athens-Clarke County Fire and Emergency Services Department are authorized to enforce all applicable state laws, regulations, and all applicable provisions of this Code in Athens-Clarke County, Georgia and in all municipalities with whom Athens-Clarke County has a valid intergovernmental agreement for the provision of fire inspection services. (7)  Establishment of the Fire Prevention Bureau. Under the authority of the Director of the Fire and Emergency Services Department is established the Fire Prevention Bureau. This bureau shall be responsible for application and enforcement of all matters involving fire codes. The Assistant Chief of Services shall head the Fire Prevention Bureau and shall be known as the Fire Marshal, the Fire Code Official, and the Authority Having Jurisdiction, in matters related to Fire Codes. Fire Prevention Officers assigned to the Fire Prevention Bureau shall be known as Assistant or Deputy Fire Marshals. Fire Prevention personnel are hereby designated by the Manager of the Athens-Clarke County Unified Government as Code Enforcement Officers. (b)  Appeals of Administrative Decisions to the Fire Chief. Whenever the Fire Marshal disapproves an application or refuses to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the code do not apply, or that the true intent and meaning of the code has been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal in writing the decision of the Fire Marshal to the Fire Chief, or his designee within five days of the Fire Marshal's decision. The Fire Chief shall respond in writing within ten days. The decision of the Fire Chief is final and may be appealed to the Superior Court as provided by Georgia law. (c)  Violations. (1)  Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for a person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, alter, repair, remove, demolish or utilize a building, occupancy, premises or system regulated by this code, or cause same to be done, in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of this code or the codes identified in Section 3-7-1. (2)  Notice of violation. When the fire code official finds a building, premises, vehicle, storage facility or outdoor area that is in violation of this code, the fire code official is authorized, but not required, to prepare a written notice of violation describing the conditions deemed unsafe and, when compliance is not immediate, specifying a time for reinspection. (3)  Service. A notice of violation issued pursuant to this code shall be served upon the owner, operator, occupant, or other person responsible for the condition or violation, either by personal service, mail, or by delivering the same to, and leaving it with, some person of responsibility upon the premises. For unattended or abandoned locations, a copy of such notice of violation shall be posted on the premises in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to such premises and the notice of violation shall be mailed by certified mail with return receipt requested or a certificate of mailing to the last known address of the owner, occupant or both. (4)  Compliance with orders and notices. A notice of violation issued or served as provided by this code shall be complied with by the owner, operator, occupant or other person responsible for the condition or violation to which the notice of violation pertains. (5)  Prosecution of violations. If the notice of violation is not complied with promptly, the fire code official is authorized to request the legal counsel of the jurisdiction to institute the appropriate legal proceedings at law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate such violation or to require removal or termination of the unlawful occupancy of the structure in violation of the provisions of this code or of the order or direction made pursuant hereto. (6)  Unauthorized tampering. Signs, tags or seals posted or affixed by the fire code official shall not be mutilated, destroyed or tampered with or removed without authorization from the fire code official. (7)  Violation penalties. Persons who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter, repair or do work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the fire code official, or of a permit or certificate used under provisions of this code, shall be guilty of an offense punishable as provided in Section 1-1-5 of the Code of Athens-Clarke County. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense. (8)  Abatement of violation. In addition to the imposition of the penalties herein described, the fire code official is authorized to institute appropriate action to prevent unlawful construction or to restrain, correct or abate a violation; or to prevent illegal occupancy of a structure or premises; or to stop an illegal act, conduct of business or occupancy of a structure on or about any premises. (9)  Stop Work Order. a.  Order. Whenever the fire code official finds any work regulated by this code being performed in a manner contrary to the provisions of this code or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, the fire code official is authorized to issue a stop work order. b.  Issuance. A stop work order shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or to the owner's agent, or to the person doing the work. Upon issuance of a stop work order, the cited work shall immediately cease. The stop work order shall state the reason for the order and the conditions under which the cited work is authorized to resume. c.  Emergencies. Where an emergency exists, the fire code official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work. d.  Failure to comply. Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to imposition of a fine of not less than $500.00 or more than $1000.00. (d)  Unsafe Buildings. (1)  General. If during the inspection of a premises, a building or structure or any building system, in whole or in part, constitutes a clear and inimical threat to human life, safety or health, the fire code official shall issue such notice or orders to remove or remedy the conditions as shall be deemed necessary in accordance with this section and shall refer the building to the building department for any repairs, alterations, remodeling, removing or demolition required. (2)  Unsafe conditions. Structures or existing equipment that are or hereafter become unsafe or deficient because of inadequate means of egress or which constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to human life or the public welfare, or which involve illegal or improper occupancy or inadequate maintenance shall be deemed an unsafe condition. A vacant structure which is not secured against unauthorized entry as required by Section 311 of the I.F.C. shall be deemed unsafe. (3)  Structural hazards. When an apparent structural hazard is caused by the faulty installation, operation or malfunction of any of the items or devices governed by this code, the fire code official shall immediately notify the building code official in accordance with this section. (4)  Evacuation. The fire code official or the fire department official in charge of an incident shall be authorized to order the immediate evacuation of any occupied building deemed unsafe when such building has hazardous conditions that present imminent danger to building occupants. Persons so notified shall immediately leave the structure or premises and shall not enter or re-enter until authorized to do so by the fire code official or the fire department official in charge of the incident. (5)  Summary abatement. Where conditions exist that are deemed hazardous to life and property, the fire code official or fire department official in charge of the incident is authorized to abate summarily such hazardous conditions that are in violation of this code. (6)  Abatement. The owner, operator, or occupant of a building or premises deemed unsafe by the fire code official shall abate or cause to be abated or corrected such unsafe conditions either by repair, rehabilitation, demolition or other approved corrective action. (e)  Enforcement. (1)  Fire Code Official. The fire code official is authorized to render interpretations of fire codes and to make and enforce rules and supplemental regulations in order to carry out the application and intent of the provisions of said fire codes. (2)  Enforcement Assistance. Police and other enforcement agencies shall have the authority to render necessary assistance in the enforcement of fire codes when requested to do so by the fire code official. (3)  Interference with Enforcement. Persons shall not interfere or cause conditions that would interfere with the fire code official carrying out any duties or functions prescribed in the fire codes. (4)  Fire Watch. The fire code official shall have the authority to require standby fire personnel or an approved fire watch when potentially hazardous conditions or a reduction in a life safety feature exists due to the type of performance, display, exhibit, occupancy, contest or activity, an impairment to a fire protection feature, or the number of persons present. (5)  Fire Watch Employment. The owner, agent, or leesee shall employ one or more qualified persons, as required and approved, to be on duty. Such standby personnel or fire watch personnel shall be subject to the fire code officials orders at all times and shall be identifiable and remain on duty during times such places are open to the public, when such activity is being conducted, or as required by the fire code official. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 2; Ord. of 6-6-95, § 1; Ord. of 9-1-98, §§ 1—5; Ord. of 12-4-2001, §§ 1—4; Ord. of 7-3-2007, § 1) 
Sec. 3-7-2. - Turning in false fire alarm.     No person shall open or break into any fire alarm box for the purpose of, or with the intention of, turning in a false alarm of fire. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 2; Ord. of 10-3-95, § 2) 
Sec. 3-7-3. - Fire hydrants generally.     All hydrants for fire protection purposes in Athens-Clarke County shall be under the direct supervision of the Director of the Department of Public Utilities or his designee. The Department of Public Utilities shall flush hydrants as often as necessary. The Director of Public Utilities or his designee shall notify the Athens-Clarke County Fire Department of any problems that would affect the expected performance of any fire hydrants. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1; Ord. of 7-3-2007, § 2) 
Sec. 3-7-4. - Parking in Firelanes; Authority to prevent blocking of private ways and alleys. (a)  Prohibition. It is prohibited for any person to stop, stand or park any motor vehicle in, or otherwise obstruct, any fire lane as described in this section. (b)  Penalty. The civil fine for any offense under this section shall be $100.00. (c)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this paragraph, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Fire lane means an area designated by the fire official which provides access to fire department connections and fire hydrants and provides access for fire department vehicles to buildings. This includes all alleys, including private alleys, private ways or driveways, where parking of motor vehicles or other obstructions can interfere with ingress or egress of fire department vehicles and equipment.     Fire official means a fire officer or other designated authority or the fire officer's or authority's duly authorized representative charged with the administration and enforcement of the fire prevention code adopted in this chapter.     Master plat means an original plat drawn in accordance with this section.     Plat means a map created by the property owner and approved by the fire official which depicts the location and boundaries of land and all existing fire lanes in accordance with this section. Maps shall be drawn to scale.     Property owner means each person possessing any estate or leasehold right in the property being designated as a fire lane. (d)  Authority. The fire chief or the chief's duly authorized fire official may properly designate fire lanes and prevent the blocking of any private alley, private way or driveway in Athens-Clarke County by the parking of automobiles or otherwise. (e)  Posting of signs. The property owner is required to post signs meeting the following criteria in areas designated as fire lanes: (1)  Signs shall read: "No Parking—Fire Lane." (2)  Signs must meet design specifications furnished by the fire department. (3)  Signs shall be located no more than four feet from the edge of the curb, with one sign located at the beginning of the fire lane, one at the end of the fire lane, with additional signs spaced at such intervals along the fire lane that at least one sign is visible from any point along the fire lane from both directions of travel. (f)  Painting of curbs. The fire chief or the chief's duly authorized fire official may order curbs adjacent to a fire lane to be painted red or another distinctive color. (g)  Parking in fire lane. No person shall park, stand or stop any motor vehicle or place any other property in a fire lane; however, this section shall not apply to the parking of an authorized emergency vehicle. (h)  Obstructing posted, private alley or driveway. Any person who shall park any vehicle of any character or place any other property in any private alley, private way or driveway which has been posted in accordance with this section or, any person owning or occupying property abutting the private alley, private way or driveway who shall cause or permit the placing of anything therein which would impede or block the passage of fire trucks and equipment shall be guilty of an offense. (i)  Plats. Property which falls within Athens-Clarke County upon which fire lanes have been designated shall have all fire lane delineations visually depicted on a plat. These plats shall be designed by the property owner and submitted to the department of fire when notified to do so by a fire official. Each plat shall identify all building exterior walls, traffic and parking lanes and sidewalks. The areas to be designated as fire lanes shall be delineated in red ink. The plat shall state a scale of measurement and shall be on paper or series of pages of 8½ inches by 11 inches. The plat shall specify the name of the property, the location of the property, a brief legal description of the property and the length and width of the fire lanes, as approved by the fire official with whom all master plats shall be filed. (j)  Enforcement officials. Fire officials, police officers, code enforcement officers or other duly authorized law enforcement officials shall have the authority for enforcement of fire lanes. Fire officials, police officers, code enforcement officers, or other duly authorized officials may cause to be removed to the nearest authorized place of impound or other place of safety any unattended vehicle or other property left standing in violation of this section. If a vehicle is towed by Athens-Clarke County subject to this section, Athens-Clarke County shall be authorized to use a call list of designated towing agencies to arrange for towing if no Athens-Clarke County equipment is available at the time of need for towing. The vehicle owner shall be charged for the towing and a daily impoundment storage fee at the same rate as provided for in section 6-15-6 (Fees for Standard Duty Wrecker Service on Police Nonconsensual Call Lists) for both towing by Athens-Clarke County or towing agencies. (k)  Notice of ordinance violation. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Code, violations of this section may be enforced by a notice of ordinance violation issued by any police officer, marshal, deputy marshal or code enforcement officer as provided below: (1)  Ordinance violations charged by means of a notice shall not be punishable by imprisonment but shall be punishable by a civil fine of $100.00. (2)  A notice of ordinance violation may be served by delivery into the hands of the suspected violator or by leaving the notice of ordinance violation at the suspected violator's residence with a person of suitable age and discretion residing therein, or by leaving the notice of ordinance violation at the suspected violator's place of business if the violation occurs at the business location, with a person of suitable age and discretion employed therein. (3)  Alternative to the provisions of subsection (2) above, a notice of ordinance violation may be served by substituted service as follows: a.  The notice of ordinance violation may be placed on the front windshield of the illegally-parked vehicle in a fashion reasonably calculated to secure the notice of ordinance violation in place. Notices served according to this subsection shall be conspicuously marked and placed in a waterproof packet. b.  The notice of ordinance violation may be served by securely attaching the notice of ordinance violation to the front door of the primary residential or business structure on the property served by the fire lane or to any other door to said structure reasonably appearing to provide the primary point of egress to said residence or business. A notice of ordinance violation served according to this subsection shall be posted on the upper part of the door, shall be conspicuously marked and shall be placed in a waterproof packet. (4)  Violators may respond to a notice of ordinance violation either by signing the notice and returning the notice along with payment of the fine indicated thereon to the Municipal Court of Athens-Clarke County by the date indicated on the notice or by appearing in the Municipal Court to plead not guilty to the charged violation at the date and time provided on the notice. No proceedings for contempt or arrest shall be initiated for failure to appear on the return date on the notice. (5)  Violators who fail to respond to a notice of ordinance violation as provided for in subsection (4) above may thereafter be served personally with an ordinance violation citation or accusation, and criminally prosecuted pursuant to section 1-1-5(a). (l)  Section not exclusive. The infliction of a penalty under the provisions of this section shall not prevent the revocation of any permit or license or the taking of other punitive or remedial action where called for or permitted under the provisions of the Charter of the Unified Government of Athens-Clarke County or this Code. (Ord. of 7-6-93, § 1; Ord. of 7-3-2007, § 3; Ord. of 12-7-2010, § 2) 
Sec. 3-7-5. - Fee Schedule. Service Fee (a) Construction plan review: 1. Building construction 10,000 square feet or less $150.00 2. Building construction more than 10,000 square feet, sq. ft. of project × $0.015 sq. ft. 3. Other construction 150.00 4. Sprinkler Plan Review 150.00 5. Alarm Plan Review 150.00 (b) New building construction inspection: 1. 80% completion N/C 2. 100% completion N/C 3. First followup N/C 4. Second followup 100.00 5. Third and each subsequent followup 150.00 (c) Temporary certificate of occupancy, each  30.00 (d) Reserved. (e) Explosive-blasting permit 100.00 1. First blast N/C 2. Second and each subsequent blast  30.00 (f) Certificate of occupancy 100.00 (g) Annual inspections, initially N/C 1. First followup N/C 2. Second followup 100.00 3. Third and each subsequent followup 150.00 (h) Fire reports, each   2.00 (i) Reserved (j) Fireworks demonstrations 100.00 (k) Exhibit halls plan review and inspection fee, per event  30.00  (Ord. of 2-6-96, § 1; Ord. of 7-3-2007, § 4; Ord. of 6-3-2014, § 1) 
Sec. 3-7-6. - Automatic fire sprinklers in fraternity and sorority houses. (a)  Application. This section shall apply to every fraternity house and sorority house as hereinafter defined and non-exempt accessory structures as hereinafter defined within the regulatory jurisdiction of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia. (b)  Definitions: (1)  A fraternity house and a sorority house under the terms of this section shall mean any building used as a dwelling and occupied by and maintained exclusively or primarily for college, university, or professional school students who are affiliated with a social, honorary, or professional organization recognized currently or in the past by a college, university, or professional school. (2)  Accessory structures to a fraternity house or a sorority house under the terms of this section shall mean a structure on the same lot with, and of a size and nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal structure. Types of accessory structures are, but are not limited to, the following: Detached garage and/or carport. Storage buildings and/or barns. Swimming pool houses. Freestanding workshops. Recreational facilities. (c)  Exemption for certain accessory structures. Accessory structures to a fraternity house or a sorority house are exempt from the requirements of section 3-7-6(d) if they meet the following conditions: (1)  Have no more than 1,000 square feet of floor area limited for storage purposes, and are not directly connected to the main building used for sleeping; and (2)  Have no facilities used for sleeping, no food services or cooking social activities at any time. (d)  Automatic fire sprinklers in fraternity houses and sorority houses and non-exempt accessory structures required: (1)  An automatic fire sprinkler system meeting the requirements of National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) Standard #13 or #13R is required to be installed in each fraternity house and sorority house and non-exempt accessory structures in accordance with the compliance deadlines in section 3-7-6(d); and (2)  All fire department connections shall be located on the street side of each building; and (3)  The automatic fire sprinkler system shall be designed to activate both a local building alarm and a supervisory alarm at a 24-hour certified and licensed alarm monitoring service. (e)  Compliance period: (1)  Fraternity houses and sorority houses and non-exempt accessory structures in existence at the time of adoption of this section shall come into compliance with this section within five years of its effective date. Except that fraternity houses, sorority houses and non-exempt structures in existence at the time of adoption of this section that undergo renovation prior to the five-year period for compliance, whose proposed renovation costs exceed 50 percent of the structure's taxable value, must comply with section 3-7-6(d) prior to a new certificate of occupancy being issued following such renovations. (2)  If an existing structure is proposed to be converted for use as a fraternity house or sorority house or non-exempt accessory structure, compliance with section 3-7-6(d) shall be required prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for use as a dwelling for a fraternity or sorority or non-exempt accessory structure. (3)  New structures shall be required to comply with the terms of this division before a certificate of occupancy is issued for use as a fraternity house or sorority house or non-exempt accessory structure. (f)  Automatic sprinkler system not to be disabled. Upon the occupancy of any new fraternity house or sorority house or non-exempt accessory structure or upon the completion of the installation of an automatic fire sprinkler system in an existing fraternity house or sorority house or non-exempt accessory structure, no person shall shut off or disable such automatic fire sprinkler system, and no owner or resident of such house shall fail to prevent the shutting off or disabling of such a system. Provided, however, that a sprinkler system may be shut off in order to perform maintenance work on the system during the time that qualified maintenance personnel are on the premises performing necessary maintenance work. Such maintenance work shall be conducted only after notice to and approval by the fire marshal. (g)  Penalties. Pursuant to section 1-1-5, violation of any provision of this section shall be an offense and shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months, or any combination thereof. Each day any violation of this section shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. of 1-2-2001, § 1) 
Sec. 3-7-7. - Construction Plans Approval. (a)  It shall be unlawful to construct, erect, or alter any commercial building without construction documents approval by the fire chief or his designee for fire department accessibility, fire hydrant requirements, Life Safety Code requirements for assembly occupancies, and flammable and combustible liquid tank installations. Construction documents shall be in accordance with the requirements below: (1)  Submittals. Construction documents shall be submitted in one or more sets and in such form and detail as required by the fire code official. The construction documents shall be prepared by a registered design professional where required by the statutes of the jurisdiction in which the project is to be constructed. (2)  Information on construction documents. Construction documents shall be drawn to scale upon suitable material. Electronic media documents are allowed to be submitted when approved by the fire code official. Construction documents shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate the location, nature and extent of the work proposed and show in detail that it will conform to the provisions of this code and relevant laws, ordinances, rules and regulations as determined by the fire code official. (3)  Applicant responsibility. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to ensure that the construction documents include all of the fire protection requirements and that the shop drawings are complete and in compliance with the applicable codes and standards. (4)  Technical assistance. The fire code official shall be permitted to require a review by an independent third party with expertise in the matter to be reviewed at the submitter's expense. The independent reviewer shall provide an evaluation and recommend necessary changes of the proposed design, operation, process, or new technology to the fire code official. (5)  Engineering. The fire code official shall be authorized to require design submittals or plans to bear the stamp of a professional engineer. (b)  Plan Compliance. The fire code official shall make the final determination as to whether the provisions of the fire codes have been met. (c)  Approved documents. Construction documents approved by the fire code official are approved with the intent that such construction documents comply in all respects with the fire codes. Review and approval by the fire code official shall not relieve the applicant of the responsibility of compliance with the fire codes. (d)  Corrected documents. Where field conditions necessitate any substantial change from the approved construction documents, the fire code official shall have the authority to require the corrected construction documents to be submitted for approval. (e)  Retention of construction documents. One set of construction documents shall be retained by the fire code official until final approval of the work covered therein. One set of approved construction documents shall be returned to the applicant, and said set shall be kept on the site of the building or work at all times during which the work authorized thereby is in progress. (f)  Occupancy prohibited before approval. The building or structure shall not be occupied prior to the fire code official issuing a permit or certificate that indicates that applicable provisions of the fire codes have been met. (g)  Compliance with code. The issuance or granting of a permit shall not be construed to be a permit for, or an approval of, any violation of any of the provisions of the fire codes or of any other ordinance of the jurisdiction. Permits presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of the fire codes or other ordinances of the jurisdiction shall not be valid. The issuance of a permit based on construction documents and other data shall not prevent the fire code official from requiring the correction of errors in the construction documents and other data. Any addition to or alteration of approved construction documents shall be approved in advance by the fire code official, as evidenced by the issuance of a new or amended permit. (h)  Inspections. Any application for or acceptance of, any permit or certificate, requested or issued pursuant to fire codes shall constitute agreement and consent by the person making the application or accepting the permit or certificate to allow the fire code official to enter the premises at any reasonable time to conduct inspections. Before a certificate or permit is approved, the fire code official is authorized to inspect the receptacles, vehicles, buildings, devices, premises, storage spaces or areas to be used to determine compliance with the fire codes or any operational constraints required. (i)  Revocation. The fire code official is authorized to revoke a permit issued under the provisions of the fire codes when it is found by inspection or otherwise that there has been a false statement or misrepresentation as to the material facts in the application or construction documents on which the permit or approval was based including, but not limited to, any one of the following: (1)  The permit is used for a location or establishment other than that for which it was issued. (2)  The permit is used for a condition or activity other than that listed in the permit. (3)  Conditions and limitations set forth in the permit have been violated. (4)  There have been any false statements or misrepresentations as to the material fact in the application for permit or plans submitted or a condition of the permit. (5)  The permit is used by a different person or firm than the name for which it was issued. (6)  The permittee failed, refused or neglected to comply with orders or notices duly served in accordance with the provisions of the fire codes within the time provided therein. (7)  The permit was issued in error or in violation of an ordinance, regulation or the fire codes. (Ord. of 7-3-07, § 5) 
Sec. 3-7-8. - Permits. (a)  General. Permits shall be in accordance with this section. (b)  Permits required. Permits required by this chapter shall be obtained from the fire code official. Permit fees, identified in Section 3-7-5 (Fee Schedule), if any, shall be paid prior to issuance of the permit. Issued permits shall be kept on the premises designated therein at all times and shall be readily available for inspection by the fire code official. (c)  Operational permits. An operational permit allows the applicant to conduct an operation or a business for which a permit is required by this chapter for either: (1)  A prescribed period; or (2)  Until renewed or revoked. (d)  Permits for the same location. When more than one permit is required for the same location, the fire code official is authorized to consolidate such permits into a single permit provided that each provision is listed in the permit. (e)  Application. Application for a permit required by this chapter shall be made to the fire code official in such form and detail as prescribed by the fire code official. Applications for permits shall be accompanied by such plans as prescribed by the fire code official. (f)  Refusal to issue permit. If the application for a permit describes a use that does not conform to the requirements of this chapter and other pertinent laws and ordinances, the fire code official shall not issue a permit, but shall return the application to the applicant with the refusal to issue such permit. Such refusal shall, when requested, be in writing and shall contain the reasons for refusal. (g)  Inspection authorized. Before a new operational permit is approved, the fire code official is authorized to inspect the receptacles, vehicles, buildings, devices, premises, storage spaces or areas to be used to determine compliance with this code or any operational constraints required. (h)  Time limitation of application. An application for a permit for any proposed work or operation shall be deemed to have been abandoned six months after the date of filing, unless such application has been diligently prosecuted or a permit shall have been issued; except that the fire code official is authorized to grant one or more extensions of time for additional periods not exceeding 90 days each if there is reasonable cause. (i)  Action on application. The fire code official shall examine or cause to be examined applications for permits and amendments thereto within a reasonable time after filing. If the application or the construction documents do not conform to the requirements of pertinent laws, the fire code official shall reject such application in writing, stating the reasons therefor. If the fire code official is satisfied that the proposed work or operation conforms to the requirements of this chapter and laws and ordinances applicable thereto, the fire code official shall issue a permit therefore as soon as practicable. (j)  Conditions of a permit. A permit shall constitute permission to maintain, store or handle materials; or to conduct processes which produce conditions hazardous to life or property; or to install equipment utilized in connection with such activities; or to install or modify any fire protection system or equipment or any other construction, equipment installation or modification in accordance with the provisions of this code where a permit is required by this chapter. Such permission shall not be construed as authority to violate, cancel or set aside any of the provisions of this chapter or other applicable regulations or laws of the jurisdiction. (k)  Expiration. An operational permit shall remain in effect until reissued, renewed, or revoked or for such a period of time as specified in the permit. Construction permits shall automatically become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced within 180 days after its issuance, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days after the time the work is commenced. Before such work recommences, a new permit shall be first obtained and the fee to recommence work, if any, shall be one-half the amount required for a new permit for such work, provided no changes have been made or will be made in the original construction documents for such work, and provided further that such suspension or abandonment has not exceeded one year. Permits are not transferable, and any change in occupancy, operation, tenancy or ownership shall require that a new permit be issued. (l)  Extensions. A permittee holding an unexpired permit shall have the right to apply for an extension of the time within which the permittee will commence work under that permit when work is unable to be commenced within the time required by this section for good and satisfactory reasons. The fire code official is authorized to grant, in writing, one or more extensions of the time period of a permit for periods of not more than 90 days each. Such extensions shall be requested by the permit holder in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. (m)  Occupancy prohibited before approval. The building or structure shall not be occupied prior to the fire code official issuing a permit that indicates that applicable provisions of this code have been met. (n)  Conditional permits. Where permits are required and upon the request of a permit applicant, the fire code official is authorized to issue a conditional permit to occupy the premises or portion thereof before the entire work or operations on the premises is completed, provided that such portion or portions will be occupied safely prior to full completion or installation of equipment and operations without endangering life or public welfare. The fire code official shall notify the permit applicant in writing of any limitations or restrictions necessary to keep the permit area safe. The holder of a conditional permit shall proceed only to the point for which approval has been given, at the permit holder's own risk and without assurance that approval for the occupancy or the utilization of the entire premises, equipment or operations will be granted. (o)  Posting the permit. Issued permits shall be kept on the premises designated therein at all times and shall be readily available for inspection by the fire code official. (p)  Compliance with chapter. The issuance or granting of a permit shall not be construed to be a permit for, or an approval of, any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or of any other ordinance of the jurisdiction. Permits presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this chapter or other ordinances of the jurisdiction shall not be valid. The issuance of a permit based on construction documents and other data shall not prevent the fire code official from requiring the correction of errors in the construction documents and other data. Any addition to or alteration of approved construction documents shall be approved in advance by the fire code official, as evidenced by the issuance of a new or amended permit. (q)  Information on the permit. The fire code official shall issue all permits required by this chapter on an approved form furnished for that purpose. The permit shall contain a general description of the operation or occupancy and its location and any other information required by the fire code official. Issued permits shall bear the signature of the fire code official or other approved legal authorization. (r)  Revocation. The fire code official is authorized to revoke a permit issued under the provisions of this chapter when it is found by inspection or otherwise that there has been a false statement or misrepresentation as to the material facts in the application or construction documents on which the permit or approval was based including, but not limited to, any one of the following: (1)  The permit is used for a location or establishment other than that for which it was issued. (2)  The permit is used for a condition or activity other than that listed in the permit. (3)  Conditions and limitations set forth in the permit have been violated. (4)  There have been any false statements or misrepresentations as to the material fact in the application for permit or plans submitted or a condition of the permit. (5)  The permit is used by a different person or firm than the name for which it was issued. (6)  The permittee failed, refused or neglected to comply with orders or notices duly served in accordance with the provisions of this code within the time provided therein. (7)  The permit was issued in error or in violation of an ordinance, regulation or this code. (s)  Required operational permits. The fire code official is authorized to issue operational permits for the following operations: (1)  Explosives. An operational permit is required for the manufacture, storage, handling, sale or use of any quantity of explosive, explosive material, fireworks, or pyrotechnic special effects. (2)  Tents, temporary membrane structures, and canopies. An operational permit is required to operate an air-supported temporary membrane structure or a tent having an area in excess of 200 square feet (19 m2), or a canopy in excess of 400 square feet (37 m2). (Ord. of 7-3-07, § 5) 
Sec. 3-7-9. - Hazardous materials response cost recovery. (a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish uniform criteria for recovering costs associated with the emergency response of the Department of Fire and Emergency Services to hazardous materials incidents. (b)  Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following words or phrases shall have the meanings below:     Extra hazardous materials incident means a hazardous materials response that requires more apparatus, personnel, equipment, and/or supplies than was dispatched upon the initial response, and which extends for a period of less than three hours in duration.     Hazardous materials incident means a release or spill of any material considered to be dangerous to the general public or the environment (as defined by the Environmental Protection Agency, Georgia Department of Natural Resources, Georgia Fire Prevention Code).     Major hazardous materials incident means a hazardous materials response that requires more apparatus, personnel, equipment, and/or supplies than was dispatched upon the initial response, and which extends for a period of three hours or more in duration.     Routine hazardous materials incident means a hazardous materials response that requires no more apparatus, personnel, equipment and/or supplies than was dispatched upon the initial response, and which extends for a period of less than three hours in duration. (c)  Policy. (1)  Athens-Clarke County recognizes the need for emergency hazardous materials response within the jurisdictional limits of Athens-Clarke County. Therefore, no person or agency requiring an emergency hazardous materials response shall be denied those services due to a lack of insurance coverage or the inability to pay for those services. (2)  The Athens-Clarke County Department of Fire and Emergency Services provides emergency hazardous materials response only, and does not act as a cleanup contractor, and does not provide cleanup or disposal services. (3)  Any applicable services rendered to a person, entity or agency shall be billed to that person, entity or agency. (4)  The fire chief, in his sole discretion, may waive reimbursement in instances where only minimal response services were required. (5)  Other emergency response agencies assisting the Department of Fire and Emergency Services may submit their list of expenses to Fire Department for inclusion in the bill submitted to the responsible person, entity or agency. Neither Athens-Clarke County, nor its fire department, shall accept any liability for payment of such costs incurred by other emergency response agencies. (d)  Procedure for billing services. (1)  A detailed listing of hazardous materials response services provided to persons, entities and/or agencies will be compiled by the Department of Fire and Emergency Services. This information shall be forwarded to the Athens-Clarke County Finance Department, which shall be responsible for the billing. This information shall include: a.  Name and address of the owner, lessee, occupant and/or responsible party(s); b.  Date, time and location of incident; c.  Department of Fire and Emergency Services fire incident report number; d.  Description of services rendered; e.  Itemized list of costs. (2)  The applicable charges for services shall be determined by reference to the following: a.  Response to a routine hazardous materials incident: A routine hazardous materials response shall have standardized recovery costs. Recovery cost charges shall begin upon arrival of the first responding fire department unit(s), and shall include, but not limited to: 1.  Loss, consumption, repair, and decontamination of equipment, vehicles, instruments, clothing, supplies and other items, at actual cost; 2.  Miscellaneous expenses, at actual cost; 3.  A charge for billing and processing of two percent of total costs. b.  Response to an extra hazardous materials incident: An extra hazardous materials response shall have standardized recovery costs. Recovery cost charges shall begin upon arrival of the first responding fire department unit(s), and shall include, but not limited to: 1.  Hazardous materials responders, at actual hourly rate per hour, per person for on-duty response and actual over-time rates per hour for off-duty response; 2.  Cost for loss, consumption, repair, and decontamination of equipment, vehicles, instruments, clothing, supplies and other items, at actual cost; 3.  Subsistence supplies, at actual cost; 4.  Miscellaneous expenses, at actual cost; 5.  A charge for billing and processing of two percent of total costs. c.  Response to a major hazardous materials incident: A major hazardous materials response shall have standardized recovery costs. Recovery cost charges for items 1. through 6. below shall begin upon arrival of the first responding fire department unit, and shall include, but not limited to: 1.  Hazardous materials responders, at actual hourly rate per hour, per person for on-duty response and actual over-time rates per hour for off-duty response; 2.  Hazardous materials command staff, at actual hourly rate per hour, per person for on-duty response and actual over-time rates per hour for off-duty response; 3.  Cost for loss, consumption, repair and decontamination of equipment, vehicles, instruments, clothing, supplies and other items, at actual replacement cost; 4.  Subsistence supplies, at actual cost; 5.  Miscellaneous expenses, at actual cost; 6.  A charge for billing and processing of 2 percent of total costs. Additional recovery cost charges shall begin after the third hour of on-scene operation (continuous operation is not required) and shall include, but not limited to: 7.  Each fire engine, ladder truck, rescue unit, hazardous materials unit and other equipment and apparatus needed in the response shall be charged based on the Federal Emergency Management Agency Schedule of Equipment Rates for like or similar equipment. (3)  All funds received from persons, entities or agencies that have been billed for services will be placed in an account designated for personnel costs, decontamination, repair, replacement and purchase of items of both durable and consumable categories for the Hazardous Materials Program of the Department. (Ord. of 7-3-07, § 5) 
CHAPTER 3-8. - AMUSEMENT DEVICES[9] Sec. 3-8-1. Definition. Sec. 3-8-2. Alcoholic beverages. Sec. 3-8-3. Age and time restrictions. Sec. 3-8-4. Posting of requirements. Footnotes: --- (9) --- Charter reference— Power of Athens-Clarke County to levy, assess and collect occupational and business taxes, § 8-114(3). Cross reference— Business license tax generally, Ch. 6-1; license for amusement devices, § 6-1-22. State Law reference— Replays on coin-operated devices, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35. 
Sec. 3-8-1. - Definition.     As used in this chapter, the term "amusement machine" shall mean a coin-operated machine or device which, whether mechanical, electrical or electronic, shall be ready for play by the insertion of a coin and may be operated by the public for use as a game, entertainment or amusement, the object of which is to achieve either a high or low score, which, by comparison to the score of other players whether playing concurrently or not, demonstrates relative skill or competence, or indicates in any other way competitive advantage of one player or team over another, regardless of skill or competence. It shall include devices such as pinball machines or any device which utilizes a video tube to reproduce symbolic figures and lines intended to be representative of real games or activities. The term "amusement machines" does not include vending machines in which are not incorporated gaming or amusement features, nor does the term include any coin-operated mechanical musical device. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 3) 
Sec. 3-8-2. - Alcoholic beverages.     The sale, use, consumption or possession of alcoholic beverages is prohibited on those premises of any establishment having amusement machines unless the establishment has an alcoholic beverage license issued by Athens-Clarke County. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 3) 
Sec. 3-8-3. - Age and time restrictions. (a)  Use of amusement machines by persons under the age of 16 years shall not be permitted during normal school hours on any day Clarke County schools are in session. (b)  No person under the age of 16 years shall be allowed to operate any amusement machine after the hour of 11:00 p.m. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 3) 
Sec. 3-8-4. - Posting of requirements.     Readily visible signs shall be posted indicating that the use of amusement machines by persons under 16 years of age shall not be permitted during the normal school hours and after the hour of 11:00 p.m. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 3) 
CHAPTER 3-9. - JUNKED AND ABANDONED VEHICLES—NUISANCE ABATEMENT[10] Footnotes: --- (10) --- Editor's note— Section 1 of an ordinance adopted Dec. 2, 2003, changed the title of Ch. 3-9 from "Junked and Abandoned Vehicles" to "Junked and Abandoned Vehicles—Nuisance Abatement." Cross reference— Junked vehicles on private property, § 3-5-8. 
Sec. 3-9-1. - Definitions. (a)  Vehicle is any means of conveyance, whether self-propelled or not, that is designed to travel on the ground or on water or in the air, including, but not limited to, automobiles, buses, motorbikes, motorcycles, motorscooters, trucks, tractors, go-carts, golf carts, campers, recreational vehicles, boats, airplanes, train cars and any means of conveyance which are designed to be pulled by motorized vehicles upon the roadway such as boat trailers, wagons, balers, motorcycle trailers, auto transport trailers, and any other trailer designed to haul specific items attached to motor vehicles on the roadway. (b)  Junked vehicle is any vehicle defined in subsection (a) above which vehicle either does not have lawfully affixed on it an unexpired license plate or tax stamp, or which vehicle is wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled, inoperative, abandoned, or discarded. (c)  Person shall mean any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or organization of any kind. (d)  Private property shall mean any real property within Athens-Clarke County which is privately owned and which is not public property as defined below. (e)  Public property shall mean any street or highway which shall include the entire width of the right-of-way publicly owned (or in which any public body has an easement for roadway purposes) and shall also mean any other publicly owned property or facility. (Ord. of 10-3-95, § 1; Ord. of 5-7-96, § 1; Ord. of 8-4-98, § 1) 
Sec. 3-9-2. - Storing, parking or leaving unattended any junked vehicle or abandoned motor vehicle prohibited; declared nuisance; exceptions.     No person shall park, store, leave, or permit the parking storing or leaving of any abandoned motor vehicle or any junked vehicle upon any public property within Athens-Clarke County for a period of time in excess of three (3) days. Nor shall any person park, store, leave or permit the parking, storing or leaving of any junked vehicle upon any private property within Athens-Clarke County for a period of time in excess of 30 days. The presence of an abandoned motor vehicle on public property or of a junked vehicle or any parts of such a vehicle on private or public property is hereby declared a public nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. This section shall not apply to any vehicle enclosed within a building on private property or to any vehicle held by an automotive maintenance, repair, or salvage facility, or similar business enterprise, lawfully licensed by Athens-Clarke County and properly operated in an appropriate business zone, pursuant to the zoning laws of Athens-Clarke County, or to any motor vehicle in operable condition specifically adopted or designed for operation on raceways or drag strips. (Ord. of 10-3-95, § 1) 
Sec. 3-9-3. - Notice to remove. (a)  Whenever it comes to the attention of Athens-Clarke County that any nuisance defined in section 3-9-2 exists in Athens-Clarke County upon private property, a notice in writing shall be served on the occupant of the land where the nuisance exists, and when there is no occupant, then notice shall be served on the owner of the land or his/her agent. Notice shall be served upon owner or occupant pursuant to section 3-9-5. (b)  Whenever it comes to the attention of Athens-Clarke County that any nuisance defined in section 3-9-2 exists in Athens-Clarke County upon public property, notice as defined in section 3-9-5 shall be served upon the registered owner of the vehicle, if such vehicle is required to be registered such as an automobile, and if not, notice shall be served upon the owner, if such owner is known to the marshal of Athens-Clarke County or to any other law enforcement officer whose duty involves the removal of said vehicle from the public property. (c)  If a basis for the notice to remove is that the vehicle is inoperative, then the officer serving said notice on the owner or occupant of private property on which a vehicle is located shall request the person served to demonstrate the operability of the vehicle to the officer. In the event that the person who is served shall demonstrate that the vehicle can be started and operated lawfully upon the roadway to the officer, then the officer shall make a note of same. However, in the event that the person served shall refuse or is unable to demonstrate the operability of the vehicle to the officer, then the officer shall make a note of same and shall introduce said note into evidence at any hearing or trial on the matter, and such evidence shall constitute a rebuttable presumption that the vehicle is inoperative. (Ord. of 10-3-95, § 1; Ord. of 8-4-98, § 2) 
Sec. 3-9-4. - Responsibility for removal. (a)  Upon proper notice and opportunity to be heard, the occupant or the owner, if unoccupied, of the private property on which the junked vehicle is located shall be responsible for the vehicle's removal. In the event of removal and disposition by Athens-Clarke County, the owner of the junked vehicle shall be liable for the expenses incurred as provided in section 3-9-6(b). (b)  In the case of a junked vehicle or abandoned motor vehicle located upon public property, the owner (if he is identified and given notice to remove as set out in section 3-9-3) shall be responsible for the vehicle's removal. In the event of removal and disposition by Athens-Clarke County, the owner of the junked vehicle shall be liable for the expenses incurred. (Ord. of 10-3-95, § 1; Ord. of 12-2-2003, § 2) 
Sec. 3-9-5. - Notice procedure. (a)  Athens-Clarke County shall give notice for removal to the owner or occupant of private property where a junked vehicle is located, at least 14 days before the deadline for compliance with this chapter. It shall constitute sufficient notice when a copy of the notice is posted in a conspicuous place upon the private property on which the vehicle is located and duplicate copies are sent by registered mail to the occupant or owner, if unoccupied, of the private property at his/her last known address. (b)  In the case of a junked vehicle or abandoned motor vehicle located on public property, it shall constitute sufficient notice when a copy of the notice requesting removal is affixed to the vehicle, and a duplicate copy is sent by registered mail to the owner of the vehicle at his/her last known address (if said owner is known to the officer whose duty it is to see that the vehicle is removed). Notice must be posted and mailed if owner is known, three days prior to removal of vehicle by Athens-Clarke County. (Ord. of 10-3-95, § 1) 
Sec. 3-9-6. - Notice and abatement. (a)  Content of notice for vehicles located upon private property. The notice described in section 3-9-5(a) shall contain a demand for removal within 14 days, and notice shall advise that upon failure to comply with the notice to remove, said nuisance will be declared a violation of the Code of Athens-Clarke County and shall be punished as provided for in section 1-1-5. (b)  Abatement by Athens-Clarke County. If the nuisance, as adjudged by the Municipal Court, is not abated as ordered within ten working days from the date of such adjudication, then Athens-Clarke County is authorized to remove any junked vehicle from the property in question. The cost to Athens-Clarke of this abatement shall be charged to parties adjudged responsible for such nuisance abatement. If the owner of the real property affected has been adjudged responsible for abatement, and the charges remain unpaid for a period of 30 days after payment is due, the manager or his designee shall cause an execution to be issued against the owner of the property for those charges. The execution shall be a lien on the property, and when recorded in the general execution docket of Athens-Clarke County, shall be a lien on all property of the defendant in execution from the date of such recording. (Ord. of 10-3-95, § 1; Ord. of 12-2-2003, § 3) 
Sec. 3-9-7. - Content of notice for vehicles located upon public property.     The notice, described in section 3-9-5(b), shall contain a demand for removal within three (3) days, and the notice shall advise that upon failure to comply with the notice to remove, Athens-Clarke County shall undertake such removal with the cost being levied against the owner of such vehicle and that said nuisance will be declared a violation of the Code of Athens-Clarke County and shall be punished as provided for in section 1-1-5. (Ord. of 10-3-95, § 1) 
Sec. 3-9-8. - Removal of motor vehicle from public property.     If the violation cited in the notice has not been remedied within the notice period for compliance, Athens-Clarke County shall have the right to take possession of the junked vehicle or abandoned motor vehicle and remove it from the public property where it is located. It shall be unlawful for any persons to interfere with, hinder, or refuse to allow such person or persons acting for Athens-Clarke County to remove said vehicle under the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. of 10-3-95, § 1) 
Sec. 3-9-9. - Notice of removal.     Within 48 hours of the removal of the vehicle, Athens-Clarke County shall give notice to the registered owner of the vehicle, if known, that said vehicle, (or vehicles) has been impounded and stored for violation of this chapter. The notice shall give the location of the vehicle (or vehicles) and the amount of costs incurred by Athens-Clarke County for removal and that said vehicle is subject to sale pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. of 10-3-95, § 1) 
Sec. 3-9-10. - Disposition of vehicles.     Upon removing a vehicle under the provisions of section 3-9-8, Athens-Clarke County shall after 10 days appraise said vehicle. If the vehicle is appraised at $500.00 or less, Athens-Clarke County shall execute an affidavit so attesting and describe the vehicle, including the license plates, if any, and stating the location and appraised value of the vehicle. Athens-Clarke County, after complying with the above, may summarily dispose of the vehicles and execute a certificate of sale. If the vehicle is appraised at over $500.00, Athens-Clarke County shall give notice of public sale not less than seven (7) days before the date of proposed sale. (Ord. of 10-3-95, § 1) 
Sec. 3-9-11. - Notice of public sale.     The notice of sale shall state: (a)  The sale is of abandoned motor vehicle or junked vehicle in the possession of Athens-Clarke County; (b)  A description of the vehicle, including make, model, license number and any other information that would accurately identify the vehicle; (c)  The terms of the sale; (d)  The date, time and place of the sale. (Ord. of 10-3-95, § 1) 
Sec. 3-9-12. - Public sale.     Any abandoned motor vehicle or junked vehicle sold at public sale by Athens-Clarke County shall be sold to the highest and best bidder. At the time of payment of the purchase price, Athens-Clarke County shall execute a certificate of sale in duplicate, the original of which shall be given to the purchaser, and a copy thereof to be maintained in the files of Athens-Clarke County pertaining to the public sale of personal property items. Should the sale for any reason be declared invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, Athens-Clarke County's liability shall be limited to the return of the purchase price. (Ord. of 10-3-95, § 1) 
Sec. 3-9-13. - Redemption of impounded vehicles.     The owner of any vehicle seized under the provisions of this chapter may redeem such vehicle at any time after its removal but prior to the sale or destruction thereof upon proof of ownership and payment to Athens-Clarke County of such sum as it may determine and fix for the actual expense of removal, and any preliminary sale advertising expenses, plus $10.00 per day for storage for each vehicle redeemed. (Ord. of 10-3-95, § 1) 
Sec. 3-9-14. - Rights of lienholders.     During the impoundment of any abandoned motor vehicle or junked vehicle removed from public property pursuant to this chapter and prior to the sale of any such vehicle, should any person assert that he is a lienholder on said vehicle or should any lienholder be identified by research into the ownership of said vehicle by any agent of Athens-Clarke County, then said lienholder shall receive any notice required by this chapter to be delivered to any owner of any said vehicle. Any such lienholder may obtain possession of the vehicle from Athens-Clarke County by paying off costs as described in section 3-9-13 above at any time prior to the sale of said vehicle as set out in this chapter. (Ord. of 10-3-95, § 1) 
Sec. 3-9-15. - Chapter not exclusive.     This chapter shall not be the exclusive regulation of abandoned or junked vehicles within Athens-Clarke County and shall be supplemental and in addition to the other ordinances, statutes or provisions of law heretofore or hereinafter enacted by Athens-Clarke County, the state, or other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction. (Ord. of 12-2-2003, § 4) 
CHAPTER 3-10. - BICYCLES[11] Sec. 3-10-1. Traffic ordinances apply to persons riding bicycles. Sec. 3-10-2. Parking. Sec. 3-10-3. Riding bicycles on public sidewalks; riding roller skates, roller blades, or skateboards on public sidewalks or on public streets. Footnotes: --- (11) --- Charter reference— Power of Athens-Clarke County to regulate roadways, § 8-114(11). Cross reference— Parking, motor vehicles and traffic generally, Ch. 3-3. State Law reference— Bicycles and play vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-2-290 et seq.; riding on roadways and bicycle paths, O.C.G.A. § 4-6-294. 
Sec. 3-10-1. - Traffic ordinances apply to persons riding bicycles.     Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by this chapter except as to special regulations in this Code and except as to those provisions of this chapter which by their very nature can have no application. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 4) 
Sec. 3-10-2. - Parking.     No person shall park a bicycle upon a street or highway other than upon the roadway against the curb or upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the bicycle or against a building or at the curb, in such manner as to afford the least obstruction to pedestrians. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 4) 
Sec. 3-10-3. - Riding bicycles on public sidewalks; riding roller skates, roller blades, or skateboards on public sidewalks or on public streets. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person over 12 years of age to ride a bicycle on any public sidewalk in Athens-Clarke County. It shall be unlawful for a person of any age to rollerskate, rollerblade, ride a skateboard, or ride a bicycle on any public sidewalk located within the area designated as the downtown tax district. (b)  It shall be unlawful for a person of any age to rollerskate, rollerblade, ride a skateboard, or ride a bicycle on any portion of a public sidewalk in any zoning district where the door of an adjacent building opens directly onto the sidewalk. The beginning and end of each such portion of sidewalk shall have a sign stating that riding a bicycle on the sidewalk is prohibited between the signs. (c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to rollerskate, rollerblade or ride a skateboard on any public street within the area designated as the downtown tax district. (d)  Any person who is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk shall yield the right of way to any pedestrian. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 4; Ord. of 2-5-2002, § 1; Ord. of 1-5-2010, § 1) 
CHAPTER 3-11. - LOST OR STOLEN PROPERTY[12] Sec. 3-11-1. Return to rightful owner; temporary retention as evidence. Sec. 3-11-2. Advertisement and sale. Sec. 3-11-3. Passage of title to property sold. Footnotes: --- (12) --- Charter reference— Police power of Athens-Clarke County, § 8-114(15). 
Sec. 3-11-1. - Return to rightful owner; temporary retention as evidence. (a)  The Athens-Clarke County Police Department shall seek the identity of the owner of any lost property coming into the possession of the police department or any stolen property recovered by the police department and shall notify the owner thereof, if such ownership can be determined, that the property is being held for return to the owner upon satisfactory proof of ownership. (b)  The Athens-Clarke County Police Department shall maintain records of all such property describing every article coming into its possession, stating all identifying numbers or symbols, the date it was first acquired, the circumstances of its acquisition, and a description of the efforts to ascertain the identity of the owner. (c)  Any person claiming ownership of any abandoned or lost property shall furnish satisfactory proof of ownership and shall adequately identify themselves, whereupon the property shall be delivered to such person. The person to whom property is delivered shall sign an affidavit declaring ownership of the property which shall be retained by the police department. If there is no other documentary proof of ownership available, such a declaration shall be deemed satisfactory proof of ownership of the property. The delivery of the property shall be without prejudice to the rights of any other person who may claim an interest in such property. (d)  If further possession of such lost or stolen property shall be necessary for use as evidence in the trial of any case, the property shall be retained in the custody of the police department. In his discretion, the chief of police may accept a forthcoming bond from the owner of the property to produce the property at trial or other proceeding where the property is needed as evidence. Property retained by the police department for use in the trial of a case shall be made available for restoration to the rightful owner, if known, as soon as practical after trial. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 5) 
Sec. 3-11-2. - Advertisement and sale. (a)  Lost or stolen property being held by the police department which is not claimed by the rightful owner thereof within 180 days from the date it came into possession of the police department shall be turned over by the police department to the department of general services for sale. Any property not sold at such a sale may be held for use or future sale by Athens-Clarke County and if it appears that such property is unusable by Athens-Clarke County and that the expense of holding and retaining such property would exceed any proceeds derived from its sale, then Athens-Clarke County may destroy such property. Appropriate records shall be maintained concerning such destruction. (b)  When any such property is to be sold, the department of central services shall then publish a notice of sale once a week for four (4) consecutive weeks in the newspaper in which sheriff's sales are advertised. The notice of sale shall give a full and complete description of the property to be sold; the time, date, place and terms of the sale; and shall state that the property to be sold was lost or stolen and recovered by the police department more than 180 days prior to the date of publication of the notice. A copy of the notice of sale shall be posted in the courthouse at least 30 days prior to the sale. (c)  All sales shall be reported by the general services department to the mayor and commission at the next regular meeting following such sale. (d)  The proceeds of such sale shall be paid into the general fund of Athens-Clarke County. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 5; Ord. of 7-2-96, § 1; Ord. of 7-6-99, § 1) 
Sec. 3-11-3. - Passage of title to property sold.     Athens-Clarke County shall not make any warranty of title to any property so sold. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 5) 
CHAPTER 3-12. - LITTER[13] Sec. 3-12-1. Definitions. Sec. 3-12-2. Litter in public places. Sec. 3-12-3. Placement of litter in receptacles so as to prevent scattering. Sec. 3-12-4. Sweeping litter into gutter prohibited; keeping sidewalk clean—Generally. Sec. 3-12-5. Same—Merchant's duty. Sec. 3-12-6. Litter thrown by persons in vehicles. Sec. 3-12-7. Truck loads or tires causing litter. Sec. 3-12-8. Litter in parks. Sec. 3-12-9. Litter in lakes and fountains, etc. Sec. 3-12-10. Throwing or distributing commercial hand bills in public places. Sec. 3-12-11. Placing commercial and noncommercial hand bills on vehicles. Sec. 3-12-12. Evidence of violating sections 3-12-10, 3-12-11, and 3-12-17. Sec. 3-12-13. Depositing commercial and noncommercial handbills on uninhabited or vacant premises. Sec. 3-12-14. Distribution of handbills where properly posted. Sec. 3-12-15. Distributing commercial and noncommercial handbills at inhabited private premises. Sec. 3-12-16. Dropping litter from aircraft. Sec. 3-12-17. Posting notices prohibited. Sec. 3-12-18. Litter on occupied private property. Sec. 3-12-19. Private property to be maintained free of litter. Sec. 3-12-20. Litter on vacant lots. Sec. 3-12-21. Clearing litter from open private property by Athens-Clarke County. Sec. 3-12-22. Penalties. Sec. 3-12-23. Glass containers prohibited. Footnotes: --- (13) --- Charter reference— Powers of Athens-Clarke County with regards to health and waste disposal, § 8-114(17), (21). 
Sec. 3-12-1. - Definitions.     For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein:     Aircraft: Any contrivance now known or hereafter invented, used or designated for navigation or for flight in the air. The term "aircraft" includes helicopters and lighter-than-air dirigibles and balloons.     Authorized private receptacle: A litter storage and collection receptacle as required and authorized under the rules, regulations and ordinances of Athens-Clarke County.     Commercial handbill: Any printed or written matter, any sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet, or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of literature: (1)  Which advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity or thing; (2)  Which directs attention to any business or mercantile or commercial establishment or other activity, for the purpose of either directly or indirectly promoting the interest thereof. (3)  Which directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or any event of any kind for which an admission fee is charged for the purpose of private gain or profit; but the terms of this section shall not apply where an admission fee is charged or a collection is taken up for the purpose of defraying the expenses incident to such meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition, or event of any kind, when it is held or given or takes place in connection with the dissemination of information. Provided, however, that nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to authorize the holding, giving or taking place of any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind without a license, where such license is or may be required by law of this state or under any ordinance of Athens-Clarke County; or (4)  Which, while containing reading matter other than advertising matter, is predominantly and essentially an advertisement and is distributed or circulated for advertising purposes for the private benefit and gain of any person so engaged as an advertiser or distributor.     Garbage: Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.     Litter: "Refuse" or "garbage" as defined herein.     Newspaper: Any newspaper of general circulation as defined by general law, any newspaper duly entered with the United States Postal Service in accordance with federal statute or regulation, and any newspaper filed and recorded with any recording officer as provided by general law; and, in addition thereto, includes any periodical or current magazine, regularly published with not less than four (4) issues per year and sold to the public.     Noncommercial handbill: Any printed or written matter, any sample, device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine, paper, booklet, or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of literature not included in the aforesaid definitions of a commercial handbill or newspaper.     Park: A park, reservation, playground, beach, recreation center or any other public area in Athens-Clarke County, owned or used by Athens-Clarke County and devoted to active or passive recreation.     Private premises: Any dwelling, house, building or other structure, designed or used either wholly or in part for private residential purposes, whether inhabited temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant, and shall include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule, or mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building or other structure.     Public place: Any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or other public ways and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds and buildings.     Refuse shall mean, but not be limited to, putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except body wastes) including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned automobiles or parts thereof, solid market and industrial wastes, combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery, wastes from construction activity, and similar materials.     Vehicle: Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, including devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 9) 
Sec. 3-12-2. - Litter in public places.     No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any street, sidewalk or other public place within Athens-Clarke County except in public receptacles, in authorized private receptacles for collection, or in official Athens-Clarke County disposal facilities. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 9) 
Sec. 3-12-3. - Placement of litter in receptacles so as to prevent scattering.     Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized private receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon private property. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 9) 
Sec. 3-12-4. - Sweeping litter into gutter prohibited; keeping sidewalk clean—Generally.     No person shall sweep or deposit in any gutter, street or other public place with Athens-Clarke County the accumulation of litter from any building or lot from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying property shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free of litter. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 9) 
Sec. 3-12-5. - Same—Merchant's duty.     No person owning or occupying a place of business shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within Athens-Clarke County the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying places of business within Athens-Clarke County shall keep the sidewalk in front of their business premises free of litter. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 9) 
Sec. 3-12-6. - Litter thrown by persons in vehicles.     No person, while a driver or passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or deposit litter upon any street or other public place within Athens-Clarke County or upon private property. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 9) Cross reference— Motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 3-3. 
Sec. 3-12-7. - Truck loads or tires causing litter. (a)  No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within Athens-Clarke County unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any loads, contents or litter from being blown or deposited upon any street, alley or other public place. Nor shall any person drive or move any vehicle or truck within Athens-Clarke County the wheels or tires of which carry onto or deposit in any street, alley or other public place mud, dirt, concrete, liquid wastes, sticky substances, litter or foreign matter of any kind. (b)  No person shall drive or move any loaded truck or other vehicle within or upon an Athens-Clarke County road or any other public road within Athens-Clarke County unless such vehicle and the load therein are covered by canvas or other material providing complete coverage, properly secured, so as to prevent any load, contents or litter from becoming loose, detached or blown from the vehicle or from dropping or escaping from the vehicle during movement of the vehicle. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 9) Cross reference— Motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 3-3. 
Sec. 3-12-8. - Litter in parks.     No person shall throw or deposit litter in any park within Athens-Clarke County except in public receptacles. Litter shall be deposited in such receptacle to prevent the litter from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of the park or upon any street or other public place. Where public receptacles are not provided, all such litter shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere as provided herein. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 9) 
Sec. 3-12-9. - Litter in lakes and fountains, etc.     No person shall throw or deposit any litter in any fountain, pond, lake or stream, bay or other body of water in a park or elsewhere within Athens-Clarke County. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 9) 
Sec. 3-12-10. - Throwing or distributing commercial hand bills in public places.     No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any sidewalk, street or other public place within Athens-Clarke County. Nor shall any such person hand out or distribute or sell any commercial handbill in any public place; provided, however, it shall not be unlawful on any sidewalk, street or other public place within Athens-Clarke County for any person to hand out or distribute, without charge to the receiver thereof, any noncommercial handbill to any person willing to accept it. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 9) 
Sec. 3-12-11. - Placing commercial and noncommercial hand bills on vehicles.     No person shall throw or deposit any commercial nor noncommercial handbill in or upon any vehicle; provided, however, it shall not be unlawful in any public place for a person to hand out or distribute without charge to the receiver thereof a noncommercial handbill to any occupant of a vehicle who is willing to accept it. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 9) 
Sec. 3-12-12. - Evidence of violating sections 3-12-10, 3-12-11, and 3-12-17.     It shall be unlawful for any person to direct, order or instigate the placing of commercial or noncommercial handbills in violation of sections 3-12-10, 3-12-11, and 3-12-17. Furthermore, in the prosecution for the violation of these sections, the fact that a person, a product or a place of business is advertised on a commercial or noncommercial handbill shall be prima facie evidence that the person advertised, or the proprietor of the product advertised, or the proprietor of the place of business advertised, as the case may be, was the person directing the placing, distributing or throwing away the advertising matter in question. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 9; Ord. of 3-5-96, § 1) 
Sec. 3-12-13. - Depositing commercial and noncommercial handbills on uninhabited or vacant premises.     No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any private premises which are temporarily or continuously vacant. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 9) 
Sec. 3-12-14. - Distribution of handbills where properly posted.     No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or noncommercial handbill upon any private premises if requested by any person thereon not to do so, or if there is placed on such premises in a conspicuous position near the entrance thereof a sign bearing the words: "No Trespassing," "No Vendors," "No advertisement," or any similar notice indicating in any manner that the occupants of such premises do not desire to have their right of privacy disturbed or to have any such handbills left upon such premises. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 9) 
Sec. 3-12-15. - Distributing commercial and noncommercial handbills at inhabited private premises. (a)  No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon private premises which are inhabited, except by handing or transmitting any such handbill directly to the owner, occupant or other person then present in or upon such private premises; provided, however, in case of inhabited private premises which are not posted, as provided in this chapter, such person, unless requested by any person upon such premises not to do so, may place or deposit any such handbill in or upon such inhabited private premises if such handbill is so placed or deposited as to secure or prevent such handbill from being blown or drifted about such premises or sidewalks, streets or other public places and except that mail boxes may not be so used when so prohibited by federal postal law or regulations. (b)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to the distribution of mail by the United States nor to newspapers (as defined herein), except that newspapers shall be placed on private property in such a manner as to prevent their being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon private property. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 9) 
Sec. 3-12-16. - Dropping litter from aircraft.     No person in an aircraft shall throw out, drop or deposit within Athens-Clarke County any litter, handbill or other object. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 9) 
Sec. 3-12-17. - Posting notices prohibited.     No person shall post or affix any notice, poster, handbills or other paper or device, calculated to attract the attention of the public, to any lamppost, public utility pole or tree, or upon any public structure or building, except as may be authorized or required by law. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 9) 
Sec. 3-12-18. - Litter on occupied private property.     No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied property within Athens-Clarke County, whether owned by such person or not, except that the owner or person in control of private property may maintain authorized private receptacles for collection in such a manner that litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon any private property. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 9) 
Sec. 3-12-19. - Private property to be maintained free of litter.     The owner, occupant, or person in control of any private property shall at all times maintain the premises free of litter; provided, however, this section shall not prohibit the storage of litter in authorized private receptacles for collection. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 9; Ord. of 5-5-92, § 2; Ord. of 12-2-2003, § 1) 
Sec. 3-12-20. - Litter on vacant lots.     No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant private property within Athens-Clarke County, whether owned by such person or not. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 9) 
Sec. 3-12-21. - Clearing litter from open private property by Athens-Clarke County. (a)  Notice to remove. The Athens-Clarke County marshal is hereby authorized and empowered to notify the owner of any open or vacant private property within Athens-Clarke County or the agent that the conditions of such owner's property constitutes a danger to the public health, safety or welfare. Such notice shall be registered or certified mail, addressed to such owner at his last-known address. (b)  Action upon noncompliance. Upon the failure, neglect or refusal of any owner or agent so notified to properly dispose of litter dangerous to the public health, safety or welfare within 30 days after receipt of written notice or if the same is returned to the post office because of its inability to make delivery thereof, provided the same was properly addressed to the last-known address of such owner or agent, Athens-Clarke County is authorized and empowered to either remove the litter or to pay for its removal. (c)  Charge included in tax bill. When Athens-Clarke County has affected the removal of litter or has paid for its removal, the actual cost thereof, plus accrued interest at the rate of six (6) percent per annum from the date of the completion of the work if not paid by such owner prior thereto, shall be charged to the owner of such property on the next regular tax bill forwarded to such property owner by Athens-Clarke County and such charge shall be due and payable by such owner at the time of payment of such bill. (d)  Recorded statement constitutes lien. Where the full amount due Athens-Clarke County is not paid by such owner within 30 days after the disposal of such litter, as provided for in subsections (a) and (b) above, the Athens-Clarke County marshal shall cause to be recorded in the office of the clerk of superior court a sworn statement showing the cost and expense incurred for the work, the date the work was done, and the location of the property on which such work was done. The recordation of such sworn statement shall constitute a lien and privilege on the property and shall remain in full force and effect for the amount due in principal and interest, plus costs of court, if any, for collection, until final payment has been made. Such costs and expenses shall be collected in the manner fixed by law for the collection of taxes and shall be subject to a delinquent penalty of seven (7) percent if not paid in full on or before the date the tax bill upon which such charge appears becomes delinquent. Sworn statements recorded in accordance with the provisions hereof shall be prima facie evidence that all legal formalities have been complied with and that the work has been done properly and satisfactorily, and shall be full notice to every person concerned that the amount of the statement, plus interest, constitutes a charge against the property designated or described in the statement and that the same is due and collectible as provided by law. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 9) 
Sec. 3-12-22. - Penalties.     The punishment imposed for any violation of this chapter shall not exceed a fine of $500.00 or 60 days imprisonment or both; however, the minimum fine which may be imposed shall be not less than $50.00 for a first offense, $75.00 for a second offense, and $150.00 for a third or subsequent offense. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder. (Ord. of 4-7-92, § 9) 
Sec. 3-12-23. - Glass containers prohibited. (a)  Glass prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to possess any open glass container for the consumption of any beverage on the public streets, sidewalks or rights-of-way or in any public or semipublic parking facility within Athens-Clarke County, Georgia. (b)  "Semipublic parking facility" defined. The term "semipublic parking facility" shall include any privately owned area wherein motor vehicles may be parked by the public in conjunction with any business, enterprise, commercial establishment, office building, church, school or multiple-family residential building. (c)  Exemption. This prohibition shall not apply to any property owned by the Board of Regents of the State of Georgia. (Ord. of 3-1-94, § 1) 
CHAPTER 3-13. - NUISANCE ABATEMENT[14] ;adv=1;Sec. 3-13-1. Authority, scope and applicability. Sec. 3-13-2. Definitions. Sec. 3-13-3. Unsafe dwellings, buildings, structures, or properties. Sec. 3-13-4. Procedures and requirements to secure structures for up to three years. Sec. 3-13-4.1. Procedures and requirements temporarily to secure structures for up to sixty days pending compliance by demolition or repair. Sec. 3-13-5. Reoccupying a secured building or structure. Sec. 3-13-6. Inspection, complaint, hearing and order. Sec. 3-13-7. Undesirable vegetation. Sec. 3-13-8. Reserved. Sec. 3-13-9. Failure to comply with order to repair or to demolish. Sec. 3-13-10. Demolition. Sec. 3-13-11. Lien on property. Sec. 3-13-12. Reserved. Sec. 3-13-13. Service of complaints, notices, orders and other filings. Sec. 3-13-14. Nuisance conditions on property. Sec. 3-13-15. Eminent domain. Sec. 3-13-16. Right to enter and inspect. Sec. 3-13-17. Powers of public officer. Sec. 3-13-18. Code of Georgia. Sec. 3-13-19. Injunctions. Footnotes: --- (14) --- Editor's note— Ord. No. 92-10-124, § 1, adopted Oct. 6, 1992, amended the Code by repealing provisions formerly codified as Ch. 3-13, Nuisances, which derived from Ord. No. 92-04-53, § 11, adopted Apr. 7, 1992. In addition, Ord. No. 92-10-123, § 1, also adopted Oct. 6, 1992, enacted provisions designated and included herein as a new Ch. 3-13, §§ 3-13-1—3-13-18, Charter reference— Power of Athens-Clarke County regarding nuisances, § 8-113(24). Cross reference— Disorderly conduct generally, § 3-5-1; noises and disturbances, § 3-5-24; litter, Ch. 3-12. State Law reference— Dead Animal Disposal Act, O.C.G.A. § 4-5-1 et seq.; abandonment, discarding, etc., of containers which lock or fasten automatically, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-100; abatement of nuisances in cities, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5. 
Sec. 3-13-1. - Authority, scope and applicability. (a)  This chapter is enacted pursuant to the provisions of Title 41, Chapter 2, Sections 7 through 17, as amended, of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7 specifies the scope and purpose of this chapter. All powers and authorities granted to public officers and public authorities by the statute are hereby incorporated by reference so as to be assumed, delegated and granted pursuant to this chapter. The commission of Athens-Clarke County specifically finds that conditions of the character described in O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7 exist within Athens-Clarke County due to dwellings, buildings, structures or properties which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business uses due to dilapidation and not in compliance with applicable codes; which have defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; which lack adequate ventilation, light or sanitary features; or where other conditions exist rendering such dwellings, buildings, structures or properties unsafe or unsanitary or dangerous or detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare, or otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents of Athens-Clarke County; or which are vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes. Such dwellings, buildings, structures or properties are declared to be a public nuisance. Power is conferred upon Athens-Clarke to exercise its police power to repair, close, or demolish the aforesaid dwellings, buildings, structures or properties as provided in this chapter. (b)  All the provisions of this chapter may also be applied to private property where there exists an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions to those persons residing or working in the vicinity. A finding by any governmental health department, health officer, or Athens-Clarke County building inspector that such property is a health or safety hazard shall constitute prima-facie evidence that said property is in violation of this chapter. (c)  The provisions of this chapter shall apply to both residential and nonresidential property within Athens-Clarke County whether being occupied or not and whether being developed or not. (Ord. 10-6-92, § 1; Ord. of 11-2-99, § 1; Ord. of 12-7-2004, § 1) 
Sec. 3-13-2. - Definitions. (a)  Specific terms defined. As used in this chapter, the following words, terms and definitions shall apply: (1)  "Applicable codes" means (A) any optional housing or abatement standard provided in Chapter 2 of Title 8 as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, or other property maintenance standards as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, or general nuisance law, relative to the safe use of real property; (B) any fire or life safety code as provided for in Chapter 2 of Title 25 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated (O.C.G.A.); and (C) any building codes adopted by local ordinance prior to October 1, 1991, or the minimum standard codes provided in Chapter 2 of Title 8 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated (O.C.G.A.) after October 1, provided that such building or minimum standard codes for real property improvements shall be deemed to mean those building or minimum standard codes in existence at the time such real property improvements were constructed unless otherwise provided by law. (2)  "Closing" means causing a dwelling, building, or structure to be vacated and secured against unauthorized entry. (3)  "Drug crime" means an act which is a violation of Article 2 of Chapter 13 of Title 16 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, known as the "Georgia Controlled Substances Act." (4)  "Dwellings, buildings, or structures" means any building or structure or part thereof used and occupied for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business uses, or intended to be so used, and includes any outhouses, improvements, and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith and also includes any building or structure of any design. As used in this chapter, the term "dwellings, buildings, or structures" shall not mean or include any farm, any building or structure located on a farm, or any agricultural facility or other building or structure used for the production, growing, raising, harvesting, storage, or processing of crops, livestock, poultry, or other farm products. (5)  "Governing authority" means the mayor and commission of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia. (6)  "Interested party" means: a.  Owner; b.  Those parties having an interest in the property as revealed by a certification of title to the property conducted in accordance with the title standards of the State Bar of Georgia; c.  Those parties having filed a notice in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-3-9; d.  Any other party having an interest in the property whose identity and address are reasonably ascertainable from the records of the petitioner or records maintained in the Athens-Clarke County Courthouse or by the clerk of the court. "Interested party" shall not include the holder of the benefit or burden of any easement or right of way whose interest is properly recorded which interest shall remain unaffected; and e.  Persons in possession of said property and premises. (7)  "Municipal court" means the municipal court of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia. (8)  "Owner" means the holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee of record. (9)  "Public authority" means any member of a governing authority, any housing authority officer, or any officer who is in charge of any department or branch of the government of Athens-Clarke County, or state relating to health, fire, or building regulations or to other activities concerning dwellings, buildings, or structures in Athens-Clarke County. (10)  "Public officer" means the officer or officers who are authorized by O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7 through 41-2-17 and by this chapter to exercise the powers prescribed by this chapter or any agent of such officer or officers. For the purposes of this chapter the manager, or designees, shall exercise the primary responsibilities prescribed by this chapter and shall be the "public officer" defined in O.C.G.A. § 41-2-8(10). The Athens-Clarke County Director of Building Inspection, or his designees, is hereby designated as the public officer as defined herein. (11)  "Repair" means altering or improving a dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes in the jurisdiction where the property is located and the cleaning or removal of debris, trash, and other materials present and accumulated which create a health or safety hazard in or about any dwelling, building, or structure. (12)  "Resident" means any person residing in the jurisdiction where the property is located on or after the date on which the alleged nuisance arose." (13)  "Undesirable vegetation" means plants, which due to natural growth characteristics, constitute a negative effect on public safety, public health or public welfare. (b)  Definitions incorporated by reference. To the extent not stated above, the definitions set forth in O.C.G.A. § 41-2-8 are incorporated herein by reference. (Ord. 10-6-92, § 1; Ord. of 11-2-99, §§ 2, 3; Ord. of 12-7-2004, § 2) 
Sec. 3-13-3. - Unsafe dwellings, buildings, structures, or properties. (a)  Duty of the owner of dwellings, buildings, structures or properties . It is the duty of the owner of every dwelling, building, structure, or property within Athens-Clarke County to construct and to maintain such dwelling, building, structure or property in conformance with applicable codes in force in the jurisdiction, or such ordinances which regulate and prohibit activities on property and which declare it to be a public nuisance to construct or maintain any dwelling, building, structure or property in violation of such codes or ordinances. (b)  Standards for determining unfitness for habitation of unsafe dwellings, buildings or structures . The public officer may determine, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling, building or structure is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use if he finds that conditions exist in such building, dwelling, or structure which are dangerous or injurious to the health, safety, or morals of the occupants of such dwelling, building or structure; of the occupants of neighborhood dwellings, buildings or structures; or of other residents of Athens-Clarke County. Such building, dwelling, or structure is illegal and shall be abated by repair, demolition, or qualify for a secured building status in accordance with this chapter. Such conditions may include the following without limiting the generality of the foregoing: (1)  Any means of egress or portion thereof is not of adequate size or is not arranged to provide a safe path of travel in case of fire or panic. (2)  Any means of egress or portion thereof, such as, but not limited to, fire doors, closing devices and fire resistive ratings, which is in disrepair or in a dilapidated or nonworking condition such that the means of egress could be rendered unsafe in case of fire or panic. (3)  The stress in any material, member or portion thereof, due to all imposed loads including dead load, exceeds the stresses allowed in the Georgia State Building Code for new buildings. (4)  The building, dwelling or structure or portion thereof has been damaged by fire, flood, earthquake, wind or other cause to the extent that the structural integrity of the building or structure is less than it was prior to damage and is less than the minimum requirement established by the Georgia State Building Code for new buildings. (5)  Any exterior appendage or portion of the building, dwelling or structure that is not securely fastened, attached or anchored such that it is capable of resisting wind, seismic or similar loads as required by the Georgia State Building Code for new buildings. (6)  If for any reason the building, dwelling, structure or portion thereof is manifestly unsafe or unsanitary for the purpose for which it is being used. (7)  The building, dwelling, structure or portion thereof as a result of decay, deterioration or dilapidation is likely to fully or partially collapse. (8)  The building, dwelling, structure or portion thereof has been constructed or maintained in violation of a specific requirement of the standard codes or of a city, county or state law. (9)  Any building, dwelling, structure or portion thereof that is in such a condition as to constitute a public nuisance. (10)  Any building, dwelling, structure or portion thereof that is unsafe, unsanitary or not provided with adequate egress, or which constitutes a fire hazard, or is otherwise a danger to human life, or which in relation to existing use constitutes a hazard to safety or health by reason of inadequate maintenance, disrepair, uncleanliness, structural defects, dilapidation, obsolescence, abandonment, or any defects to any building, structure or dwelling or portion thereof increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities. (c)  Standards for determining unfitness for habitation dwellings, buildings or structure being used in connection with drug crimes. The public officer may determine, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling, building or structure is vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes upon personal observation or upon report of a law enforcement agency and evidence of drug crimes being committed. (d)  Property endangering the public health or safety. Any property where there exists an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions to those persons residing or working in the vicinity is illegal and in violation of this chapter. A finding by any governmental health department, health officer, or Athens-Clarke County building inspector that such property is a health or safety hazard shall constitute prima-facie evidence that said property is in violation of this chapter. (Ord. of 10-6-92, § 1; Ord. of 12-7-2004, § 3) 
Sec. 3-13-4. - Procedures and requirements to secure structures for up to three years.     The following procedures and requirements must be met in order to secure structures pending repairs. (1)  It shall be unlawful for a building owner to secure or cause to be secured a building without first obtaining a secured structure permit from the public officer. The owner must apply for and be approved for a secured structure permit and pay the required fees in the amount established in Title 7 Article 10 of this Code; and the public officer and/or building official shall then inspect such structure. (2)  To qualify for secured status, the building must be structurally sound (walls and roof); otherwise, the secured structure permit will be denied. (3)  The repairs needed to bring the structure into compliance with the Property Maintenance Code must not represent a cost that exceeds one-half of the fair market value of the structure as determined by the current ad valorem tax valuation or by an appraisal by a Georgia licensed appraiser. The property owner must provide, along with the application for a secured structure permit, a cost estimate for repairs and a valuation appraisal of the structure to the public officer for review and approval. (4)  The property owner must provide, along with the application for a secured structure permit, a schedule of repairs subject to the review and approval of the public officer. (5)  If the building is structurally sound, nonstructural interior portions (electrical wiring, plumbing, etc.) need not comply with appropriate codes while in secured status. (6)  Building or structure must remain vacant while in secured status. (7)  The Secured Structure Permit must be posted on the front of the building in a clearly visible location while the structure remains in secured status. (8)  All utilities must remain turned off while in secured status unless otherwise approved by the Public Officer. (9)  Building must be secured, windows and doors covered and secured. (10)  Reserved. (11)  The Public Officer shall notify the Police Chief and Fire Chief of buildings that have been approved for secured status by the issuance of a secured structure permit and also shall provide notification when the secured status permit has expired or has otherwise been revoked. (12)  It shall be unlawful for any person to enter or be inside a secured building or structure, except for the owner or duly authorized agent. Any person violating any provision of this paragraph shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in section 1-1-5. (13)  All secured structures must be maintained in a manner which minimizes the appearance of vacancy, including the prompt removal of graffiti. (14)  All secured structures shall be maintained in a manner which does not create an unreasonable risk of fire, including the removal of weeds and the proper maintenance of grass areas which may constitute a fire hazard. No secured structure or portion thereof may be used for the storage of flammable liquids or other materials which would constitute a safety or fire hazard. (15)  All secured structures including all adjoining yard areas shall be maintained free of debris, combustible materials, litter, and garbage. (16)  All exterior surfaces shall be applied with sufficient paint, stucco, or other finishes, in the same color or similar color as the adjoining areas, to weatherproof the vacant structure and to create a sufficient appearance of repair to deter unauthorized occupation. (17)  It shall be unlawful for any person to remove securing material on a secured building or structure. Any person violating any provision of this paragraph shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in section 1-1-5. (18)  The secured structure permit is valid for a period of 12 months from the issue date. The owner may make application for a secured structure permit for an additional 12 months. The owner must provide the documentation listed in (3) and (4) above along with the application and fee. The application for renewal shall be made no later than 30 days prior to the expiration of the current secured structure permit. Renewal of the permit is subject to the approval by the Public Officer and upon denial of the application to renew, the property will be subject to immediate nuisance abatement action. The secured structure permit may be renewed twice for a total of 36 months subject to the approval of the Public Officer. (19)  Periodic inspections of the structure and property will be performed by a code enforcement officer and/or building official. A report detailing the inspector's findings shall be included in the case file. If compliance with all of the requirements of this chapter is not present at the time of the inspection, enforcement action will be taken. In addition, the secured structure permit may be revoked by the Public Officer and nuisance abatement action initiated. (20)  It shall be unlawful for the holder of the secured building/structure permit during the permit year to violate any of the provisions of paragraphs (1) through (19) above. Any person violating any provision of these paragraphs shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in section 1-1-5. (Ord. of 10-6-92, § 1; Ord. of 12-7-2004, § 4; Ord. of 6-2-2009, § 1) Editor's note— Ord. of June 2, 2009, § 1, changed the title of § 3-13-4 from procedures and requirements to secure buildings and structures to procedures and requirements to secure structures for up to three years. 
Sec. 3-13-4.1. - Procedures and requirements temporarily to secure structures for up to sixty days pending compliance by demolition or repair.     The following procedures and requirements must be met in order temporarily to secure structures or temporarily to restrict access to a property prior to demolition of a structure or obtaining a building permit for the reconstruction of the structure: (1)  The Public Officer or the owner must have determined that the structure represents a hazard to life safety to the public and that such risk cannot be eliminated by affordable repairs as defined in Sec. 3-13-4(3). (2)  It shall be unlawful for a building owner to secure or cause to be secured such a building without first obtaining a Temporary Secured Structure Permit from the Public Officer. (3)  A Temporary Secured Structure Permit may be issued by the Public Officer for a maximum time period of 60 days prior to the repair or demolition of a structure which has been identified by the Public Officer as a nuisance. This temporary, short-term permit is for the purpose of restricting access to a structure or site that may pose an immediate hazard to life safety. (4)  The owner must obtain a Temporary Secured Structure Permit from the Public Officer for any structure that has been identified as a nuisance by the Public Officer so that the structure will remain secure until a building permit or demolition permit is issued and work has commenced on the repairs or demolition. Along with an application for a secured structure permit pending demolition or repair, the owner must provide to the Public Officer a schedule for repair or demolition and payment of the required fees in the amount established in Title 7 Article 10 of this Code. (5)  The building must be secured, windows and doors covered and secured. If the condition of the building prevents securing of the windows and doors, the site must be fenced in order to deter unauthorized entry to the property. (6)  All secured structures including all adjoining yard areas shall be maintained free of debris, combustible materials, litter, and garbage. (7)  The Temporary Secured Structure Permit must be posted on the front of the building in a clearly visible location while the structure remains in secured status. (8)  It shall be unlawful for the holder of a Temporary Secured Structure Permit issued by the Public Officer, pending compliance by demolition, to violate any of the provisions in paragraphs (1) through (7) in this section. Any person violating these provisions shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in section 1-1-5. (Ord. of 6-2-2009, § 2) 
Sec. 3-13-5. - Reoccupying a secured building or structure.     Before a building or structure can be reoccupied: (1)  The building or structure must be fully returned to compliance with building/fire codes; (2)  The building or structure must be reinspected by the public officer and/or building official; (3)  Approval of required plans, if applicable; historic preservation, if applicable; request and purchase of all required building permits, subtrade permits, etc., as may be required, for compliance with construction codes. (4)  No utilities shall be turned on until full compliance with construction codes (temporary service is permitted if necessary for construction work to bring building back in to compliance with construction codes). 
Sec. 3-13-6. - Inspection, complaint, hearing and order. (a)  Whenever a request is filed with the director of building inspections by any public authority or by at least five residents of Athens-Clarke County or by the director of building inspections on his own information charging that any dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer shall make an investigation or inspection of the specific dwelling, building, structure, or property. (b)  If the public officer's investigation or inspection identifies that any dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer may issue a complaint in rem against the lot, tract, or parcel of real property on which such dwelling, building, or structure is situated or where such public health hazard or general nuisance exists and shall cause summons and a copy of the complaint to be served on the interested parties for such dwelling, building, structure or property. The complaint shall identify the subject real property by appropriate street address and official tax map reference; identify the interested parties; state with particularity the factual basis for the action; and contain a statement of the action sought by the public officer to abate the alleged nuisance. The summons shall notify the interested parties that a hearing will be held before the municipal court, at a date and time certain and at a place within Athens-Clarke County where the property is located. Such hearing shall be held not less than 15 days nor more than 45 days after the filing of said complaint in the municipal court. The interested parties shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or by attorney and offer testimony at the time and place fixed for hearing. (c)  If, after such notice and hearing, the court determines that the dwelling, building, structure, or property in question is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the court shall state in writing findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the interested parties that have answered the complaint or appeared at the hearing an order: (1)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, structure or property can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, structure, or property requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter, or improve such dwelling, building, structure or property so as to bring it into full compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violation and, if applicable, to secure the structure so that it cannot be used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or (2)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, structure or property in order to bring it into full compliance with applicable codes relevant to the cited violations cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, structure, or property requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to demolish and remove such dwelling, building, or structure and/or all debris from the property. For purposes of this Code section, the court shall make its determination of reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, structure or property without consideration of the value of the land on which the structure is situated; provided, however, that costs of the preparation necessary to repair, alter, or improve a structure may be considered. Income and financial status of the owner shall not be factors in the court's determination. The present value of the structure and the costs of repair, alteration, or improvement may be established by affidavits of real estate appraisers with a Georgia appraiser classification as provided in Chapter 39A of Title 43 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, qualified building contractors, or qualified building inspectors without actual testimony presented. Costs of repair, alteration, or improvement of the structure or property shall be the cost necessary to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violations in force in the jurisdiction. (Ord. of 10-6-92, § 1; Ord. of 12-7-2004, § 5) 
Sec. 3-13-7. - Undesirable vegetation.     It shall be unlawful for the owner and/or occupant of any occupied lot of land in Athens-Clarke County, or the owner of any unoccupied lot in Athens-Clarke County, or for any agent or representative of any such occupant or owner, to permit or maintain on such lot any growth of undesirable vegetation. The complaint and inspection of undesirable vegetation shall be as set forth in section 3-13-6. (Ord. of 10-6-92, § 1) 
Sec. 3-13-8. - Reserved. Editor's note— Section 6 of an ordinance adopted Dec. 7, 2004, deleted former § 3-13-8 of the Code in its entirety, which pertained to placarding and derived from § 1 of an ordinance adopted Oct. 6, 1992. 
Sec. 3-13-9. - Failure to comply with order to repair or to demolish. (a)  If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair or demolish the dwelling, building, structure, or property, the public officer may cause such dwelling, building, or structure to be repaired, altered, or improved or to be vacated and closed or demolished. Such abatement action shall commence within 270 days after the expiration of time specified in the order for abatement by the owner. Any time during which such action is prohibited by a court order issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 41-2-13 or any other equitable relief granted by a court of competent jurisdiction shall not be counted toward the 270 days in which such abatement action must commence. The public officer shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of the building, dwelling, or structure a placard with the following words: 'This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use and does not comply with the applicable codes or has been ordered secured to prevent its use in connection with drug crimes or constitutes an endangerment to public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The use or occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful.' (b)  In addition, the placard shall bear the date posted, street address and number of the building involved and the signature of the director of the building inspection department. It shall thereafter be unlawful for any person to mutilate or remove such placard or for such building to be occupied until the required corrective action is taken. (Ord. of 10-6-92; Ord. of 11-2-99, § 4; Ord. of 12-7-2004, § 6) 
Sec. 3-13-10. - Demolition.     No person shall begin demolition until a permit for demolition has been obtained and all utilities have been cut off and capped at the street. The person who has secured the permit shall remove from the property all debris, trash, litter, rubbish, rubble and foundation exposed above the ground level; fill any excavation or other depressions to existing grade with clean dirt containing no more than 25 percent stone or masonry; and adequately slope and drain all filled areas as determined by the director of the building inspection department. (Ord. of 10-6-92, § 1) 
Sec. 3-13-11. - Lien on property. (a)  If the public officer has the structure demolished, reasonable effort shall be made to salvage reusable materials for credit against the cost of demolition. The proceeds of any moneys received from the sale of salvaged materials shall be used or applied against the cost of the demolition and removal of the structure, and proper records shall be kept showing application of sales proceeds. Any such sale of salvaged materials may be made without the necessity of public advertisement and bid. The public officer and governing authority are relieved of any and all liability resulting from or occasioned by the sale of any such salvaged materials, including, without limitation, defects in such salvaged materials. (b)  The amount of the costs of repair or demolition, including all court costs, appraisal fees, administrative costs incurred by the county tax commissioner, and all other costs necessarily associated with the abatement action, including, but not limited to, restoration to grade of the real property after demolition, shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. (c)  The lien provided for in paragraph (b) above shall attach to the real property upon the filing of a certified copy of the order requiring repair, closure, or demolition in the office of the clerk of superior court in the county where the real property is located and shall relate back to the date of the filing of the lis pendens notice required under this chapter. The clerk of superior court shall record and index such certified copy of the order in the deed records of the county and enter the lien on the general execution docket. The lien shall be superior to all other liens on the property, except liens for taxes to which the lien shall be inferior, and shall continue in force until paid. (d)  Upon final determination of costs, fees, and expenses incurred in accordance with this chapter, the public officer responsible for enforcement actions in accordance with this chapter shall transmit to the county tax commissioner a statement of the total amount due and secured by said lien, together with copies of all notices provided to interested parties. The statement of the public officer shall be transmitted within 90 days of completion of the repairs, demolition, or closure. It shall be the duty of the county tax commissioner to collect the amount of the lien using all methods available for collecting real property ad valorem taxes, including specifically Chapter 4 of Title 48 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated; provided, however, that the limitation of Code Section 48-4-78 which requires 12 months of delinquency before commencing a tax foreclosure shall not apply. A county tax commissioner shall collect and enforce liens imposed pursuant to this chapter in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-5-359.1. The county tax commissioner shall remit the amount collected to the governing authority of Athens-Clarke County. (e)  Enforcement of liens pursuant to this section may be initiated at any time following receipt by the county tax commissioner of the final determination of costs in accordance with this chapter. The unpaid lien amount shall bear interest and penalties from and after the date of final determination of costs in the same amount as applicable to interest and penalties on unpaid real property ad valorem taxes. An enforcement proceeding pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78 for delinquent ad valorem taxes may include all amounts due under this chapter. (f)  The redemption amount in any enforcement proceeding pursuant to this section shall be the full amount of the costs as finally determined in accordance with this section together with interest, penalties, and costs incurred by the governing authority and/or county tax commissioner in the enforcement of such lien. Redemption of property from the lien may be made in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-4-80 and 48-4-81. (g)  The governing authority of Athens-Clarke County may waive and release any such lien imposed on property upon the owner of such property entering into a contract with the unified government of Athens-Clarke County agreeing to a timetable for rehabilitation of the real property or the dwelling, building or structure on the property and demonstrating the financial means to accomplish such rehabilitation. (h)  Where the abatement action does not commence in superior court, review of the court order requiring the repair, alteration, improvement, or demolition of a building, dwelling or structure shall be by direct appeal to the superior court under O.C.G.A. § 5-3-29. (i)  In addition to the procedures and remedies in this chapter, the public officer may issue citations for violations of state minimum codes, optional building, fire, life safety, and other codes adopted by ordinance, and conditions creating a public health hazard and general nuisance, and seek to enforce such citations in a court of competent jurisdiction prior to issuing a complaint in rem as provided in this chapter. (j)  Nothing is this chapter shall impair or limit in any way the power of Athens-Clarke County to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise. (Ord. of 10-6-92, § 1; Ord. of 11-2-99, § 5; Ord. of 12-7-2004, § 7) 
Sec. 3-13-12. - Reserved. Editor's note— Section 7 of an ordinance adopted Dec. 7, 2004, deleted former § 3-13-12 of the Code in its entirety, which pertained to procedure for collection of amount due on lien and derived from § 1 of an ordinance adopted Oct. 6, 1992; and § 6 of an ordinance adopted Nov. 2, 1999. 
Sec. 3-13-13. - Service of complaints, notices, orders and other filings. (a)  Complaints issued by a public officer pursuant to this chapter shall be served in the following manner: At least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing, the public officer shall mail copies of the complaint by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, to all interested parties whose identity and address are reasonably ascertainable. Copies of the complaint shall also be mailed by first-class mail to the property address to the attention of the occupants of the property, if any, and shall be posted on the property within three business days of filing the complaint and at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing. (b)  For interested parties whose mailing address is unknown, a notice stating the date, time, and place of the hearing shall be published in the newspaper in which the sheriff's advertisements appear in such county once a week for two consecutive weeks prior to the hearing. (c)  A notice of lis pendens shall be filed in the office of the clerk of superior court in the county in which the dwelling, building, or structure is located at the time of filing the complaint in the appropriate court. Such notice shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices provided by law. (d)  Orders and other filings made subsequent to service of the initial complaint shall be served in the manner provided in this Code section on any interested party who answers the complaint or appears at the hearing. Any interested party who fails to answer or appear at the hearing shall be deemed to have waived all further notice in the proceedings. (Ord. of 10-6-92, § 1; Ord. of 11-2-99, §§ 7, 8; Ord. of 12-7-2004, § 8) 
Sec. 3-13-14. - Nuisance conditions on property.     Without limiting the generality of the provisions of section 3-13-3, paragraph (d), conditions constituting an endangerment to the health or safety of persons residing or working in the vicinity may include but are not limited to the following: (1)  The generation of smoke or fumes in sufficient amounts to cause odor or annoyance to the inhabitants of Athens-Clarke County. (2)  Maintaining a dangerous or diseased animal or fowl. (3)  The external or outdoor storage or use of refrigerators, freezers, stoves, air conditioners, and any other appliances shall be unlawful, except for those appliances held in connection with a licensed commercial establishment operated in an appropriately zoned district, or the residential use of one such appliance operated externally by the residents of the premises. All such appliances permitted to be stored externally shall be of the type that does not close or lock automatically. Any person violating any provision of this subparagraph shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in section 1-1-5. (4)  Stagnant water on premises. (5)  An accumulation of weeds, trash, junk, filth, or other unsanitary and unsafe conditions that create a public health hazard or a general nuisance to those persons residing in the vicinity. (6)  Any other condition constituting a nuisance under state law. (Ord. of 10-6-92, § 1; Ord. of 11-2-99, § 9; Ord. of 12-7-2004, § 9) 
Sec. 3-13-15. - Eminent domain.     Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the owner of any property from receiving just compensation for the taking of such property by the power of eminent domain under the laws of the State of Georgia or to permit any property to be condemned or destroyed except in accordance with the police power of this state. Procedures under this chapter shall not constitute the exercise of the power of eminent domain by Athens-Clarke County. (Ord. of 10-6-92, § 1) 
Sec. 3-13-16. - Right to enter and inspect.     The public officer, or designee, or any person authorized to enforce this chapter, and any sworn officer of the police department shall be empowered to enter any property and structure at reasonable times to inspect the condition or work being performed thereon or therein. (Ord. of 10-6-92, § 1) 
Sec. 3-13-17. - Powers of public officer.     The public officer is hereby authorized to exercise the following powers in addition to the other powers granted and set forth in this chapter: (1)  To investigate the dwelling conditions in Athens-Clarke County in order to determine which dwellings, buildings, or structures therein are unfit for human habitation or are unfit for current commercial, industrial, or business use or are vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; (2)  To administer oaths and affirmations, to examine witnesses, and to receive evidence; (3)  To enter upon premises for the purposes of making examinations; provided, however, that such entries shall be made in such a manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession; (4)  To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents, and employees as he deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter; and (5)  To delegate any of his functions and powers under the ordinance to such officers and agents as he may designate. (Ord. of 10-6-92, § 1) 
Sec. 3-13-18. - Code of Georgia.     Any reference to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated or O.C.G.A. shall include any amendment to a cited section as subsequently adopted. (Ord. of 10-6-92, § 1) 
Sec. 3-13-19. - Injunctions.     Any person affected by an order issued by the public officer may petition to the superior court for an injunction restraining the public officer from carrying out the provisions of the order, and the court may, upon such petition, issue a temporary injunction restraining the public officer pending the final disposition of the cause; provided, however, that such person shall present such petition to the court within 15 days of the posting and service of the order of the public officer. De novo hearings shall be heard by the court on petitions within 20 days. The court shall hear and determine the issues raised and shall enter such final order or decree as law and justice may require; provided however, that it shall not be necessary to file bond in any amount before obtaining a temporary injunction pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 41-2-13. (Ord. of 11-2-99, § 10; Ord. of 12-7-2004, § 10) 
CHAPTER 3-14. - POLICE SERVICE FEES[15] Sec. 3-14-1. Police service fees. Footnotes: --- (15) --- Charter reference— Powers of Athens-Clarke County with regards to police powers and police and fire protection, § 8-114(15), (35). 
Sec. 3-14-1. - Police service fees.     The police service fees shall be charged for services performed by the police department. The person or persons receiving these services shall pay such fees: (1)  Record check, each ..... $ 20.00 (2)  Private property accident reports, each ..... 24.00 (3)  Fingerprinting, each ..... 12.00 (4)  Photostat copy of accident and incident reports, each ..... 3.00 The public defender office, prosecutorial offices and other police agencies are hereby exempt from paying the fee for copies of incident reports for their official use only and for clients officially being represented by the public defender office. (5)  Photographs, each ..... 5.00 (6)  Verification of vehicle identification number of vehicles and self-manufactured trailers, each ..... 15.00 (7)  Wheel lock fee ..... 50.00 (8)  Good conduct letter plus record check ..... 25.00 (9)  Expungement ..... 50.00 (10)  Faxing or e-mail service for reports, in addition to other fees ..... 3.00 (11)  Copying audio tape, including costs of tape, each ..... 15.00 (12)  Copying video tape, including costs of tape, each ..... 20.00 (Ord. 4-17-92 § 16; Ord. of 12-3-96, § 1; Ord. of 4-2-2002, § 1; Ord. of 6-4-2002, § 3; Ord. of 6-2-2009, § 1) 
CHAPTER 3-15. - PANHANDLING Sec. 3-15-1. Begging and soliciting by accosting or forcing oneself upon the company of another; prohibited conduct. 
Sec. 3-15-1. - Begging and soliciting by accosting or forcing oneself upon the company of another; prohibited conduct. (a)  Begging or soliciting deemed not unlawful. Except when performed in the manner set forth in subparagraphs (b)(1) and (b)(2) of this section, it shall not be unlawful to ask, beg or solicit. (b)  Restrictions. It shall be unlawful for any person to ask, beg or solicit, which includes money or other things of value, or exhibit oneself for the purpose of begging or soliciting by: (1)  Accosting another; or (2)  Forcing oneself upon the company of another. (c)  "Ask, beg or solicit" defined. For the purposes of this section, "ask, beg or solicit" shall include, without limitation, the spoken, written or printed word or such other acts as are conducted in furtherance of the purpose of obtaining money or other things of value. (d)  "Accosting" defined. "Accosting," for the purposes of this section, shall be defined as approaching or speaking to someone in such a manner as would cause a reasonable person to fear imminent bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon his or her person, or upon property in his or her immediate possession. (e)  "Forcing oneself upon the company of another" defined. "Forcing oneself upon the company of another" shall be defined as continuing to request, beg or solicit in close proximity to the individual addressed after the person to whom the request is directed made a negative response, blocking the passage of the individual addressed, or otherwise engaging in conduct which could reasonably be construed as intended to compel or force a person to accede to demands. (f)  Certain behavior prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to act in a boisterous, turbulent or agitated manner, or who shall use profane, vulgar, loud or unbecoming language while under the influence of alcohol or other drugs while on the streets, sidewalks, or other public places within Athens-Clarke County." (Ord. 4-7-92 § 17) 
CHAPTER 3-16. - JUVENILE EVENING CURFEW Sec. 3-16-1. Purposes. Sec. 3-16-2. Definitions. Sec. 3-16-3. Minors prohibited from being upon streets and other public places at certain evening hours; exceptions. Sec. 3-16-4. Parental responsibility. Sec. 3-16-5. Jurisdiction of juvenile and municipal courts. Sec. 3-16-6. Severability. Sec. 3-16-7. Reserved. 
Sec. 3-16-1. - Purposes.     The Commission of Athens-Clarke County has determined that there has been an increase in juvenile violence and crime by persons under the age of 18 in Athens-Clarke County resulting in juveniles being involved in a wide range of unacceptable behavior by juveniles; that persons under the age of 18 are particularly susceptible by their lack of maturity and experience to participate in unlawful activity and to be victims of older perpetrators of crime; that there has been a significant breakdown in the supervision and guidance normally provided by parents for minors resulting in an increase in the crimes, substance abuse, and school dropout rates, juvenile pregnancy, and other illicit behavior. Athens-Clarke County has an obligation to provide for the protection of minors from each other and from other persons, for the enforcement of parental control over and responsibility for children, for the protection of the general public, and for the reduction of the incidence of juvenile criminal activities which are not easily controlled by existing laws and ordinances. The Commission of Athens-Clarke County has determined a curfew for those under the age of 18 will be in the interest of the public health, safety, and general welfare and will help to attain the foregoing objectives and to diminish the undesirable impact of such conduct on the citizens of Athens-Clarke County and will promote the public good, safety and welfare. Parental responsibility for the whereabouts of children is the accepted norm and legal sanctions to enforce such responsibility have had demonstrated effectiveness in many cities. The Commission of Athens-Clarke County has determined that a curfew ordinance will increase parental responsibility for minors within their control and decrease minor delinquency. (Ord. of 8-5-97, § 1) 
Sec. 3-16-2. - Definitions.     For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply: (a)  Emergency errand: A mission that results from an unforeseen combination of circumstances that call for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, or automobile accident, or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life. (b)  Minor: Any unemancipated person under the age of 18. (c)  Public place: Any place to which the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, alleys or rights-of-way, to include sidewalks, parks, playgrounds, malls, or other places or buildings open to the public; any cemeteries, school yards, bodies of water or watercourses; any privately or publicly owned places of amusement, entertainment or public accommodation including parking lots; and any vacant lot or land. (Ord. of 8-5-97, § 1) 
Sec. 3-16-3. - Minors prohibited from being upon streets and other public places at certain evening hours; exceptions.     It shall be unlawful for any minor under the age of 18 years to loiter, wander, stroll, or play in any public place unsupervised by his/her parent, legal guardian, or another adult over the age of 21, having the lawful care and custody of the minor and having the lawful authority to be at such places between the hours of 11:00 p.m. on any day and 5:00 a.m. of the following day; provided, however, that on Fridays and Saturdays the evening curfew shall begin at 12:00 midnight rather than 11:00 p.m.; and provided further that the provisions of this section shall not apply in the following instances: (a)  When the minor is upon an emergency errand directed by his/her parent, guardian, or other adult person 21 years of age or older having the lawful care and custody of the minor; (b)  When the minor is returning directly home from a school activity; (c)  When the minor is traveling to, or returning directly home from, lawful employment that makes it necessary to be in above referenced places during the proscribed period of time; (d)  When the minor is attending or traveling directly to or from an activity involving the exercise of First Amendment rights of free speech, freedom of assembly, or free exercise of religion; (e)  When the minor is engaged in interstate and intrastate vehicular travel through Athens-Clarke County with parental consent; (f)  When the minor is on the sidewalk adjoining the property where the minor resides or on the property where the minor resides or on either side of or across the street from the property where the minor resides and the adult owner or resident of that property has given permission for the minor to be there; and (g)  When the minor is married or has been married pursuant to state law. (Ord. of 8-5-97, § 1) 
Sec. 3-16-4. - Parental responsibility.     It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian, or other person having custody or control of any child under the age of 18 years to permit or, by insufficient control, to allow such minor to violate section 3-16-3 above. A person charged with violation of this section for the first time shall be given a warning citation. Upon subsequent violation, the person shall be charged with such violation and, if found guilty, such person shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-1-5 of the Code of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia. (Ord. of 8-5-97, § 1) 
Sec. 3-16-5. - Jurisdiction of juvenile and municipal courts.     Any minor under the age of 17 who violates section 3-16-3 above shall be subject to the jurisdiction of the juvenile court. Any minor 17 years of age who violates section 3-16-3 shall be subject to the jurisdiction of municipal court. (Ord. of 8-5-97, § 1) 
Sec. 3-16-6. - Severability.     If any provision, including any exception, section, subsection, part, sentence, clause, phrase, term, or portion of this chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof. (Ord. of 8-5-97, § 1) 
Sec. 3-16-7. - Reserved. Editor's note— Section 2 of an ordinance enacted Aug. 3, 1999, repealed § 3-16-7, which pertained to the sunset and review by commission provisions enacted by Ord. of Aug. 5, 1997. 
CHAPTER 3-17. - JUVENILE DAYTIME CURFEW Sec. 3-17-1. Purposes. Sec. 3-17-2. Definitions. Sec. 3-17-3. Minors prohibited from being upon streets and other public places at certain daytime hours; exceptions. Sec. 3-17-4. Parental responsibility. Sec. 3-17-5. Each violation deemed separate offense; affirmative defense for violation of section 3-17-3. Sec. 3-17-6. Jurisdiction of juvenile and municipal courts. Sec. 3-17-7. Disposition of violating minors. Sec. 3-17-8. Responsibility of parent or guardian for supervision of minors expelled or suspended from school. Sec. 3-17-9. Punishment for violation of section 3-17-8. Sec. 3-17-10. Affirmative defense to violation of section 3-17-8. Sec. 3-17-11. Severability. Sec. 3-17-12. Reserved. 
Sec. 3-17-1. - Purposes.     The Commission of Athens-Clarke County has determined that there has been an increase in juvenile violence and crime by persons under the age of 18 in Athens-Clarke County resulting in juveniles being involved in a wide range of unacceptable behavior including armed robberies, robberies, assault and batteries, drug use, breaking and entering; that persons under the age of 18 are particularly susceptible by their lack of maturity and experience to participate in unlawful activity and to be victims of older perpetrators of crime; and that there has been a significant breakdown in the supervision and guidance normally provided by parents for minors resulting in an increase in the crimes and other unacceptable behavior, such as illiteracy, juvenile pregnancy, increased school drop-out rate; Athens-Clarke County has an obligation to provide for the protection of minors from each other and from other persons, for the enforcement of parental control over and responsibility for children, for the protection of the general public, and for the reduction of the incidence of juvenile criminal activities which are not easily controlled by existing laws and ordinances. The Commission of Athens-Clarke County has determined a truancy ordinance for those of school age will be in the interest of the public health, safety, and general welfare and will help to attain the foregoing objectives and to diminish the undesirable impact of such conduct on the citizens of Athens-Clarke County and will promote the public good, safety and welfare. Parental responsibility for the whereabouts of children is the accepted norm and legal sanctions to enforce such responsibility have had demonstrated effectiveness in many cities. The Commission of Athens-Clarke County has determined that a truancy ordinance will increase parental responsibility for minors within their control and decrease minor delinquency. (Ord. of 8-5-97, § 1) 
Sec. 3-17-2. - Definitions.     For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply: (a)  Emergency errand: A mission that results from an unforeseen combination of circumstances that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, or automobile accident, or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life. (b)  Minor: Any unemancipated person under the age of 18. (c)  Public place: Any place to which the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, alleys or rights-of-way, to include sidewalks, parks, playgrounds, malls, or other places or buildings open to the public; any cemeteries, school yards, bodies of water or watercourses; any privately or publicly owned places of amusement, entertainment or public accommodation including parking lots, and any vacant lot or land. (d)  School day: Any day of the week in which school is in session and students are normally expected to attend. This term does not include any religious holidays for which a student's professed religion prohibits such student from school attendance. (Ord. of 8-5-97, § 1) 
Sec. 3-17-3. - Minors prohibited from being upon streets and other public places at certain daytime hours; exceptions.     It shall be unlawful for any minor under the age of 18 years to loiter, wander, stroll, or play in or upon any public place unsupervised by a parent, guardian or other adult 21 years of age or older having the lawful care and custody of the minor and having the lawful authority to be at such places between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 2:30 p.m. on any school day; provided, however, that the provision of this section shall not apply in the following incidents: (a)  When the minor is upon an emergency errand directed by his/her parent, guardian, or other adult person 21 years of age or older having the lawful care and custody of the minor; (b)  When the minor is traveling directly from home to lawful employment or returning directly home from lawful employment that makes it necessary to be in above referenced places during the proscribed period of time; (c)  When the minor is engaged in interstate and intrastate vehicular travel through Athens-Clarke County with parental consent; (d)  When the minor is enrolled in a valid home study program as authorized by O.C.G.A. § 20-2-690, and has written consent from a parent or legal guardian to be outside the home; (e)  When the minor has graduated from high school; (f)  When the minor is married or has been married pursuant to state law; (g)  When the minor has written proof from school authorities that he/she is excused from school attendance at that particular time; or (h)  When the minor is participating in an approved school or study activity which requires the minor to be off school property. (Ord. of 8-5-97, § 1) 
Sec. 3-17-4. - Parental responsibility.     It shall be unlawful for the parent or legal guardian of a minor under the age of 18 years to permit, or by insufficient control, to allow a minor to violate section 3-17-3 above. A person charged with violation of this section for the first time shall be given a warning citation. Upon subsequent violation, the person shall be charged with such violation, and if found guilty, such person shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-1-5 of the Code of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia. (Ord. of 8-5-97, § 1) 
Sec. 3-17-5. - Each violation deemed separate offense; affirmative defense for violation of section 3-17-3.     Each violation of this section [chapter] shall constitute a separate offense. It shall be an affirmative defense if the parent or legal guardian has initiated the jurisdiction of the juvenile court against the minor under age 17, prior to the time that the minor was found in violation of section 3-17-3 above. (Ord. of 8-5-97, § 1) 
Sec. 3-17-6. - Jurisdiction of juvenile and municipal courts.     Any minor under the age of 17 who violates section 3-17-3 above is subject to the jurisdiction of the juvenile court. Any minor who has attained the age of 17 and violates section 3-17-3 above is subject to the jurisdiction of the municipal court. (Ord. of 8-5-97, § 1) 
Sec. 3-17-7. - Disposition of violating minors.     A police officer shall transport any minor found in violation of section 3-17-3 above to a designated school district facility. A minor transported to the school district facility will be released to the custody of the school officials or to the custody of his/her parent or legal guardian. (Ord. of 8-5-97, § 1) 
Sec. 3-17-8. - Responsibility of parent or guardian for supervision of minors expelled or suspended from school.     If a minor is suspended or expelled from school, that minor's parent or legal guardian, for the duration of the suspension or expulsion, shall: (a)  Personally supervise the minor or arrange for a responsible adult 21 years of age or older to supervise the minor at the times that the minor would have been required to be in attendance at school had he/she not been expelled or suspended; and (b)  Prohibit the minor from being in any public place at the times the minor would have been required to be in attendance at school had he/she not been suspended or expelled unless: (1)  The minor is accompanied by his/her parent or legal guardian or a responsible adult, 21 years of age or older, selected by the parent or legal guardian to supervise the minor; or (2)  The minor is actually and lawfully employed or traveling directly to or from the job site. (Ord. of 8-5-97, § 1) 
Sec. 3-17-9. - Punishment for violation of section 3-17-8.     Upon conviction of a violation of section 3-17-8, a person shall be punishable in accordance with section 1-1-5 of the Code of Athens-Clarke County. Each violation of this section shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. of 8-5-97, § 1) 
Sec. 3-17-10. - Affirmative defense to violation of section 3-17-8.     It shall be an affirmative defense if the parent or legal guardian has initiated the jurisdiction of the juvenile court against the minor under the age of 17, prior to the time that he/she violated section 3-17-8 above. (Ord. of 8-5-97, § 1) 
Sec. 3-17-11. - Severability.     If any provision, including any exception, section, subsection, part, sentence, phrase, term, or portion of this chapter is held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision, and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof. (Ord. of 8-5-97, § 1) 
Sec. 3-17-12. - Reserved. Editor's note— Section 2 of an ordinance enacted Aug. 3, 1999, repealed § 3-17-12, which pertained to the sunset and review by commission provisions enacted by Ord. of Aug. 5, 1997. 