ZONING ORDINANCE CHEROKEE COUNTY, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published in 1995 by Order of the Board of Commissioners 
____________ 
____________ 

CURRENT OFFICIALS  of  CHEROKEE COUNTY, GEORGIA 
____________ 
L.B. (Buzz) Ahrens, Chairman 
Steve West, District 1 Commissioner 
Raymond Gunnin, District 2 Commissioner 
Bob Kovacs, District 3 Commissioner 
K. Scott Gordon, District 4 Commissioner 
____________ 
Jerry W. Cooper, County Manager 
____________ 
Christy Black, County Clerk 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
By adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

 
ARTICLE 1. - TITLE 
An Ordinance of the County of Cherokee, Georgia, regulating the location, height, number of stories and size of buildings and other structures; the density of population; the uses of land, building and structures for industry, commerce, agriculture conservation, recreation, residence, public activities, preservation of the tax base, and other purposes; creating districts for said purposes and establishing the boundaries thereof; providing for transition to new zoning classifications; defining certain terms used herein; providing for the method of administration; amendment and enforcement and for the imposition of penalties for violations providing for a Zoning Board of Appeals and defining its powers and duties; repealing conflicting resolutions; providing for other purposes; and other matters. 
This Ordinance is adopted pursuant to the authority conferred by Article 9, Section 2, Paragraph IV, 1983 Constitution of the State of Georgia and laws enacted pursuant thereto. 
ARTICLE 2. - PURPOSE 
The zoning regulations and districts herein established have been developed in accordance with the comprehensive plan (master plan) for Cherokee County and are designed to lessen congestion in the streets; to secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers; to promote health and the general welfare, to provide adequate light and air, to prevent overcrowding of the land; to avoid undue concentration of populations to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other public requirements; to protect the tax base. The regulations have also been made with reasonable consideration for particular uses; with a view to promote desirable living conditions, sustaining the stability of neighborhoods protecting property against blight and depreciation, promoting aesthetics, securing economy in governmental expenditures, and preservation of revenue, conserving the value of buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use of land and structures throughout Cherokee County. 
The requirements set forth in this resolution are minimum permissible standards. It is expected that developers, property owners, the Cherokee County Municipal Planning Commission, and the county governing authority will normally strive for quality development which will exceed these minimum requirements. 
Changes in zoning and land use classifications will be made only if they bear a substantial relation to the public health, safety, morality, or general welfare. Changes will be granted where the existing classification or zoning results in little or no gain or benefit to the public while inflicting serious injury or loss on the landowner. 
ARTICLE 3. - SHORT TITLE 
This Ordinance shall be known, referred to and cited as "The 1992 Zoning Ordinance of Cherokee County." 
ARTICLE 4. - RULES AND DEFINITIONS 

4.1 - Rules. 
In the construction of this ordinance, the rules contained in this article shall be observed and applied, except when the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
4.1-1 Words used in the present tense include the future tense. 
4.1-2 Words used in the singular number include the plural number and words used in the plural include the singular. 
4.1-3 The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary. 
4.1-4 The word "may" is permissive. 
4.1-5 The word "building" includes the word "structure" and every kind regardless of similarity to building. 
4.1-6 The word "erected" includes the word "constructed," "moved," "located" or "relocated." 
4.1-7 The word "lot" includes the word "plot" or "parcel." 
4.1-8 The word "map" or "zoning map" means the Zoning Map of Cherokee County, Georgia. 
4.1-9 The word "person" includes the words "individual," "firms," "partnerships," "corporations," "associations," "governmental bodies" and all other legal entities. 
4.1-10 The word "used" or "occupied" include the words "intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied." 
4.1-11 The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter. 
4.1-12 All measured quantities shall be to the nearest integral unit of measure, and if a fraction is one-half or greater, the next highest integral unit shall be used. 
4.1-13 Where requirements are set based on number of days, days are computed based on the calendar, except that when the final date falls on a weekend or holiday, the day due shall continue until the next regular working day. 
4.2 - Use of definitions. 
For the purpose of this ordinance, certain words or terms are defined as indicated in this article. These definitions and all other provisions of this ordinance are subject to the rules of interpretation as listed below. Any words or terms not herein defined shall be as defined elsewhere in the zoning ordinance or, if not defined elsewhere in the ordinance, as defined in Webster's New World Dictionary of the American Language, Second College Edition, the said definition to be read in context with the purposes and provision of part of the ordinance it is being used to define. 
4.3 - Definitions. 
Accessory structure. A structure detached from a principal building on the same lot and customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal building or occupied. See figure 1, accessory structure. 
Accessory use. A use of land or of a building or portion thereof customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the land or building and located on the same lot with such principal use. 
Factors used to determine if a use of land or of a building is accessory to the principal use shall include: 
a.  Area devoted to the accessory use; 
b.  Frequency of the use; 
c.  Active versus passive activities associated with the use; 
d.  Number of employees and hours of operation; and 
e.  Whether the use is subordinate to the principal use, or is a different, alternative or additional use. 

Alley. A service way providing a secondary means of public access to abutting property and not intended for general traffic circulation. 
Alternative tower structure. Man-made trees, clock towers, bell steeples, light poles and similar alternative-design mounting structures that camouflage or conceal the presence of towers or antennas. 
Animal hospital. A building used for the treatment, housing or boarding of small domestic animals such as dogs, cats, rabbits, and birds or fowl by a veterinarian. 
Animal husbandry. The production of animals (livestock) and/or the by-product thereof. It does not include pets, such as dogs and cats. 
Animal quarters. Any structures which surrounds or is used to shelter, care for, house, feed, exercise, train, exhibit, display or show any animals, other than fenced pasture land for grazing. 
Antenna. Any exterior apparatus designed for telephonic, radio or television communications through the sending and/or receiving of electromagnetic waves. 
Berm. A mound of earth, or the act of pushing earth into a mound. See figure 2, buffer. 
Block. An area of land within a subdivision that is entirely surrounded by public streets, public lands, railroad rights-of-way, watercourses, or other well defined and fixed boundaries. See Figure 4.3-1. 

Buffer. A buffer is a portion of lot set aside for open space and/or screening purpose, to shield or block noise, light, glare, or visual or other nuisances, to block physical passage to dangerous areas; or to reduce air pollution, dust, dirt, and litter. A buffer may contain a barrier, such as a berm, wall or fence, where such additional screening is necessary to achieve the desired level of buffering between various activities. See figure 2. 

Building. Any structure attached to the ground which has a roof and which is designed for the shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, animals or property of any kind. 
Building line. A line parallel to the street line at a distance therefrom equal to the depth of the front yard required for the zoning district in which the lot is located (see setback line). 
Building height. The vertical distance measured from the threshold of the front door entrance to the highest point of roof surface of a flat roof; the deck line of a mansard floor; and to the mean height level between eaves and ridges of a gable hip, or gambrel roof. 
Cattery. Any place that regularly breeds, boards, trains, buys, sells or trades any cat. A cattery is also a kennel. 
Clinic. A building or a portion of a building where patients are not lodged overnight, but are admitted for examination and treatment by a group of physicians or dentists practicing together. 
Cluster development. A form of development for residential subdivisions that permits a reduction in lot area requirements, provided there is no increase in the number of lots that would normally be permitted under conventional zoning and subdivision requirements and the resultant land area is devoted to open space. 
Comprehensive plan. Any plan adopted by the Cherokee County Board of Commissioners, or portion of such plan or plans. This definition shall be construed liberally to include the major thoroughfare plan, master parks and recreation plan, or any other study, document, or written recommendation pertaining to subjects normally within the subject matter of a comprehensive plan as provided by the Georgia Planning Act of 1989, if formally adopted by the local governing body. 
Condominium. A condominium is a multiple dwelling in which each dwelling unit is owned or financed by the occupant, but in which halls, entrance ways and underlying lands are owned jointly. 
Conservation subdivision. A subdivision, as defined by Article 23 of the Cherokee County Zoning Ordinance, where open space is the central organizing element of the subdivision design and that identifies and permanently protects all primary and all or some of the secondary conservation areas within the boundaries of the subdivision. 
Contiguous common parcels. Parcels adjoining or touching other land at a common point and having a common owner, regardless of whether or not portions of the parcels have separate tax lot numbers, or were purchased in different land lots, or were purchased at different times. 
Cremation means the reduction of the dead human body to residue by intense heat or any mechanical, chemical, thermal, or other professionally accepted process. Cremation also includes any other mechanical, chemical, thermal, or other professionally accepted process whereby human remains are pulverized, burned, re-cremated, or otherwise further reduced in size or quantity. 
Crematory means any place where cremation is performed, other than a hospital, clinic, laboratory, or other facility authorized by the Department of Community Health for such purposes. 
Cul-de-sac. A street with only one outlet closed and terminated with a vehicular turnaround. See Figure 4.3-2. 

Cul-de-sac, temporary. A nonpermanent vehicular turn around located at the termination of a street or alley. 
Cultural facility. A structure or portion of a structure used as art gallery, museum, historical display, legitimate theater, library, and other uses similar in character to those listed. 
Day care facility. A structure or portion of a structure wherein is provided care and supervision of persons away from their place of residence for less than 24 hours per day on a regular basis for compensation. For the purposes of this ordinance, the term "day care" shall include but not be limited to the terms "nursery school," "early learning center," "pre-kindergarten," "private kindergarten," "play school," and "pre-school." 
Day care facilities for children are defined by the number of children and the type of structure in which they are located as shown in the table below: 

 
A day care facility for children may offer educational programs up through Kindergarten, as well as before and after-school programs for school age children. 
Deceleration lane. An added roadway lane, of a specified distance and which may include a taper, as approved by the county engineer that permits vehicles to slow down and leave the main vehicle stream. 
Dedication. The deliberate appropriation of land by an owner for any general and public use or purpose, reserving to himself no other rights than such as are compatible with the full exercise and enjoyment of the public uses to which the property has been devoted. 
Dedication plat. A plat that indicates property to be dedicated for public right-of-way or land for public use. 
Density. The number of dwelling units per acre of land. Gross density refers to the number of units per acre of the total land to be developed. Net density refers to the number of units per acre of land devoted to residential use. 
Development. Any manmade change on improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to, buildings, structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling, or permanent storage of materials or equipment. 
Director. The director of planning and zoning, or his designee. 
District. A section or sections of Cherokee County for which the zoning regulations governing the use of buildings and premises, the height of buildings, the size of yards and the intensity of use are uniform. 
Double frontage corner lot. See "lot, corner, double frontage." 
Duplex. See "dwelling, duplex." 
Dwelling. A building which is designed or used exclusively for residential purposes, including single-family, duplex and multifamily residential buildings, rooming and boarding houses, fraternities, sororities, dormitories, manufactured homes, and industrialized home but not including hotels and motels. Except as otherwise provided in the regulations, only one dwelling shall be allowed on each lot of land located in a district which allows residences. 
Dwelling, attached. A one-family dwelling attached to two or more one-family dwellings by common vertical walls. 
Dwelling, detached. A dwelling which is not attached to any other dwellings by common vertical walls. 
Dwelling, duplex. A structure on a single lot containing two dwelling units, each of which is totally separated from the other by an unpierced wall extending from ground to roof of an unpierced ceiling and floor extending from exterior wall to exterior wall, except for a common stairwell exterior to both dwelling units. See figure 3, dwelling types. 

Dwelling, multifamily. A dwelling containing more than two dwelling units. See figure 4. 
Dwelling, quadruplex. Four attached dwellings in one structure in which each unit has two open space exposures and shares one or two walls with adjoining unit or units. See figure 4, dwelling types. 
Dwelling, single-family. A building containing one dwelling unit. See figure 3. 
Dwelling, townhouse. A one-family dwelling in a row of at least three such units in which each unit has its own front and rear access to the outside, no unit is located over another unit, and each unit is separated from any other unit by one or more common fire resistant walls. See figure 4. 
Dwelling, triples. A dwelling containing three dwelling units, each of which has direct access to the outside or to a common hall. 
Dwelling unit. One or more rooms designed for the occupancy, cooking and sleeping of one or more persons living as a family. 
Dwelling, zero-lot-line. A development of single-family detached residences in which one interior side yard may be lawfully reduced to zero on any lot for the purpose of creating larger, more usable, and more easily maintained yard spaces, particularly on smaller lots. See figure 3. 
Easement. A grant of one or more of the property rights, or for the use of land for a specific purpose or purposes, by the property owner to and/or for use by the public, a corporation, or another person or entity. The purpose of the easement on or across a property shall be described in text and its exact physical location described by its survey measurement. See Figure 4.3-3. 

Escrow account: A type of subdivision improvement guarantee where the sub-divider deposits cash, a note, a bond, or some other instrument readily convertible to cash for specific face value specified by the county engineer to cover the costs of required improvements. 
Family. An individual, or two or more persons related by blood, marriage, adoption or guardianship, or a group of not more than four unrelated persons, occupying a single dwelling unit; provided however that domestic servants employed on the premises may be housed on the premises without being counted as a separate family or families. The term "family" does not include any organization or institutional group. 
Farming. The business of cultivating land, or employing it for the purposes of animal husbandry; the fertilization of the soil as well as caring for and harvesting the crops. 
FAA. Federal Aviation Administration. 
FCC. Federal Communications Commission. 
Fence. An artificially constructed barrier of any materials or combination of materials erected to enclosed or screen areas of lands. A privacy fence is one that is solid and of a height designed to effectively limit visibility. 
Final plat. The final drawing of a subdivision and, as applicable, dedication, prepared for filing for record with the clerk of the Cherokee County Superior Court, and containing all elements and requirements set forth in this ordinance. 
Floor area, gross. The sum of the gross horizontal area of the several floors of a building measured from the exterior face of exterior walls or from the centerline of a wall separating two buildings but not including interior parking spaces, loading space for motor vehicles, or any space where the floor-to-ceiling height less than six feet. 
Floor area ratio. The gross floor area of all buildings on a lot divided by the lot area. See figure 5, floor area ratio. 

Frontage. The side of a lot abutting on a street; the front lot line. See figure 9. 
Funeral establishment means a place where embalming or funeral directing is practiced and which is open to the public and transacting business relating to funeral services. 
Garage, general service. A building or portion thereof, other than a private, storage or parking garage, designed or used for equipping, servicing, repairing, hiring, selling or storing of motor-driven vehicles, but not including the storage of wrecked or junked vehicles. 
Garage, parking. A building or portion thereof designed or used primarily for the parking and storage of motor-driven vehicles. 
Garage, private. An accessory building designed or used for the storage of motor-driven vehicles owned and used by the occupants of the buildings to which it is accessory. 
Governing authority. Board of commissioners of the county or its designee. 
Gross floor area. See "floor area, gross." 
Habitat for endangered or threatened species: An area verified by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources as; 1) actually containing naturally-occurring individuals of a species that has been listed as endangered or threatened under the Federal Endangered Species Act, as amended, and, 2) being likely to support the continued existence of that species by providing for a significant portion of that species' biological requirements, and that meets the definition of "natural conditions" as defined by this ordinance. 
Health clubs. A facility designed for the major purpose of physical fitness or weight reducing which includes, but is not limited to, such equipment as weight resistance machines, whirlpools, saunas, showers, and lockers. This shall not include municipal or privately owned recreation buildings. 
Home occupation. An occupation customarily carried on within a dwelling unit or within an enclosed accessory building or detached garage for gain or support, involving the sale of only those articles, products or services produced on the premises, with equipment customarily used for household purposes and involving no display of article or products. 
Home owners association: An organization formed for the maintenance and operation of the common areas of a development, where membership in the association is automatic with the purchase of a dwelling unit or lot within the development, with the ability to legally assess each owner of a dwelling unit or lot and which has authority to place a lien against all dwelling units and lots within the development. 
Inert waste landfill. A disposal site accepting only wastes that will not or are not likely to cause production of leachate of environmental concern. Such wastes are limited to dirt, concrete, rock, bricks, yard trimmings, stumps, limbs, and leaves. This definition excludes industrial and demolition wastes. 
Industrialized home. A factory fabricated transportable building consisting of units designed to be incorporated at a building site on a permanent foundation into a structure to be used for residential purposes. A modular home or industrialized home shall be certified by the manufacturer to meet the approval of the state building administrative board (SBAB) to meet the same requirements as an on site-built home within Cherokee County. The term "industrialized home" includes the term "modular home." 
Junk vehicle. Any vehicle which either does not have lawfully affixed on it an unexpired license plate or tax stamp, or which vehicle is wrecked, dismantled, or partially dismantled to the extent it may not be lawfully driven on the public roads. 
Junk yard. A property used for indoor or outdoor storage, keeping or abandonment, whether or not for sale or resale, of junk including scrap metal, rags, paper or other scrap materials, used lumber, salvaged house wrecking and structural steel materials and equipment or for the dismantling, demolition or abandonment of automobiles or other vehicles or machinery or parts thereof. 
Kennel. Any place which regularly breeds, boards, trains, buys, sells or trades any dog. A kennel is a commercial activity. Structures housing more than eight [dogs] over eight months of age are presumed to be kennels. 
Kindergarten. Any premise's or portion thereof used for educational work or parental care of children of less than the age required for enrollment in the public school system. 
Land-disturbing activity. Any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state water or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in paragraph (5) of Code section 12-7-17. 
Land suitability analysis. A method used by land planners, in preparing land use plans at a community wide scale or land plans at a site development scale, to evaluate the fitness of land for various uses based at least partially on environmental criteria. The end product of land suitability analysis is typically a map or set of maps depicting the appropriateness of land areas for various land uses. 
Larger common plan of development or sale. A contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring, or are intended to occur, under one plan of development or sale. For purposes of this article, "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
Exempted from this definition is the construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre. 
Letter of credit. A type of subdivision improvement guarantee whereby a sub-divider secures an instrument from a bank or other institution or from a person with resources sufficient to cover the cost of improvements required by the county. The instrument pledges the creditor to pay the cost of improvements in case of default by the sub-divider. 
Livestock. The term "livestock" does not include a Vietnamese pot-bellied pig. Vietnamese potbellied pigs are allowed in all residential districts, not to exceed one per residence. 
Lot. A developed or undeveloped tract of land in one ownership legally transferable as a single unit of land. See figure 4.3-4, lot. 

Lot area. The net area of any lot shall be the area bounded by the lot lines, the right-of-way line of any street adjoining the lot, and the center line of the right-of-way of any private access road adjoining the lot. 
Lot area requirement. For the purpose of determining the lot area per dwelling unit, the total lot area shall be measured with the exclusion of land in the public or private streets right-of-way and land dedicated for park or school purposes. 
Lot, corner. A lot or parcel of land abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection, or upon two parts of the same street forming an interior angle of less than 135 degrees, or adjoining a curve street at the end of a block. 
Lot, corner, double frontage. A corner lot which has frontage on three or more streets. 
Lot coverage. The area of a zoning lot occupied by the principal building or buildings and accessory buildings. 
Lot depth. The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines measured within the lot boundaries. 
Lot, double frontage. See "lot, through." 
Lot, flag. A tract or lot of land of uneven dimensions in which the portion fronting on a street is less than the required minimum width required for construction of a building or structure on that lot. 
Lot frontage. The width in linear feet of a lot where it abuts the right-of-way of any street. 
Lot line. A line record bounding a lot which divides one lot from another lot or from a public or private street or any other public space. 
Lot line, front. The lot line separating a lot from a street right-of-way. 
Lot line, rear. The lot line opposite and most distant from the front lot line; or in the case of triangular or otherwise irregularly shaped lots, a line that is a minimum of 10 feet in length entirely within the lot, parallel to and at a maximum distance from the front lot line. 
Lot line, side. Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line. 
Lot of record. A lot which is part of a subdivision approved in accordance with land subdivision requirements, a plat of which has been lawfully recorded in the records of the Clerk of the Cherokee County Superior Court; or a parcel of land, the deed of which was lawfully recorded in the same office prior to effective date of this ordinance. 
Lot, through. A lot which fronts upon two parallel streets, or which fronts upon two streets which do not intersect at the boundaries of the lot. 
Lot width. The horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured at right angles to the lot depth at the established front building line. 
Lot width (cul-de-sac). For a lot having the majority of its frontage on a cul-de-sac, the lot width shall be the horizontal distance between the side lines of the lot, measured at the minimum required front yard (building setback) line or at a line parallel to said setback line which is no more than twice the minimum front yard setback distance from the street. 
Manufactured home. A dwelling defined in the state code as a manufactured home, subject to the standards and regulations of the Department of Housing and Urban Development adopted June 15, 1976 and as amended. 
Mobile home. A dwelling defined in the Georgia code as a mobile home, otherwise known as a "pre-HUD home" and constructed prior to June 15, 1976. Requirements for manufactured homes apply to mobile homes except where otherwise provided. 
Modular home. See "industrialized home." 
Multifamily dwelling. See "dwelling, multifamily." 
Natural conditions. The flora, fauna, soil and water conditions that would develop on a specific tract of land if all human interference were to be removed. The tract of land must have been undisturbed for a sufficient period of time for natural processes to dominate the tract. This period of time will vary among environments. 
Nuisance. An interference with the enjoyment and use of property. 
Nursery school. See "kindergarten." 
Off-site: Beyond the boundaries of the property in question. 
Office, professional. Include offices for professional such as accountants, architect, attorneys, chiropractors, dentists, doctors, engineers etc. 
Office, business. Include offices for general business, insurance, real estate etc. 
On-site: Within the boundaries of the property in question. 
Open space. Uncovered area open to the sky on the same lot with a building. 
Open space, public: An area within a development or subdivision designed and intended for the use and enjoyment of all residents or for the use and enjoyment of the public in general. 
Original tract. A unit of land which the owner holds under single or unified ownership, or which the owner holds controlling interest on the effective date of this resolution, where all land abutting said tract is separately owned by others, not related to or associated by business partnership with the owner. 
Parking lot. An off-street, ground level area, usually surfaced and improved, for the temporary storage of motor vehicles. See garage, parking. 
Parsonage. A single-family residential structure intended for the occupancy of the spiritual leader of the religious organization occupying the Place of Worship and his/her family. 
Pedestrian way. A public right-of-way or private easement across a block or within a block to provide access for pedestrians. 
Performance guarantee. A bond, letter of credit, cash equivalent, or other instrument provided by the developer and approved by the Cherokee County Attorney that insures funds will be available to the county if required subdivision improvements are not completed. 
Person. Any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of this state, any interstate body, or any other legal entity. 
Pet (household pet). Any animal owned or kept for pleasure rather than sale, which is an animal of a species customarily bred and raised to live in the habitat of humans and is dependent upon them for food and shelter; except that livestock and wild animals shall not be deemed pets. 
Place of Worship. A permanent structure built for the purpose of accommodating a religious organization in its exercise of religious worship, prayer, and/or religious instruction. 
Planning commission. The Cherokee County Municipal Planning Commission. 
Preliminary plat. A tentative drawing or map of a proposed subdivision. A preliminary plat is the basis for the approval or disapproval of the general layout of a land subdivision. 
Premises. A lot, parcel, tract or plot of land together with all buildings and structures existing thereon. 
Principal use: The primary and predominant purpose for which a lot is occupied and/or used as such use is listed and provided for in Permitted Uses Table 7.2. There shall be only a single principal use on each lot. Such principal use may be accompanied by accessory buildings and/or uses to the extent authorized in this ordinance. 
Professional engineer. An engineer duly registered or otherwise authorized by the State of Georgia to practice in the field of civil engineering. 
Professional surveyor. A surveyor duly registered or otherwise authorized by the State of Georgia to practice in the field of land surveying. 
Protective covenants. Contracts made between private parties as to the manner in which land may be used, with the view toward protecting and preserving the physical and economic integrity of any given area. 
Public infrastructure. The basic facilities, and installations necessary for land development including but not limited to transportation and communications systems, water and power lines, stormwater facilities, whether owned by the county or privately owned but utilized by more than one property owner. 
Putrescible wastes. Wastes that are capable of being quickly decomposed by microorganisms. Examples of putrescible wastes include but are not necessarily limited to kitchen wastes, animal manure, offal, hatchery and poultry processing plant wastes, and garbage. 
Quadruplex. See "dwelling, quadruplex." 
Recreation, active. Leisure activities that are facility oriented, such as swimming pools, tennis courts, and ball fields. 
Recreation, passive. Leisure activities that are natural resource oriented, such as hiking trails, conservation areas, and nature preserves. 
Recreational facilities, indoor. Any commercial or noncommercial indoor facility such as bowling alley, shooting gallery, video game center etc. 
Recreational facilities, outdoor. Any commercial or noncommercial outdoor facility such as miniature golf course, golf or baseball driving range, tennis court, swimming pool, drive-in theater etc. 
Religious organization. An assembly of people: (1) whose members organize voluntarily as a distinct entity as a means of religious exercise, endorsing a recognized creed and form of worship (2) which is organized and led by a licensed, commissioned, or ordained member of the organization; and (3) which convenes regular meetings that are regularly published to the general public in established places of worship for religious instruction, prayer, and/or worship. 
Reservation. A method of holding land for future public use by showing proposed public areas on a subdivision plat. 
Reserve strip. A strip of land across the end of, or along the edge of, a street, alley, or lot for the purpose of controlling access which is reserved or held until future street extension or widening. 
Residential care facility . A licensed facility where 24-hour care is provided for residents. The different types of residential care facilities are described by the number of residents and the type/level of care provided to residents, as shown in in the following chart and as further defined in subsequent definitions by the respective treatment and/or care provided: 

 
These types of Residential Care Facilities are further defined as follows: 
Personal Care Home . A licensed home where residents are provided with housing, meals, and 24 hours per day assistance with essential activities of daily living, such as bathing, grooming, dressing, etc., supervision, and counseling services, as applicable, but no medical or nursing care is provided. A Small Personal Care Home may house up to six (6) ambulatory residents, plus necessary staff, and a Large Personal Care Home may house seven (7) or more residents, plus necessary staff. The term "Personal Care Home" shall include, but not be limited to, the term "Community Living Arrangement". A Personal Care Home includes homes for the Elderly Without Nursing Care, Residential Mental Health Facility, Residential Mental Retardation Facility, Residential Substance Abuse Facility, and Residential Care Facility, Other, as such terms are reflected in Table 7.2 and otherwise defined in this Ordinance. 
Assisted Living Community . A licensed facility where residents receive 24-hour specialized care, which includes providing personal services, administering medications and providing assisted self-preservation. 
Nursing Home . A licensed facility which admits patients on medical referral only and for whom arrangements have been made for continuous medical supervision; it maintains the services and facilities for skilled nursing care, rehabilitative care, and has an agreement with a physician and dentist who will be available for any medical and/or dental emergency and who will be responsible for the general medical and dental supervision of the facility. 
Residential care facility, other . A type of residential care facility primarily engaged in providing residential care, supervision, and personal care services to children under the age of 18, however, age is not a limiting factor, unless expressly so provided by the facility, and except when such care and/or treatment is for mental retardation, mental health illnesses, or substance abuse illnesses, in which case the use shall be addressed under the respective, specific definition for that illness. Such other residential care facilities may include, but not be limited to, orphanages, homes for visually or hearing impaired, endangered youth, delinquent youth, and unwed teen mothers. Shall function as a small or large personal care home, depending on the number of residents. 
Residential mental retardation facility . A type of residential care facility primarily engaged in providing residential care services for persons diagnosed with mental retardation, including such things as room, board, supervision, assistance with essential activities of daily living, and counseling services. Shall function as a small or large personal care home, depending on the number of residents. 
Residential mental health facility. A type of residential care facility primarily engaged in providing residential care and treatment for patients with mental health illnesses. These establishments provide such things as room, board, supervision, assistance with essential activities of daily living, counseling services, and may provide other social services in addition to counseling. Shall function as a small or large personal care home, depending on the number of residents. 
Residential substance abuse facility . A type of residential care facility primarily engaged in providing residential care and treatment for patients with substance abuse illnesses. These establishments provide such things as room, board, supervision, assistance with essential activities of daily living, counseling services, and may provide other social services in addition to counseling. Shall function as a small or large personal care home, depending on the number of residents. 
Riding stable and academy. An establishment where horses are kept for riding or driving or are stabled for compensation or incidental to the operation of any club, association, ranch, or similar establishment. 
Right-of-way. An area or strip of land acquired by reservation, dedication, forced dedication, prescription, or condemnation, either public or private, intended to be occupied by a road, crosswalk, railroad, electric transmission line, oil or gas pipeline, water line, sanitary or storm sewer or other similar use, and where an irrevocable right of passage has been recorded for the use of vehicles, utilities or other similar use. 
Roof. The outside top covering of a building. See figure 7, roof. 

Salvage yard. See "junk yard." 
Sanitary landfill. A disposal site where putrescible wastes are disposed of using sanitary landfilling techniques. 
Sanitary landfilling. An engineered method of disposing of putrescible wastes on land by spreading them in thin layers, compacting them to the smallest practical volume, placing an earth cover thereon, and such other measures as are necessary to protect human health and the environment. 
Scenic views and sites: Those geographic areas containing visually significant or unique natural features, as identified in the comprehensive plan, or by other reasonable means. 
Schools, private, parochial and other elementary. Any places for teaching children grades one to seven, inclusive, which are not a part of the State of Georgia, but which teach the subjects commonly taught in the common elementary schools of the state. 
Schools, public. Any places for teaching children grades one to 12 inclusive and no other, and a part of the public school system as defined by the law of the State of Georgia. 
Screening. A method of visually shielding or obscuring one abutting or nearby structure or use from another by fencing, walls, berms or densely planted vegetation. 
Sensitive natural areas. Any area, as identified now or hereafter by the department of natural resources, which contains one or more of the following: 
1.  Habitat, including nesting sites, occupied by rare or endangered species; 
2.  Rare or exemplary natural communities; 
3.  Significant landforms, hydroforms, or geological features; and/or 
Other areas so designated by the department of natural resources that are sensitive or vulnerable to physical or biological alteration. 
Septic tank. An approved watertight tank designed or used to receive sewage from a building sewer and to affect separation and organic decomposition of sewerage solids, and discharging sewage effluent to an absorption field or other management system. 
Setback. See "yard." 
Setback line. That line that is the required minimum distance from the street right-of-way line or any other lot line that establishes the area within which the principal structure must be erected or placed. See figure 9. 
Shared driveway. A roadway serving no more than five lots on which homes exist or may be built under existing zoning and other regulations. 
Shopping center. A group of commercial establishments planned, constructed and managed as a total entity with customer and employee parking provided on-site, provision for goods delivery separated from customer access, aesthetic considerations and protection from the elements. 
Sidewalk. A hard-surfaced pedestrian access area adjacent to or within the right-of-way of a public road. 
Significant groundwater recharge areas. Any area as designated on Hydrologic Atlas, No. 18, Maps of the Most Significant Groundwater Recharge Areas of Georgia; 1988, as published by the Georgia Geologic Survey, Environmental Protection Division, Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
Single-family dwelling. See "dwelling, single-family." 
Slope. Degree of deviation of a surface from the horizontal, usually expressed in percent or degree; the ratio of the difference in elevation between two points on the ground, and the horizontal distance between these two points. For purposes of determining steep slopes, slopes shall be measured between two points on the ground separated by 500 feet or more. 
Solid waste. Putrescible and nonputrescible wastes, except water-carried body waste, but shall include garbage, rubbish, ashes, street refuse, dead animals, sewage sludge, animal manures, industrial wastes, abandoned automobiles, dredging wastes, construction wastes, hazardous wastes and any other waste material in a solid or semi-solid state not otherwise defined in these regulations. 
Steep slopes. Lands with slopes of at least 35 percent which can be calculated with aid of a United States Geological Survey 1:24,000, 7.5 minute quadrangle topographic map or other available topographic information. 
Stockyard. A place where transient cattle, sheep, swine, or horses are kept temporarily for slaughter, market or sleeping. 
Street. Any vehicular way, other than an alley, that: 
1.  Is an existing federal, state, county or municipal roadway; 
2.  Is constructed as shown upon a plat approved pursuant to law and is open to vehicle travel; 
3.  Is constructed and open to vehicle travel as approved by other official action of the board of commissioners; or 
4.  Is constructed and open to vehicle travel and shown on a plat duly filed and recorded in the clerk's office, Cherokee County Superior Court prior to the effective date of this ordinance. Land between the street lines, whether improved or unimproved, shall be considered part of the street. 
Street, private. A street which is privately owned and maintained, over which the general public has no right of use. (See also, Cherokee County Development Regulations 4.09 Private Streets) 
Structure. Anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached to something on the ground. 
Sub-divider: Any person, as defined by this ordinance, who undertakes the subdivision of land, and any person having such a proprietary interest in land to be subdivided as will authorize the maintenance of proceedings to subdivide such land under this ordinance, or the authorized agent of such person. 
Subdivision. A division of a tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, building sites, or other divisions for the purpose of sale or building development, whether immediate or future, including all divisions of land involving the dedication of a new street or a change in existing streets. The word "subdivision" includes re-subdivision and, when appropriate to the context, relates either to the process of subdividing or to the actual land or area which is subdivided. 
Subdivision, major. A division of a tract or parcel of land into six or more lots. 
Subdivision, minor. A division of a tract or parcel of land into not more than five lots and does not result in the creation of any public or private streets. 
Tower. Any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas, including self-supporting lattice towers, guy towers or monopole towers. The term includes radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common-carrier towers, cellular telephone towers, alternative tower structures and similar telecommunications towers or antennas. 
Tower and tower structure height. The distance measured from ground level to the highest point on the tower or tower structure including antennas. 
Triplex. See "dwelling, triplex." 
Use. General category of use such as commercial, industrial, and residential. 
Utility. Public or private services including, water or sewer piping systems, water or sewer pumping stations, electric power lines, fuel or gas pipelines, telephone lines, roads, cable telephone line, fiber optic cable, driveways, bridges, river/lake access facilities, storm water systems and drainage ways, and railroads or other utilities identified by the county. As appropriate to the context, the term "utility" may also include all persons, companies, or governmental agencies supplying the same. 
Variance. A grant of relief from the strict requirements of this ordinance which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this Code; a minimal relaxation or modification of the strict terms of this ordinance as applied to specific property when, because of particular physical surroundings, shape, or topographical condition of the property, compliance would result in practical difficulty or hardship. 
Vehicle. Any means of conveyance, whether self-propelled or not, that is designed to travel on the ground or on water or in the air, including, but not limited to, automobiles, buses, motorbikes, motorcycles, motorscooters, trucks, tractors, go-carts, golf carts, campers, recreational vehicles, boats, airplanes, train cars, and any means of conveyance which are designed to be pulled by motorized vehicles upon the roadway such as boat trailers, wagons, balers, motorcycle trailers, auto transport trailers, and any other trailer designed to haul specific items attached to motor vehicles on the roadway. 
Wild animal. Any living member of the animal kingdom, including those born or raised in captivity; but excluding human beings, livestock, dogs and cats, rodents, hybrid animals that are part wild, captive-bred species of common cage birds and aquarium-kept fish, amphibians and reptiles. 
Yard. An open space on a lot situated between the principal building or use on the lot and a lot line and unoccupied by any structure except as otherwise provided herein. See figure 9, yard. 

Yard, front. An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a principal building or use, extending the full width of the lot and located between the street line and the front line of the building projected to the side lines of the lot. On corner lot, the front yard shall be considered as parallel to the street upon which the lot has its least dimension. 
Yard, rear. An open space on the same lot with a principal building or use, unoccupied except by an accessory building or use, extending the full width of the lot and located between the rear line of the lot and the rear line of the building or use projected to the side lines of the lot. 
Yard, side. An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a principal building or use, located between the building or use and the side line of the lot and extending from the rear line of the front yard to the front line of the rear yard. 
Zero-lot-line. See "dwelling, zero-lot-line." 
Zoning. The power of Cherokee County to provide within its territorial boundaries for the zoning and districting of property for various uses and the prohibition of other or different uses within such zones or districts and for the regulation of development and the improvement of real estate within such zones or districts in accordance with the uses of property for which said zones or districts were established. 
(Ord. No. 96-15, § 1, 10-25-96; Ord. No. 98-O-11, 8-28-98; Ord. No. 2008-Z-003, 12-16-08; Ord. No. 2009-O-006, § IA, 10-20-09; Ord. No. 2011-Z-001, 3-1-11; Ord. No. 2012-Z-001, Exh. A, 3-20-12; Ord. No. 2015-O-008, Exh. A, 10-6-15; Ord. No. 2015-O-009, Exh. A, 9-15-15; Ord. No. 2017-O-004, § 1, 4-18-17; Ord. No. 2018-O-003, 4-3-18; Ord. No. 2018-O-014, § 1, 10-16-18) 
ARTICLE 5. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

5.1 - Interpretation. 
5.1-1 In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this zoning ordinance shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, morals and welfare, including those purposes, intents, objectives or similar language as set out in various articles of the ordinance. 
5.1-2 Where the conditions imposed by any provision of this zoning code upon the use of land or buildings or upon the bulk of buildings are either more restrictive or less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by any other provisions of this code or of any other law, ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation of any land, the regulations which are more restrictive (or which impose higher standards or requirements) shall govern. 
5.2 - Scope of regulations. 
Except as otherwise provided in article 14, "nonconforming uses," all buildings erected hereafter, all uses of land or buildings established hereafter, all structural alteration or relocation of existing buildings occurring hereafter, and all enlargements of or additions to existing uses occurring hereafter shall be subject to all regulations of this ordinance which are applicable to the zoning districts in which such buildings, uses or land shall be located. 
5.3 - Building permits. 
Building permits are required for all structures erected, converted, enlarged, restructured, moved or structurally altered and the provisions for said building permit shall be separately set out in the Building Code of Cherokee County. However, where a building permit for a building or structure has been issued in accordance with law prior to the effective date of this ordinance, and provided that construction is begun within one year of such effective date and diligently pursued to completion, said building or structure may be completed in accordance with the approved plans on the basis of which the building permit has been issued, and further may upon completion be occupied under a certificate of occupancy by the use for which originally designated subject thereafter to the provisions of section 14.2, permit procedure. 
5.4 - Access to public street. 
Every principal structure hereafter erected shall be on a zoning lot or parcel of land which adjoins a public street or an exclusive permanent easement of access to a public street; such exclusive easement to each individual lot to be at least 20 feet wide unless a lesser width was duly established and recorded prior to the effective date of this ordinance, or where such lot or parcel is a part of a neighborhood plan as outlined in Article 8, Section 8.4 of this ordinance. 
No exclusive permanent easement of access will be allowed to intersect another permanent easement of access unless at the point of intersection the total width of exclusive permanent easement is equal to 20 feet multiplied by the number of lots or parcels served. The total width is required from the point of intersection to a public street. 
However, a 60-foot wide access easement to a public street will be permitted to serve a minor subdivision, as defined by the Development Rules and Regulations of Cherokee County. Any subdivision of land of five or more lots or parcels of land shall require full compliance with the street standards and specifications as outlined in the Cherokee County Development Regulations. 
(Ord. No. 96-08, § 3, 4-9-96; Ord. No. 2000-O-7, 8-22-00; Ord. No. 2007-Z-002, 8-7-07) 
5.5. - Subdivision and plat approval. 
5.5-1  Authority, applicability and general provisions. 
a.  Authority and delegation. These regulations are adopted pursuant to powers vested in counties by the State of Georgia Constitution and pursuant to state administrative rules for the adoption and implementation of comprehensive plans and the protection of vital areas of the state. 
i.  Delegation of powers to director. The director of planning and zoning is vested with the authority to review, approve, conditionally approve or disapprove final plats of subdivisions not requiring the installation of public infrastructure and, lot combination plats, lot line adjustments, construction plans and final plats of subdivisions when such preliminary subdivision plat approval of construction plans has been obtained. 
The director of planning and zoning shall also be authorized to review and approve all subdivisions and re-subdivisions for conformity to the requirements of this Code, and to make reports and recommendations to the board of commissioners on subdivisions and re-subdivisions, and to administer, interpret, and enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
ii.  Delegation of powers to county engineer. The county engineer is vested with the authority to require and approve land development improvements and to require improvement guarantees for public improvements as specified in this ordinance, and as further required by the Cherokee County Development Regulations, adopted by the Cherokee County Board of Commissioners January 15, 2002 and as amended from time to time. 
b.  Applicability. The subdivision regulations of Cherokee County shall apply to all real property within unincorporated Cherokee County, but specifically excluding the subdivision of property as outlined in, "Exemptions From Plat Approval." 
c.  Effect of prior subdivision regulations. At the subdivider's request, a plat that received preliminary approval under prior subdivision requirements may be processed through the final plat process under such requirements. 
d.  Land is one tract until subdivided. Until property proposed for subdivision has received final plat approval and been properly recorded, the land involving the subdivision shall be considered as one tract, or as otherwise legally recorded. 
e.  All land subdivisions to comply. No plat of land subdivision shall be entitled to be recorded in the office of the clerk of the Superior Court of Cherokee County, and it shall be unlawful to record such a plat of land subdivision, unless and until it shall have been approved in accordance with the requirements of this ordinance. (State Law Reference O.C.G.A. 15-6-67 (d)) 
5.5-1.1  Division of land not a part of a larger common plan of development (aka minor subdivision). 
a.  Purpose. Property owners who desire to subdivide property for subsequent sale as independent tracts of land; and in which the land involved is not a part of a larger common plan of development; but otherwise meet all other county regulations regarding zoning and land development, may submit such subdivision of land to the county for review and approval as a final plat. It is the intent of the board of commissioners to provide for the division of land not a part of a larger common plan of development (minor subdivisions), whereby an original tract of land may be divided into not more than five individual tracts of land provided all tracts of land within the subdivision have appropriate frontage, access, and otherwise comply with all county regulations including, but not limited to the Cherokee County Zoning Ordinance, Development Regulations, Tree Preservation and Replacement Ordinance, etc. 
b.  Chain subdivisions prohibited. Divisions of land not a part of a larger common plan of development may be submitted to the county for review and approval following the procedure as a final plat. Such divisions of land provide certain advantages, in that a final plat is all that may be required for the purpose of subdividing the original tract of land into new lots, which tend to favor their use. Given these advantages, the prospect exists that sub-dividers may seek to divide a parcel via consecutive and/or contiguous final plats instead of filing for a preliminary plat as a larger common plan of development. It is the policy of the board of commissioners to prohibit the practice of "chain" subdivisions where the same land owner subdivides land and then files additional subdivision applications on common contiguous parcels, which collectively creates a larger common plan of development. It is also the policy of the board of commissioners to prohibit the division of land not a part of a larger plan of common development adjacent to each other within a two-year time period, in cases where part of an original tract of land is now owned by another person or entity and was transferred or sold to another owner with the apparent intent to circumvent the preliminary plat process. 
c.  Contiguous common parcels shown on subdivision plats. Contiguous common parcels, as defined by this ordinance, shall be referenced on all applications for subdivision of land, and contiguous common parcels shall be considered part of any application for subdivision of land, for purposes of determining whether or not the division of land proposed is a part of a larger common plan of development. Common contiguous parcels shall not be counted as lots in the case of a subdivision. 
d.  Limitations. This section only applies to the division of a single parcel into not more than five sub-parcels smaller than ten acres, and within any two-year period. In all other cases, a preliminary plat application must be filed and approved pursuant to the requirements of this ordinance. This provision shall not be construed to prohibit the approval of two contiguous subdivisions under separate ownership; however, this provision is intended to be construed liberally so that one property owner does not develop a subdivision on part of an original tract and transfer or sell another part of the original tract for the purposes of subdivision within a two-year period. 
e.  It is the intent that land abutting a subdivision that was owned by the sub-divider of the abutting subdivision shall not be subdivided for a period of two years, regardless of ownership without preliminary plan review. 
f.  County reservation. Cherokee County reserves the right to require any person seeking to subdivide land within the unincorporated areas of Cherokee County to submit a preliminary subdivision plat for review and approval where the county engineer or director of planning and zoning find that such plan review is necessary to conform to state laws and regulations. 
5.5-1.2  Preliminary plat and plans required prior to construction. No person shall commence construction of any improvements on any lot prior to the approval of a preliminary plat, if required by this ordinance, nor prior to approval of construction plans for said improvements as required by this ordinance, the Cherokee County Zoning Ordinance and by Cherokee County Development Regulations. 
5.5-1.3  Building and other permits. No building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued for a building, structure, or use, nor shall any excavation, grading, or land disturbance applications be approved, on any parcel of land regulated by this ordinance that has not been approved in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance except as specifically exempted. 
5.5-1.4  Public streets and lands. No land dedicated as a public street or for other public purpose shall be opened, extended, or accepted as a public street or for other public land unless such improvements are constructed in accordance with the specifications of this ordinance and the Cherokee County Development Regulations, and said land and/or improvements are formally approved and accepted as public improvements by the board of commissioners in accordance with procedures established in this ordinance. 
5.5-1.5  Appeals. Any person aggrieved by an interpretation or decision of the director of planning and zoning, county engineer, or other official responsible for the administration of this ordinance may file an appeal to the zoning board of appeals in accordance with the procedure and requirements contained in the Cherokee County Zoning Ordinance. 
5.5-2  Exemptions from plat approval. The following types of land subdivisions, transfers, and sales are specifically exempted from the plat approval requirements of this ordinance; provided, however, that such exemptions shall not apply to land development requirements and improvement requirements of the Cherokee County Development Regulations. 
a.  The creation and sale of cemetery plots. 
b.  The sale of lots consistent with previously approved and recorded plats or deeds. 
c.  The creation of leaseholds for space within a multiple-occupancy building or the division of property into leaseholds for commercial, industrial, or institutional use. 
d.  The creation of leaseholds for the agricultural use of property where the use does not involve the construction of a building to be used as a residence or for other purposes not directly related to agricultural use of the land or crops or livestock raised thereon. 
e.  Any division of land to heirs through a judicial estate proceeding, or any division of land pursuant to a judicial partition, or any division of land occurring from the foreclosure of a deed of trust; provided, however, that such exemption shall not require the county to issue permits if the resulting lots or parcels fail to meet any applicable regulations of the local jurisdiction concerning lot size, lot width, and other dimensional requirements. 
5.5-2.1  Lot combinations. An existing lot line forming the boundary between two conforming platted lots located within the same subdivision or a lot line between lots or parcels that have merged to form one building lot may be removed or eliminated through a final plat revision process which conforms to the requirements of this ordinance. In the case where no final plat applies to the subject lots or parcels, a boundary survey and plat depicting all lots involved in the lot combination shall be required to be approved by the director and recorded as a final plat. Such combination plat shall be titled with the same name as that of the original subdivision, if applicable, and shall indicate thereon that the re-plat is for the purpose of removing the lot lines between specific lots. See Figure 5.5-1. 

5.5-2.2  Boundary line adjustments. One or more existing lot lines forming boundaries between conforming platted lots located within the same subdivision, or one or more lot lines between abutting lots or parcels may be adjusted through a final plat revision process that requires the approval of the director and recording of a plat meeting the specifications of a final plat. In the case no final plat applies to the subject lots or parcels, a boundary survey and plat of the entire lots involved in the boundary line adjustment shall be required to be approved by the director and recorded. Such plat showing said boundary line adjustment shall be titled with the same name as that of the original subdivision and shall include thereon that the re-plat is for the purpose of adjusting the lot lines between specific lots. See Figure 5.5-2. 

5.5-3  Preliminary plat. 
a.  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to ensure compliance with the basic design concepts and improvement requirements of subdivisions and land developments through the submittal of a tentative map of all subdivisions for review and approval by the planning and zoning and engineering departments. 
b.  When required. Any subdivision involving the dedication of a public street or requiring the construction of a private street for access, or any subdivision which requires or proposes the installation of public infrastructure, or any subdivision which by its nature constitutes a larger common plan of development or sale shall require the submission of a preliminary plat to the director for review and approval by the county engineer. Prior to the issuance of any permit for land disturbance, or the installation of any improvements, the county engineer must approve the preliminary plat. 
c.  Preliminary plat application and specifications. The preliminary plat approval process is administrative. Preliminary plat applications shall be made in accordance with requirements shown in Table 5.1, and preliminary plats shall meet the minimum plat specifications shown in Table 5.2. 
d.  Procedures. Upon receipt of a completed preliminary plat application, the director shall schedule the application for the next available development review meeting and forward all pertinent materials in the application to the development coordinator. The director shall have 32 days from the date of the development review meeting to approve, conditionally approve, or deny the completed preliminary plat application. The applicant shall attend the development review meeting scheduled by the director where comments related to the compliance of the plat to all county resolutions and ordinances will be communicated to the applicant. The basis of the director's review of and action on a preliminary plat shall be whether the preliminary plat meets the purposes and requirements of this ordinance, and all other resolutions or ordinances that relate to the proposed development. 
e.  Preliminary plat criteria. The following criteria shall be utilized by the county in determining whether a submitted preliminary plat is acceptable: 
i.  Whether the proposed development is in compliance with all pertinent sections of the Cherokee County Zoning Ordinance and the Cherokee County Development Regulations, including but not limited to densities, height restrictions, lot size, set backs, buffers, roadway access, overlay districts, uses, streets, and open spaces. 
ii.  Whether the proposed development is in compliance with all conditions of zoning affixed to the subject property by resolution of the board of commissioners; all terms and conditions of any development agreement entered into between the applicant and the board of commissioners; all conditions of relief or appeal as may have been granted by resolution of the zoning board of appeals; or any other decree or agreement between the applicant and the board of commissioners. 
iii.  Whether the proposed development is in compliance with all other Cherokee County ordinances, codes and regulations, including but not limited to the Tree Preservation Ordinance, Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Ordinance, Storm Water Management Ordinance, Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance, the Tributary Protection Act, and the Public Sewer System Ordinance. 
iv.  Whether provision has been made for a water supply system that is compliant with pertinent county ordinances and regulations and is otherwise sufficient in terms of quantity, dependability, and quality to provide an appropriate supply of water for the type of development proposed. 
v.  If a public sewage system is proposed, whether adequate provision has been made for such a system under pertinent county ordinances and regulations and, if other methods of sewage disposal are proposed including septic, that such systems comply with all pertinent federal, state, and local laws and regulations. 
vi.  If the tendered preliminary plat reveals areas deemed by the director or county engineer or their designee to be unsuitable for development due to the likelihood of flooding or improper drainage, or due to rock formations, topography, utility easements, or other characteristics rendering the proposed development harmful to the safety, health, and general welfare of the citizens of the county or whether the proposed development makes accommodations for such characteristics such that the health, safety and welfare of the county is not unduly impacted. 
vii.  Whether proposed roads provide safe, convenient, and functional system for vehicular, pedestrian, and bicycle circulation and are otherwise consistent with the Cherokee County Comprehensive Land Use Plan and Cherokee County Comprehensive Transportation Plan. 
f.  Disposition. Approval of a preliminary plat shall be valid for a period of one year, during which time a complete construction plan application must be submitted. If a completed application for construction plan is not submitted during that time, preliminary plat approval shall expire and be null and void. 
g.  Appeal. The denial of preliminary plat approval may be appealed to the Zoning Board of Appeals of Cherokee County. 
h.  Amendments to approved preliminary plats. The director of planning and zoning or the county engineer is authorized to approve minor amendments to preliminary plats without the need to resubmit the preliminary plan for review. Any proposed amendment to a preliminary plan that is determined by the director or the county engineer to constitute a public interest shall be deemed a major amendment. Procedures for considering a major amendment to a preliminary plat shall be the same as required for an initial application for preliminary plat approval. 
5.5-4  Construction plans. 
a.  Application. Upon approval of a preliminary plat, the sub-divider or land developer may apply for construction plan approval. In cases where a preliminary plat is not required by this article, the sub-divider or land developer may apply for approval of construction plans; provided, however, the applicant for construction plan approval should hold a pre-application conference with the director and/or county engineer to ensure that plans meet the intent and specific provisions of this ordinance and other applicable regulations. The construction plan approval process is administrative. Applications for construction plan approval shall be made in accordance with requirements shown in Table 5.1 and Table 5.2. No application for construction plans shall be accepted for processing nor approved by the director and/or county engineer until a preliminary plat, if required, has been approved and the proposed construction plans are found by the director and/or county engineer to be in substantial conformity with said approval and any conditions of such approval. 
b.  Construction plan decision criteria. The only basis upon which the director of planning and zoning and/or the county engineer may deny a construction plan is the failure of the application to meet the requirements of this ordinance or any other applicable federal, state, or local regulations; or the failure of the construction plans and application to meet the requirements of preliminary plat approval. 
c.  Certificate of approval. All copies of the construction plans shall be noted by inscription on the plat noting such approval by the director of planning and zoning and the county engineer. Construction plan approval shall expire and be null and void after a period of one year, unless activity toward improvements on the land has been initiated, or unless the director and/or the county engineer approves an extension of time. 
5.5-5  Final plat. 
a.  When required. All subdivisions and dedications shall require final plat approval. The final plat approval process is administrative. Applications shall be made in accordance with requirements shown in Table 5.1. 
b.  Criteria for approval. The director may grant final plat approval if the following conditions, as applicable, are met. 
i.  The county has previously approved a preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision, if required. 
ii.  Where new improvements are involved in the subdivision, construction plans have been approved, and all improvements have been installed and inspected by the county engineer, and subdivision improvement guarantees as required by this ordinance have been submitted. 
iii.  The final plat meets all applicable requirements of this ordinance. 
iv.  A complete final plat application has been submitted, including all supporting materials required by this chapter for final plats. 
v.  All county regulations and requirements pertinent to land development have been met. 
c.  The cirector shall consider final plats and applications that meet the above-referenced conditions a ministerial action of approval. Denial of a final plat shall be permitted only upon specific findings that one or more of the above-referenced conditions have not been met. 
d.  Approval certificate. Upon approval of the final plat, a certificate, stamped directly on the plat, shall state: 
"Pursuant to the Land Subdivision Regulations of Cherokee County, Georgia, and all requirements of approval having been fulfilled, this final plat was given preliminary approval on ____________ , 20 ____________ , and final approval by the Director of Planning and Zoning and County Engineer and it is entitled to recordation in the Clerk's Office, Cherokee County Superior Court." 
e.  Additional plat certificates. In addition to information required by Table 5.2 to be supplied on a final plat, each final plat shall contain the following certificates: 
f.  Surveyor's certificate. A certificate by a surveyor directly on the final plat as follows: 
"It is hereby certified that this plat is true and correct and was prepared from an actual survey of the property by me or persons under my supervision; that all monuments shown hereon actually exist or are marked as "future," and that their location, size, type and material are correctly shown; and that all engineering requirements of the Zoning Ordinance of Cherokee County, Georgia, have been fully complied with. 
By: ____________ 
Registered Georgia Land Surveyor No.: ____________ " 
g.  Owner's certificate. A certificate by the owner directly on the final plat, signed in an appropriate manner as follows: 
"The owner of the land shown on this plat and whose name is subscribed hereto, in person or through a duly authorized agent, certifies that this plat was made from an actual survey, and that all State, City and County taxes or other assessments now due on this land have been paid. Said owner donates and dedicates to the public for use forever the street right-of-way as shown on this plat. 
____________  Owner 
Signed, sealed and delivered  in the presence of: 
____________  Witness 
____________  Notary Public" 
h.  Health Department Approval Certificate. 
"This final plat has been approved by the Cherokee County Health Department as being consistent with applicable state and local environmental health requirements. 
;sigrule;  Director, Cherokee County Health Department" 
5.5-6  Dedications of streets and public lands. Streets and right-of-ways and other lands to be dedicated to the public shall be accepted by the county only upon the delivery to the board of commissioners of the general warranty deed conveying fee simple title of such right-of-ways and lands. The warranty deed shall be accompanied by an attorney's certificate of title and a tax transfer form addressed to the Cherokee County Board of Commissioners certifying that the grantor in such deed is vested with marketable fee simple title to the property conveyed thereby, free and clear of all liens and encumbrances; and further that the individual executing such deed has full authority to do so. Acceptance of such dedication shall be accomplished by resolution of the board of commissioners, a certified copy of which shall be attached to both the deed of dedication and the final plat. 
5.5-6.1  Private streets. 
a.  Private streets permitted. Private streets may, upon application, be permitted by the board of commissioners within major subdivisions, subject to the requirements of this section. Applications for approval of private streets shall be considered by the board of commissioners concurrent with or prior to preliminary plat approval. Following a recommendation of the county engineer to authorize private streets in a major subdivision, the board of commissioners shall consider the application and may impose conditions on the approval of private streets to ensure various public purposes and to mitigate potential problems with private streets. No final plat involving a private street shall be approved unless said final plat conforms to the requirements of this section. 
b.  Construction plans required. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to construct a new private street or alter an existing private street or to cause the same to be done without first obtaining approval of construction plans from the county engineer and a development permit issued in accordance with the requirements of this ordinance. 
c.  Standards. All private streets shall be constructed to all standards for public streets as required by this ordinance for public streets, applicable construction specifications of the county, and as approved by the county engineer. 
d.  Street names and signs. Private streets shall be named, subject to the approval of the county. The subdivider of land involving a private street shall install street signs with content containing the street name and the designation "private," as approved by the county engineer. The sign signifying the private street may be required by the county to be a different color than that of street signs provided for public streets, in order to distinguish maintenance responsibilities in the field. 
e.  Easements. Easements for private streets shall be designated on final plats as general-purpose public access and utility easements, along with the name of said private street. Said easement shall at minimum be of the same width as that required for the right-of-way of a public street by the major thoroughfare plan and the county for the type of public street (local, collector, etc.) most closely resembling the proposed private street. Easements for private streets shall not be included in any calculation of minimum lot size or density limitations established by Cherokee County Zoning regulations. In the cases of private streets, the general-purpose public access and utility easement for the private street shall either; 
i.  Be shown in a manner on the final plat such that each lot fronting the private street extends to the centerline of the private street. No lot shall be permitted to be divided by the general purpose public access and utility easement required and established for a private street; or 
ii.  Shall be drawn as its own discrete parcel to be dedicated to a private homeowners association (i.e., not shown to be a part of any lot). 
iii.  Where the lot fronting the private street extends to the centerline of the private street, the front building setback for said lot shall be measured from the nearest edge of the easement and not the property line forming the centerline of the private street. 
f.  Maintenance. The county shall not maintain, repair, resurface, rebuild, or otherwise improve streets, signs, drainage improvements or any other appurtenances within general purpose public access and utility easements established for private streets. A private maintenance covenant recorded with the Clerk of the Superior Court of Cherokee County shall be required for any private street and other improvements within general-purpose public access and utility easements established for private streets. The covenant shall set out the distribution of expenses, remedies for non-compliance with the terms of the agreement, rights to the use of easements, and other pertinent considerations. The covenant shall specifically include the following terms. 
i.  The covenant shall establish minimum annual assessments in an amount adequate to defray costs of ordinary maintenance and procedures for approval of additional needed assessments. The Covenant shall also specify that the funds from such assessments will be held by a homeowners or property owners association. 
ii.  The covenant shall include a periodic maintenance schedule. 
iii.  The covenant for maintenance shall be enforceable by any property owner served by the private street. 
iv.  The covenant shall establish a formula for assessing maintenance and repair costs equitably to property owners served by the private street. 
v.  The covenant shall run with the land. 
vi.  The board of commissioners may, at its discretion, as a condition of approving private streets, require a performance bond and/or maintenance bond be submitted by the subdivider and held by a homeowners or property owners association, or the board may require that the subdivider pay an amount of money as recommended by the county engineer into an escrow account or other suitable account for the maintenance and repair of private streets and stormwater management improvements, to be drawn from by the homeowners or property owners association as maintenance and repair needs may arise. 
g.  Specifications for final plats involving private streets. The county engineer shall not approve for recording any final plat involving a private street unless and until it shall contain the following on the face of the plat: 
i.  Deed book and page reference to the recorded covenant required by this section; 
ii.  "WARNING, Cherokee County has no responsibility to build, improve, maintain, or otherwise service the private streets, drainage improvements, and other appurtenances contained within the general public purpose access and utility easement or easements for private streets shown on this plat."; 
iii.  "Grant of Easement. The general purpose public access and utility easement(s) shown on this plat for private street(s) is hereby granted and said grant of rights shall be liberally construed to provide all necessary authority to the County, and to public or private utility companies serving the subdivision, for the installation and maintenance of utilities, including, but not limited to, electric lines, gas lines, telephone lines, water lines, sewer lines, cable television lines, and fiber optic cables, together with the right to trim interfering trees and brush, together with a perpetual right of ingress and egress for installation, maintenance, and replacement of such lines. 
____________  Signature of Property Owner"; and, 
iv.  (The following certificate of dedication shall be required, unless the Board of Commissioners waives the dedication requirement.) 
"Certificate of Dedication. All water and sewer lines installed within the general purpose public access and utility easement(s) shown on this plat for private street(s) are hereby dedicated to Cherokee County. 
____________  Signature of Property Owner." 
h.  Requirement for purchaser's acknowledgement of private responsibilities. Prior to the sale or as a condition of the closing of a real estate transaction involving any lot served by a private street in the county, the subdivider or seller of said lot shall obtain a notarized purchaser's acknowledgement of private street construction and drainage maintenance responsibilities as set forth below. A copy of the purchaser's acknowledgement shall be retained by the purchaser and shall be required to be submitted as a condition of a building permit for a principal building on said lot: 
"Purchaser's Acknowledgement of Private Street and Drainage Maintenance Responsibility 
(I)/(We) have read the Declaration of Covenant which pertains to the lot that is the subject of this real estate transaction ____________ (insert address or attach legal description). (I)/(We) understand that the Declaration of Covenant applies to the lot that (I am)/(we are) purchasing and requires (me)/(us) to provide a specified percentage or amount of the financing for the construction and maintenance of any private street and drainage facilities serving the lot which (I am)/(we are) purchasing, and that owners of other lots as depicted on this plat may sue for and recover those costs which this covenant requires (me)/(us) to pay, plus their damages resulting from (my)/(our) refusal to contribute, plus reasonable attorneys fees. 
(I)/(We) further understand that Cherokee County has no obligation to assist with the maintenance and improvement of the private street, drainage facilities, and other appurtenances within the general purpose public access and utility easement for the private road serving the lot in question. (I)/(We) understand that a copy of this purchaser's acknowledgement shall be required as a condition of the issuance of a building permit for a principal building on the lot (I am)/(we are) purchasing. 
____________  Purchaser 
____________  Purchaser" 
5.5-6.2  Subdivision improvement guarantees. In order to protect the county and prospective purchasers of and residents in a subdivision, the sub-divider/developer shall provide to the county financial security to guarantee the installation of public improvements. The sub-divider's or developer's financial guarantee may be any of the following: 
a.  An escrow of funds with the county; 
b.  An escrow with a bank or savings and loan association upon which the county can draw; 
c.  An irrevocable letter of commitment or credit upon which the county can draw; 
d.  A performance bond for the benefit of the county upon which the county can collect, or a certificate of deposit with assignment letter; and 
e.  Any other form of guarantee approved by the board of commissioners that will satisfy the objectives of this section. The guarantee shall be in an amount to secure the full costs, as determined by the county, of constructing or installing the improvements and utilities required. 
5.5-7  Supplemental subdivision provisions: Notwithstanding other provisions of this ordinance, subdivisions shall be governed by the following: 
5.5-7.1  Flag lots. 
a.  Intent. Flag lots, as defined in this ordinance, are strongly discouraged. However, subdivisions designed with one or more flag lots may be approved where conditions of hardship make standard design or frontage impossible or impractical due to the configuration of the lot to be subdivided. 
b.  Denial if reasonable alternative exists. The director and/or county engineer shall have due cause to deny any plat that proposes any flag lot, when a reasonable alternative to such lot pattern is available. 
c.  Panhandle (flag pole) length restriction. If permitted, no flag lot shall be allowed to be platted that has a "panhandle" portion (i.e., portion that does not meet the required lot width) that is more than 400 feet in length. 
d.  Width of pole. At no point may the staff or "pole" portion of a flag lot be less than 30 feet in width. 
5.5-7.2  Public streets required. Access to every lot in a subdivision shall be provided over a public street or private street as defined in subsection 5.5-6.1 and approved there under. Construction of a privately maintained road requires prior approval by the board and must be constructed to current county standards. All streets and other features in the Major Transportation Plan of Cherokee County, Georgia, shall be platted by the subdivider in the locations and to the dimensions indicated in the major transportation plan adopted by the board of commissioners. This provision shall not apply to shared driveways as defined herein. 
5.5-7.3.  Minimum access standards. No building permit shall be issued for any lot that does not meet the minimum access standards of this section, except as otherwise specifically permitted, until such time as there exists a road or street meeting all county standards. Except as otherwise noted herein, all lots and tracts hereafter created must front a minimum of 50 feet on a county approved public road. Cul-de-sac lots must front a minimum of 35 feet on a county approved public road. The panhandle section of approved flag lots must have at least 30 feet on a county approved public road. Landlocked lots may access a county approved public road via a minimum 20-foot easement, if said easement is duly recorded and made a part of the property deed. The location and dimensions of each such access easement shall be shown upon the subdivision plat and shall only be used for a maximum of one parcel, whether previously platted or newly created under the terms of this article. In instances where a subdivision contains such a lot that does not abut a public road, the final plat of the subdivision shall also contain the following owner's certificate: 
"I, the undersigned owner hereby dedicate the access easement shown on this plat to the common use of the owner, or owners, of the lot within this subdivision. It is further acknowledged that the access way and any improvements within such access easement shall not be accepted by Cherokee County, Georgia, but shall remain privately owned and maintained. 
Owner: ____________ 
Signed, sealed and delivered  in the presence of: 
____________  Witness 
____________  Notary Public 
5.5-7.4  Plats straddling jurisdictional boundaries. Whenever access to the subdivision is required across land within the jurisdictional boundaries of another local government, the planning director may request assurance from the local government authority that access is legally established, and from the local government engineer that the access road is adequately improved, or that a guarantee has been duly executed and is sufficient in amount to assure the construction of the access road. In general, lot lines should be laid out so as not to cross jurisdictional boundary lines. 
5.5-7.5  Additional rights-of-way. Subdivisions that adjoin existing streets shall dedicate additional right-of-way to meet the minimum street width requirements specified by the county's major transportation plan, and the entire right-of-way shall be provided where any part of the subdivision is on both sides of the street; provided that when the subdivision is located on one side of an existing street, one-half of the required right-of-way, measured from the center line of the existing roadway, shall be provided. 
5.5-7.6  Street alignment, intersections and jogs. Streets shall be aligned to join with planned or existing streets. Under normal conditions, streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles. Street jogs with center-line offsets of less than 150 feet shall not be permitted. 
5.5-7.7  Continuation of existing streets and connections. Existing streets shall be continued as the same or greater width, but in no case less than the required width. The county engineer may require a development provide one or more future connections to adjoining subdivisions or un-subdivided tracts. 
5.5-7.8  Street plans for future phases of the tract. Where the plat proposed to be subdivided includes only part of the tract owned or intended for development by the subdivider, a tentative plan of a future street system for the portion not slated for immediate subdivision consideration shall be prepared and submitted by the subdivider. 
5.5-7.9  Enforcement, violations, and penalties. The director of planning and zoning shall enforce the provisions of this chapter. The director is authorized to issue stop-work orders and issue citations for violations of this chapter. If it is discovered that a plat was recorded but was not eligible for recording under the provisions of this chapter, then in such an event the director shall cause to be filed a notice of revocation of approval of said plat in the clerk's office, Cherokee County Superior Court, with cross reference noted on the plat to the filed revocation, in a form to be approved by the county attorney. In addition to remedies associated with violations to this Code, the director may institute proceedings to obtain injunction, abatement, or any other appropriate action or actions, to prevent, enjoin, or abate such unlawful action. 
5.5-8  Legacy lot. 
5.5-8.1  Intent: It is the intent of the board of commissioners to provide owners of property who wish to subdivide their property, except where the division of land would create a non-conforming parcel, the opportunity, upon petition to and acceptance of the board of commissioners, to present said subdivision at a public hearing. A non-conforming parcel of land is one which has less area of land than the minimum lot size required by the zoning district assigned the property. Lack of access or inadequate access shall not make a parcel non-conforming. 
5.5-8.2  Purpose: The purpose of legacy lots is to permit a division of land to facilitate a familial gift or a transfer of land between family members. The presence of family members living nearby adds to the community by providing affordable housing, child and elder care, and transportation to those family members who cannot drive themselves, all of which fosters stable family environments. 
5.5-8.3  Legacy lot requirements. A subdivision created under the terms and conditions of this procedure shall be known as a legacy lot, and shall only be considered where the following criteria are found to exist: 
a.  Zoning of property in the immediate vicinity, the land use policies set forth in the comprehensive plan and existing pattern of development of nearby property does not suggest or support a request for a zoning change, and 
b.  The division of land is not a part of a larger common plan of development; and 
c.  The purpose for the division of land is exclusively for gifting to an heir or relative a parcel of land, upon which the recipient intends on constructing a single-family dwelling unit, and residing within said structure; and 
d.  The division of land creates no more than one non-conforming parcel. 
Table 5.1: Application Requirements 

 
Table 5.2: Plat and Plan Requirements 

 
Table 5.3: Subdivision Types Reference 

 
(Ord. No. 2008-Z-003, 12-16-08) 
5.6 - Accessory uses and structures. 
No accessory building or use shall be constructed upon a lot until construction of the principal building has commenced, except in the case of a barn in the AG district, which may be permitted before construction of principal building. The preceding requirements shall not apply to accessory use and structures in the TND district. 
Accessory structure. A structure detached from a principal building on the same lot and incidental and subordinate to the principal building. 
Barn. Building traditionally used for storing hay, grain, etc., and often for housing livestock. 
Farm outbuilding. A detached accessory structure used in AG only for farm related storage or activity. 
Lot coverage. The cumulative square foot measurement of the principal building footprint, any accessory buildings' footprints, and accessory uses such as pools along with the concrete decking and tennis courts, as well as patios of impervious material. 
A.  Location on lot. Where an accessory building is structurally attached to a main building it shall be subject to and must conform to all regulations of the ordinance applicable to the main building. 
When an accessory building is attached to the principal building by breezeway, passageway, or similar means, it shall comply with the yard requirements of the principal building to which it is accessory. 
On a corner lot, no accessory building or use shall be located closer to any street right-of-way line than the principal building setback. 
Accessory uses and structures shall be located on the same lot or parcel as the principal use or structure. No garage or other accessory building or use shall be allowed within a front yard area or be located closer to ten feet to a side or rear lot line. A two-foot overhang for eves or gutters will be permitted within this ten-foot setback. 
B.  Number and size. No accessory use, or structure, or combination of, shall exceed the number or total lot coverage area shown in the attached chart. Wells, pump houses, and well houses of less than 35 square feet, gazebos and other decorative structures of less than 120 square feet, farm outbuildings, and barns shall not be included in determining the allowable number or size. Except for barns and farm outbuildings in AG, no accessory structure may exceed the footprint of the principal structure. 
C.  Height. No accessory building or portion thereof located in the required side or rear yard shall exceed 25 feet in height or the height of the primary structure, whichever is lower. 
D.  Structure limitations. Accessory structures shall not be used as dwelling units or for lodging purposes except as otherwise provided herein. (See Guest houses section 5.6-13) 
E.  Incidental uses. The following accessory uses and structures and similar uses and structures which are incidental to a residential use or use are permitted in their respective residential and AG districts, except for farm outbuildings which shall be permitted in the AG district only. 
5.6-1 A children's playhouse, private greenhouse. 
5.6-2 A swimming pool for private use. Pools shall be fenced with a sturdy material of chain link or of material and colors compatible with the main dwelling; that prevents entry that is continuous around the pool except for gate openings; that is a minimum of five feet in height; that has latches out of reach of children or at least five feet off the ground; and locked to exclude all persons unless a responsible person is at the pool. 
5.6-3 A garage, shed or building for domestic storage. 
5.6-4 Reserved. 
5.6-5 Signs (other than advertising sign) as permitted and regulated in each district incorporated in this ordinance. 
5.6-6 Public utility communication, electric, gas, water and sewer lines, their supports, and incidental equipment. 
5.6-7 Carports. 
5.6-8 A satellite disk or dish, subject to the same restrictions and requirements as sheds and storage buildings. 
5.6-9 Domestic pets such as dogs and cats of an appropriate type and number kept inside or outside a structure but not violating health standards, constituting inhumane treatment or constituting a nuisance to neighbors. Farm animals, including horses are not domestic pets for purposes of this provision. 
5.6-10 No fence or free-standing wall other than a retaining wall shall be more than eight feet in height or be constructed in a public right-of-way or future street right-of-way as defined by the Cherokee County Major Thoroughfare Plan. If a fence is adjacent to a public road right-of-way and within the required setback in a residential district such fence shall not exceed six feet in height respectively and shall further meet the requirements set forth in 5.7. If a fence is placed on the property line then it becomes an adjoining fence with that property owner. We recommend that fences be placed a minimum of six inches off the property line onto your property. 
5.6-11 Guest houses. Guest houses are accessory structures which are allowed in the AG and Residential districts. Only one guest house shall be constructed concurrently with or after the construction of the principal structure. Any living area included in a detached garage or swimming pool cabana is a guest house. Mini-warehouse facilities may establish one resident-manager of the facility. 

 
(Ord. No. 95-0-10, § 1, 8-8-95; Ord. No. 98-O-14, §§ 2, 3, 8-28-98; Ord. No. 2002-Z-006, §§ 1—3, 8-20-02; Ord. No. 2007-Z-001, 7-17-07; Ord. No. 2007-Z-002, 8-7-07) 
5.6A - Reserved. 
Editor's note— At the instruction of the city, § 5.6A has been removed from this Code. Former § 5.6A pertained to guest houses and derived from Ord. No. 95-0-10, § 1, adopted Aug. 8, 1995; and Ord. No. 98-O-14, § 1, adopted Aug. 28, 1998. 
5.7 - Vision clearance at intersections. 
In all zoning districts, no fence, wall, structure, shrubbery or other obstruction to vision between the heights of three feet and 15 feet, except utility poles, light or street sign standards or tree trunks shall be permitted within 25 feet of the intersection of the right-of-way lines of streets, roads, highways or railroads, so long as the same also complies with state law. 
5.8 - Approvals for developments along interstates, state highways and county roads. 
For all business and industrial developments fronting on a state, interstate highway and county road, no building permit shall be issued until the approval of the Georgia Department of Transportation or the county engineer has been obtained by the applicant on entrances and exits, curb radii, drainage and other matters that are the appropriate concern of the department. 
5.9 - Use occupancy and erection. 
No building or structure or land shall hereafter be used or occupied and no building or structure or part thereof shall be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved or altered except in conformity with the regulations of this ordinance. 
5.9-1  Public buildings and use. Buildings erected and owned by any government or other public agency shall be permitted in any zoning district. 
5.9-2  Street setback requirement. No building or structure shall hereafter be erected closer than 75 feet from the right-of-way of any existing two-lane arterial; or 65 feet from the right-of-way of any existing two-lane collector street; or 50 feet from the right-of-way of any existing four-lane interstate or arterial. 
(Ord. No. 2008-A-002, § 1, 9-15-08) 
5.10 - Classification of streets. 
For the purposes of this ordinance, all the streets, roads and highways in Cherokee County area classified as local streets, major or minor collector streets, arterial and interstates. The classification of each street in Cherokee County is shown on the Cherokee Road Classification Map which is on file in the office of the Cherokee County Planning and Zoning Department. 
5.11 - Connecting access among adjoining businesses. 
Except as provided in this article, the site plan of each business property shall include a minimum 20-foot width roadway which shall connect to adjoining business property. The road is not required to be paved unless and until the adjoining property is developed. The zoning administrator is authorized to grant an exception to this requirement upon presentation of an engineering feasibility study presented to and satisfactory to the county engineer that due to location, isolation, uniqueness of land, or topography, a connecting access is not feasible or is not warranted. Such an exception shall be made a part of the public record with the findings of the administrator set out and the engineering study attached. 
5.12 - Requirements of the Cherokee County Development Standards, the Cherokee County Soil Sedimentation and Control Ordinance, and the Cherokee County Flood Plain Regulation Ordinance. 
The Cherokee County Development Standards, also known as Regulations, and as may be amended; the Cherokee County Soil Sedimentation and Control Ordinance, and as may be amended; and the Cherokee County Floodplain Regulation Ordinance, and as may be amended, are incorporated herein and are made a part of this ordinance for all purposes, including but not limited to interpretation, enforcement and penalties. As between two conflicting provisions, the zoning ordinance shall control. 
5.13 - Mailbox supports. 
(a)  Mailbox supports. The use of massive mailbox supports that, when struck, could damage vehicles and cause serious injury to vehicle occupants are prohibited. Heavy metal posts, concrete posts, brick bases, and miscellaneous items such as farm equipment or supports filled with concrete are also prohibited. 
(b)  Encroachment on public rights-of-way. No building, structure (including prohibited mailbox suprots as described in subsection (a)), service area or required off-street parking and loading facilities, except driveways, shall be permitted to encroach on public rights-of-way. 
(c)  Pre-existing structures. All structures pre-existing this section are exempt from this section. 
(Ord. No. 99-0-13, 6-8-00; Ord. No. 2003-Z-007, 8-5-03) 
ARTICLE 6. - ZONING DISTRICTS AND BOUNDARIES 

6.1 - Establishment of districts. 
In order to carry out the intent and purpose of this resolution, Cherokee County is hereby divided into the following districts: 

 
(Ord. No. 206-Z-004, 5-2-06; Ord. No. 2011-Z-001, 3-1-11) 
6.2 - Zoning District Map. 
The boundaries of zoning district are shown on the map designated as the "zoning district map." The zoning district map and all notations, references and other information shown thereon are a part of this ordinance and have the same force and effect as if the zoning district map and all the notations, references, and other information shown thereon were fully set forth and described herein, which zoning district map is properly attested and is on file with the Clerk of Cherokee County or otherwise safeguarded by the county. 
6.2-1 Where the zoning district map is not available upon adoption of this ordinance, or has not been fully amended to reflect the new zoning designations, the current zoning pursuant to the 1969 ordinance, as amended, shall remain in effect and the zoning regulations for the nearest equivalent of that zoning to the districts set out herein shall apply. Interpretations of the zoning designations shall be by the zoning board of appeals. 
Zoning Equivalent to 1969 Ordinance Provisions 

 
(Ord. No. 2007-Z-002, 8-7-07) 
6.3 - District boundaries. 
All streets, alleys, and railroad rights-of-way; if not otherwise specifically designated, shall be deemed to be in the same zone as the property immediately abutting upon such alleys, streets and railroad right-of-way. Where the center line of a street, alley or railroad right-of-way serves as a district boundary, the zoning of such areas, unless otherwise specifically designated, shall be deemed to be the same as that of the abutting property up to such center line. In all other cases, the district boundary lines shall be determined by use of the scale appearing on the zoning district map. Wherever any uncertainty exists as to the boundary line of any use district as shown on the zoning map incorporated herein, the following rules shall apply: 
6.3-1 Where district boundary lines are indicated as approximately following lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be such boundaries. 
6.3-2 Where as lot held in one ownership and of record, at the effective day of this ordinance, is divided by a district boundary line, said lot shall remain presently zoned and unaffected by said division. 
(Ord. No. 2000-O-4, 5-23-00) 
ARTICLE 7. - DISTRICT USES AND REGULATIONS 

7.1 - Purpose. 
7.1-1 General agricultural district (AG). The purpose of this district is to maintain the integrity of agricultural activities predominate in the rural area of Cherokee County. Within the district, the subdivision of land for suburban development is discouraged, while agriculture and livestock production are strongly encouraged in order to maintain the rural character of these areas. On-site sales should be limited to live animals, plants, and produce that have been raised or produced on the property, unless this Ordinance specifically provides for limited related commercial activities for particular uses. 
7.1-2  Estate residential district (R-80, R-60). The purpose of this district is to permit residential development in those areas that are expected to become more nearly urban in character. The areas involved are generally in transition from agricultural to residential development and are considered appropriate for low density residential development. Limited agricultural uses, such as crop production and animal husbandry, on tracts of five acres or more are also compatible with this district. 
7.1-3  Single-family residential districts (R-40, R-30). The purpose of these residential districts is to enable residential development of a low density urban character. The regulations are designed to permit and encourage residential development in areas where urbanization is taking place. Limited agricultural uses, such as crop production and animal husbandry, on tracts of five acres or more are also compatible with this district. 
7.1-4  Single-family residential districts (R-20). The purpose of this residential district is to permit and encourage development of medium density single-family residential uses in a moderately spacious surrounding. The R-20 development district shall be served with an approved community water system. 
7.1-4.A  Single-family residential district (R-15). The purpose of these residential districts is to permit and encourage development of high density single-family residential uses in a moderately spacious surrounding. The R-15 development district shall be served with an approved community water system and a central sewerage system. 
7.1-5  Zero-lot-line residential district (RZL). The purpose of the district is to provide affordable housing by encouraging development of moderate to high density single-family detached residential dwellings. The idea of zero-lot-line is to promote better use of space within a smaller lot by permitting the construction of houses on lots without a sideyard requirement on one side of the lot. Innovative design of cluster housing with garden homes or patio homes are encouraged. Such development districts are intended to be served with central sewerage system. 
7.1-6  Single-family attached residential districts (RA, RTH). The purpose of this district is to provide for intermediate housing types and densities between single-family detached and multifamily dwellings. Such development may include duplexes, triplexes, quadraplexes or townhouses to be located in the urban portion or suburban portion of the county where apartment buildings would not be compatible. Innovative design with cluster development is encouraged. Such development districts are intended to be served with central sewerage system except for lot sizes exceeding 20,000 square feet. 
7.1-7  Multifamily residential district (RM-10, RM-16). The purpose of the residential districts is to permit development of high density multifamily residential dwellings. These zoning districts are to be located where public water supply and sewerage facilities are available or can be obtained and where there is convenient access to collector streets or major thoroughfares. The use of these districts can be developed as a transition zones between residential districts and commercial districts. 
7.1-8  Planned unit development district (PUD). Planned unit development is a floating district which may be located within any residential district if it meets all the standards for a planned unit development. The purpose of this district is to encourage flexible and innovative design in site planning and building arrangements under a unified plan of development regulation instead of standard zoning regulation. Planned unit developments shall be planned as integral units and may be residential, commercial or a combination of land uses. The developer benefits from better land utilization, economy in the provision of roads and utilities, and flexibility in design. The community benefits from efficient use of land, preservation of natural amenities and environmental sensitive areas, and lower development and housing costs. Review and approval of the development plan provides the opportunity to assure that the development will be in harmony with the character of the neighborhood in which it is located. 
7.1-9  Office/institutional district (OI). The purpose of this district is to provide a location for office, institutional, medical and educational development. Limited related retail business and service activities may be permitted but not involved with storage and processing. 
7.1-10 Corporate park district (CP). The purpose of this district is to provide for suitable areas for developments that are primarily for offices for businesses, professional services, and sales activities with a limited amount of retail uses within master-planned developments or parks. This district should be accessible to an arterial. An overall concept plan is required within this zoning district in order to guide each development. 
7.1-11  Neighborhood commercial district (NC). The purpose of this district is to provide for limited retail activities, commercial sales, personal services and professional offices to serve the general need of a residential neighborhood. Development of commercial uses is regulated for compatibility with the surrounding residential areas. Districts are located to create commercial centers or clusters and to discourage commercial strip development. The maximum allowed floor space of all buildings on an NC site shall be 10,000 square feet per acre of total building floor space. 
7.1-12  General commercial district (GC). The purpose of this district is to provide sufficient space in appropriate locations for a wide variety of commercial sales and service activities which generally serve a wide area. The permitted uses are generally located along the major thoroughfares of the county. Activities with limited storage may be permitted. Districts are located to create centers or concentrations of commercial activities and to discourage commercial strip development. 
7.1-13  Light industrial district (LI). The purpose of this district is to provide suitable areas for industrial development but whose proximity to residential or commercial districts makes it desirable to limit the intensity of industrial operations and processes. This district limits industrial, manufacturing and warehousing uses to those which are wholly conducted indoors, with the exception of limited amounts of outdoor storage which shall be screened and situated in a side or rear yard. The district should be accessible to a major arterial or state highway. Permitted uses are restricted to those which are not characterized by smoke, dust, fumes, gas, heat, glare, fire hazards, noise, vibrations and other nuisances. 
7.1-14  Heavy industrial district (HI). The purpose of this district is to provide suitable areas for industrial operations and processes conducted both indoors and outdoors. Due to the intensity of these uses, the district should be located on or have ready access to a major arterial or state highway and separated from residential areas by significant natural barriers and/or buffers. 
(Ord. No. 98-O-19, § 1, 10-23-98; Ord. No. 2006-Z-006, 6-6-06; Ord. No. 2011-Z-001, 3-1-11; Ord. No. 2018-O-003, 4-3-18) 
Table 7.1. Minimum District Development Standards 

 
Existing two-lane arterial and collector roads required a 65-foot setback limit. (See article 5, section 5.9-2.) 
Existing four-lane interstate and arterial roads require a 50-foot setback limit. (See article 5, section 5.9-2.) 
Note: See Article 8—Traditional Neighborhood Development for TND development requirements. 
(Ord. No. 98-O-19, § 2, 10-23-98; Ord. No. 2007-Z-002, 8-7-07; Ord. No. 2018-O-012, § 1, 10-16-18) 
7.2 - Development standards. 
The requirements regarding lot size, building size, and building placement on the lot for each zone district shall be met as indicated in section 7.3, application of standards, Table 7.1, minimum district development standards and additional requirements listed in section 7.4. 
Table 7.2: Permitted Uses 

 

 
(Ord. No. 98-O-19, § 3, 10-23-98; Ord. No. 98-0-13, 8-28-98; Ord. No. 99-O-29, § 1, 9-14-99; Ord. No. 99-O-31, 9-28-99; Ord. No. 2001-013, 8-14-01; Ord. No. 2006-Z-007, 6-6-06; Ord. No. 2007-Z-002, 8-7-07; Ord. No. 2011-Z-001, 3-1-11; Ord. No. 2012-Z-001, Exh. A, 3-20-12; Ord. No. 2015-O-008, Exh. A, 10-6-15; Ord. No. 2018-O-003, 4-3-18; Ord. No. 2018-O-013, § 2, 10-16-18; Ord. No. 2018-O-014, § 3, 10-16-18) 
7.3 - Application of standards. 
7.3-1  Lots of record. Any lot of record which is legal at the time of the adoption or amendment of this ordinance, that has an area or width that is less than required by this ordinance, may be used, subject to the following exceptions and modifications. 
a.  Individual lot not meeting minimum lot size requirements. Except as set forth in section 7.3-1a., in any zoning district in which one-family dwellings are permitted any lot of record existing at the time of adoption or amendment of this ordinance which has an area, width or depth less than that required by this ordinance may be used as a building site for a one-family dwelling. 
In the case of such a lot, when it is not possible to provide the required side yards and at the same time build a minimum width one-family dwelling, the zoning board of appeals is hereby authorized to grant a variance reducing the side yard requirements for such lot the minimum amount necessary for a reasonable dwelling, but in no case shall each of the side yards be less than five feet in width. 
7.3-2  Lot area. No lot shall be reduced in size so that lot width or depth, size of yards, lot area per family or any other requirement of this ordinance is not maintained. This limitation shall not apply: 
a.  When a portion of a lot is acquired for a public purpose. 
b.  To dormitories, fraternities, sororities and other similar living quarters which are accessory to a permitted use and which have no cooking facilities in individual rooms or apartments. 
c.  To rental units in a hotel, motel, motor lodge, tourist home or to rooms in a rooming or boarding house. 
7.3-3  Corner lots. The minimum yard requirements for corner lots with multiple road frontage shall not be less than the minimum front yard requirements for such lots as specified for each district. Such yards shall be classified as required front yards. 
7.3-4  Through lots. On lots having frontage on two streets, but not located on a corner, the minimum front yard shall be provided on each street in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance. 
7.3-5  Double frontage corner lot. On lots having frontage on more than two streets, the minimum front yard shall be provided in accordance with the regulations set forth in this ordinance on at least two of the street frontage. The minimum front yard on the other frontage or frontages may be reduced along the other streets in accordance with the provisions of section 7.3-3. 
7.3-6  Density. No building or structure shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed or altered to: 
a.  House greater number of families per acre or occupy a smaller lot area per family than are herein required. 
b.  Have narrower or smaller front, rear or side yards than are herein required. 
7.3-7  Yards and other spaces. 
a.  No part of a yard or the off-street parking or loading spaces that are required in connection with any building or use for the purpose of complying with the regulations of this ordinance shall be included as part of the yard or off-street parking or loading spaces required for another building, except as specifically provided herein. 
b.  Whenever a lot abuts upon a public alley, one-half of the alley width may be considered as a portion of the required yard. 
c.  Where these regulations refer to side streets, the zoning administrator shall be guided by the pattern of development in the vicinity of the lot in question in determining which of two streets is the side street. 
d.  Every part of a required yard (except rear yards) shall be open to the sky, except as authorized by this article, and excepting ordinary projections of sills, belt courses, window air conditioning units, chimneys, cornices and ornamental features which may project to a distance not to exceed 24 inches into a required yard. 
7.3-8  Front yards. 
a.  Where an official line has been established for the future widening or opening of a street or major thoroughfare upon which a lot abuts, the depth of a front or side yard shall be measured from such official line to the nearest line of the building. 
b.  Platforms or paved terraces, not covered by a roof or canopy and which do not extend above the level of the first floor of the building, may extend or project into the front or side yard not more than six feet. Unenclosed porches shall be considered part of the main structure. 
c.  Within the same block and zoning district, when 25 percent or more of the existing buildings which are located within 200 feet of each side of a lot have less than the minimum required setback, the setback of such lot should not exceed the average of the existing setbacks. 
7.3-9  Side yards. 
a.  For the purpose of the side yard regulations, a group of business or commercial building separated by common or party walls shall be considered as one building occupying one lot. 
7.3-10  Rear yards. Open or lattice-enclosed fire escapes, outside stairways balconies opening up on fire towers and the ordinary projections of chimneys and flues, may project into the required rear yard for a distance of not more than five feet, but only where the same are so placed as not to obstruct light and ventilation. 
(Ord. No. 2011-Z-001, 3-1-11) 
7.4 - Development standards additional requirements. 
7.4-1  Single-family residential (R-15). 
a.  Development in district R-15 and R-10 shall be served with public or private central sewerage. 
7.4-1.1  Single-family residential (RD-3). 
a.  Intent: The RD-3 district shall be designed around the public realm. The area between the front of house on one side of a street and the front of the house on the other side of the street comprise a public space, or the public realm. This area is differentiated from the private space located in the backyards of the homes. Generally, homeowners concern themselves with the "street presence" of their home. Yards are neatly trimmed, landscaping is installed, and decorations adorn the front face of the house so as to be seen by the neighbors. The public realm is the area in a neighborhood where residents engage one another. The design of the public realm is focused on the experience of the pedestrian so the presence of automobiles should be minimized to enhance the community's enjoyment of the public streetscape. 
b.  Infrastructure: Development in RD-3 district shall be served with public water and public or private central sewage. 
c.  Documentation: 
1.  Zoning —A proposed site plan must be submitted to planning and zoning for review and comment prior to RD-3 rezoning request. Typical lot layouts with building footprints and elevations/renderings of the proposed housing product are also required. More information about specific requirements when requesting RD-3 zoning can be found in Article 18 of the Zoning Ordinance. 
2.  Development plan —If property is already zoned RD-3, a preliminary technical review meeting is required with development review staff. At this time, actual lot layouts with building footprints, elevations/renderings and design palette of the final housing product are required for review and comment by staff. 
3.  Building permit —A house location plan must be approved by Cherokee County prior to the issuance of a building permit for a RD-3 lot. 
d.  Overall site constraints: 
1.  The minimum lot size of 7,500 square feet creates the opportunity for open space to be included in the design of the development. A minimum of 30 percent of the property must be set aside as open space. Yield of no more than three units per acre. 
2.  The street network shall be designed and constructed as a series of interconnecting roads. The use of cul-de-sacs is strongly discouraged and only allowed if approved as a necessity by the county engineer. Instead the use of loop lanes and crescents are encouraged as alternatives to the traditional cul-de-sac design. 
3.  There shall be an exterior building setback of 50 feet on the perimeter of the property being developed as an RD-3 development. Should the development abut an existing RD-3 development, the exterior building setback would be reduced to 25 feet if the two properties are not being developed as a single master planned development. 
4.  On street parking shall be provided for guests at the rate of 0.25 spaces per home. 
5.  At minimum, 30 percent of the lots are required to be served by alley access. 
e.  Required open space: 
1.  Open space consists of a combination of civic spaces and natural areas. Typical civic spaces include amenities, greens, commons, pocket parks and courts. No more than 50 percent of the total open space requirement can be met with civic spaces. The majority of open space is not allowed to be placed behind a small number of private lots. Stormwater detention ponds may not be used to meet open space requirements. 
2.  Civic space shall be configured and distributed in such areas as to provide a central location for the majority of residents within the subdivision. Civic space is required to be accessible by internal street network with at least 40 percent of the perimeter of a civic space fronting on a street. Crosswalks are required to be installed where necessary to provide safe passage to civic spaces. Civic spaces are encouraged to provide a benefit to the residents (examples include: picnic area, playground, multi-purpose sports field, walking trail, community garden), where appropriate. A detailed landscape plan is required to be provided for each civic space. 
3.  Natural areas should be configured to conserve and integrate the environmentally sensitive lands as a significant feature of the neighborhood design. Typical Natural areas include wetlands, floodplains, steep slopes, and wildlife habitat. The entirety of the natural areas should not consist of undisturbed buffers. The surrounding landscape should be considered in the design, and where possible the view into the property should be preserved. Access to each natural area shall be provided by road frontage or an access easement recorded on the final plat. 
f.  Streetscape design: 
1.  The minimum street section shall consist of the following elements in order (see Figure 7.4-1): 
• Five-foot sidewalk *;b3; • Five to six-foot planting strip for trees and street lights 
• Two-foot curb and gutter 
• Two ten-foot travel lanes 
• Two-foot curb and gutter 
• Five to six-foot planting strip for trees and lights 
• Five-foot sidewalk 
2.  The minimum alley section shall consist of the following elements in order (see Figure 7.4-2: 
• Utility easement 
• Drainage swale or curb and gutter 
• One nine-foot travel lane for one-way traffic or two nine-foot travel lanes for two-way traffic 
• Drainage swale or curb and gutter 
• Utility easement 
3.  On-street parking may be provided with a dedicated lane of a minimum seven-foot width or as a bay of angled parking. 
4.  Street trees are required to be located along the roads internal to the residential development. Trees should be planted within the planting strip and placed every 30 to 45 feet. Trees should be placed to provide adequate sight distance at driveways and intersections. 
5.  Lighting along the street should be installed at a pedestrian height (15 feet max.) instead of at a height for automobiles, unless expressly required by the county engineer. 
6.  Planning staff has the authority to modify required streetscape elements based on specific site conditions. 

g.  Home siting and design: 
1.  Homes shall be located between 15 feet minimum and 30 feet maximum from the property line on the front, five feet minimum on the side and ten feet minimum on the rear, unless perimeter setback applies. Corner lots in this zoning district shall have only one front yard with front setbacks parallel to the street upon which the lot has its least dimension. 

2.  The home entryway for each home shall have three components: 
• A walkway directly from the sidewalk to the front door. 
• A semi-private outdoor space (i.e., porch, patio, garden, etc.) intended for interaction with the public realm with a minimum depth of eight feet and a minimum width of 12 feet. 
• Front door, which may not be recessed from the front plane of the home. 
3.  Porches are strongly encouraged. A minimum of 50 percent of the homes are required to have covered front porches. Porches are permitted to encroach into the front setback area. 
4.  Garages shall be set back a distance of 20 feet from the front face of the primary residence, to avoid front elevations dominated by garages that are located closer to the front property line than the front of the primary structure. The "front face" of the primary residence is defined as the plane consisting of the majority of the front elevation of the structure. Modifications to the 20-foot requirement may be approved as follows: 
a.  Front facade with a covered porch - 20-foot setback may be measured from the front edge of the porch. 
b.  Front facade with architectural treatment of garage - garage setback may be reduced by up to ten feet with the following architectural treatments for the garage doors: 
i.  Carriage-style doors 
ii.  Doors are painted to match the predominate color of the home. 
c.  Side entry - Garages may not be located within 20 feet of the front plane of the home. 
d.  Rear entry - no requirements. 

5.  Detached garages may be erected, but must meet all applicable yard setback requirements. Detached garages must be located a minimum of 20 feet behind the front plane of the home. 
6.  There shall be a consistent design palette of building design elements details, exterior materials and colors for each RD-3 development to provide a cohesive look and feel throughout the neighborhood. 
a.  Design palette: The design palette shall consist of three or more of the following items: 
- Detailed or rendered elevations of with facade materials labeled 
- Photos of proposed residential product with same floor plan 
- Drawings of typical architectural details for cornices/soffits, windows, doors, porches, overhangs, etc. 
- Paint samples of primary and accent colors 
- Detailed list of exterior materials and proposed finishes 
b.  Exterior finish materials: The materials used on the exterior of the structures should reflect traditional residential materials, such as wood, brick, stone, stucco and cementitious siding (such as "Hardi-Plank"TM). The use of vinyl and aluminum siding is expressly prohibited. 
c.  The design of the facades shall vary such that adjacent homes will not be the same. 
7.4-2  Zero-lot line residential (RZL). 
a.  Prior to development, a conceptual site plan is required to show the locations of all buildings, uses, fences, property lines, landscaping, open spaces, parking areas, and uses and any other features deemed appropriate by the county commission. Site plan shall be prepared in accordance to requirements as indicated in section 7.5. 
b.  A development with rear garages can reduce the front yard to 25 feet for a yard which faces an interior street provided that the combined front and rear yard set back shall total a minimum of 60 feet. 
c.  Zero-lot-line dwellings shall be constructed against the lot line on one side of a lot, and no windows, doors, or other openings shall be permitted on this side. 
d.  There shall be a minimum side yard of ten feet on one side and no minimum requirement on the opposite side. 
e.  Cluster open space shall not include areas devoted to public or private vehicular streets or other public uses subject to the provisions in article 7. 
f.  Development shall be served with central sewerage facilities. 
7.4-3  Single-family attached residential (RA). 
a.  All developments shall be served with a central sewerage system. 
7.4-4  Townhouse residential (RTH). 
a.  Prior to development a conceptual site plan is required to show the locations of all buildings, uses, fences, property lines, landscaping, open spaces, parking areas, and uses and any other features deemed appropriate by the board of county commissioners. The site plan shall be prepared in accordance to requirements as indicated in section 7.5. 
b.  A development with rear garages can reduce the fronts yard to 25 feet for a yard which faces an interior street provided that the combined front and rear yard set back shall total a minimum of 50 feet. 
c.  A minimum of two off-street parking spaces per unit shall be provided. 
d.  A maximum of eight dwelling units shall be allowed in each row of townhouses. When there is no street being placed between two rows of townhouses, an open space or court of at least 20 feet in width shall be provided between the two rows of townhouses. 
e.  Cluster open space shall not include areas devoted to public or private vehicular streets or other public uses subject to the provisions in article 7. 
f.  Development shall be served with central sewerage facilities. 
7.4-5  Multifamily residential (RM-10, RM-16). 
a.  Prior to development, a conceptual site plan is required to show the locations of all buildings, uses, fences, property lines, landscaping, open spaces, parking areas, and uses and any other features deemed appropriate by the county commissioners. Site plan shall be prepared in accordance to requirements indicated in section 7.5. 
b.  Development shall be served with central sewerage facilities. 
c.  Townhomes are allowed in the RM-10 and RM-16 zoning classification. Where townhomes are chosen the density and all design criteria will be consistent with the RTH zoning classification. 
7.4-6  Office/institutional (OI). 
a.  Distributive functions such as loading, unloading, storage, packaging, and unpackaging shall be limited to ten percent of the total building area and five percent of the total lot area. 
7.4-7 Corporate park (CP). 
a.  No more than 20 percent acreage of the development may be used for freestanding retail uses. The entire site area, including building footprints, associated parking and landscaped areas, would count toward the acreage cap. Ground floor accessory retail uses with a multi-story office building are not considered freestanding retail uses. 
b.  Distributive functions such as loading, unloading, storage, and packaging shall be limited to ten percent of the total building area and five percent of the total lot area. 
7.4-8  Neighborhood commercial (NC). 
a.  No outdoor storage is permitted. 
7.4-9  General commercial (GC). 
a.  Permitted uses of district GC shall be located on property along interstates, arterial, major or minor collector streets when they intersect with a major street or highway as classified by the Cherokee County Road Classification Map. 
7.4-10  Light industrial (LI). 
a.  Permitted use of district LI shall be on property which has access to interstates, arterial or major collector streets. 
b.  Permitted uses are restricted to [whose] those which are not characterized by extensive open storage, or the nuisance factors such as smoke, dust, fumes, gas, heat, glare, fire hazards, noise, vibrations and other objectionable influences. 
7.4-11  Heavy industrial (HI). 
a.  Permitted uses of district HI shall be on property which has access to state or federal highway arterial or railroads. 
b.  Permitted uses shall be separated from residential districts by natural barriers and buffer zones subject to the provisions of article 10, buffer. 
(Ord. No. 2006-A-008, 5-16-06; Ord. No. 2009-Z-003, 10-6-09; Ord. No. 2011-Z-001, 3-1-11) 
7.5 - [Site plan requirements for certain districts.] 
The following features shall be included in site plan requirements for all development(s) within all zoning districts except for AG, R-80, R-40, R-30, R-20, and R-15. 
7.5-1  Site development plan. The site development plan shall be submitted at the time of construction plan submittal, if not submitted, the land disturbance permit shall not be permitted to proceed. Prior to issuance of the LDP, a site development plan shall be submitted addressing all issues described in 7.5-1 (a through o). All plans shall be submitted for approval by noon on Friday and a plan review will take place during the work day with county officials and the developer the following Friday. Any changes requested by the county shall be reviewed on or before the second Friday before the original submission. 
a.  Location map. A general location map at a scale of one inch equals 500 feet indicating existing zoning on the site, adjoining roads and the adjacent areas are required. 
b.  Survey boundaries. Surveyed boundaries of the entire tract and their relationship to adjoining properties, public rights-of-way, and easements. 
c.  Building locations. Location of all proposed buildings, their shape, size, and setback in appropriate scale. 
d.  Right-of-way. Location and right-of-way of streets, roads, alleys, railroads, public crosswalks, with lengths and widths, road names, or designations. 
e.  Buffers. Proposed buffers and landscaping. 
f.  Topography. Existing topographic conditions with contour intervals of five feet or less; areas that have slopes greater than 15 percent shall be identified. 
g.  Floodplain. Location of streams, lakes, swamps, and if applicable, the boundary and elevation of the 100-year floodplain as determined by the past history of flooding or the best available data. 
h.  Drainage. Size and location of all drainage mechanisms and the applicable drainage area within the tract or within the right-of-way of streets or roads adjacent to the tract; grades and invert elevations of sewers shall be shown; all elevations shall refer to mean sea level datum where public water and/or public sewers are to be installed. Layouts of all utility and drainage easement. 
i.  Soil erosion plan. A soil erosion plan showing the mitigation techniques that will be employed during construction. 
j.  Common open spaces. Location of parks or common open spaces, tree areas to be retained or added and other open spaces. Designation of all land to be reserved or dedicated for public use; or used as recreation areas. 
k.  Recreation facilities. Proposed bikeways, jogging trails, pedestrian ways or other recreational facilities if provided within the residential district. 
l.  Sketches. Representative architectural sketches or renderings of typical proposed structures, signs, landscaping, screening and/or fencing. 
m.  Off-street parking and loading. Show the access point to the public street system, off-street parking and loading plan. 
n.  Development report. A report setting forth the proposed development schedule, indicating the sequence of development of the various sections thereof, and the approximate time period required for completion of each phase. 
o.  Technical data. Statistical or technical data as necessary to accurately describe the proposed development including, but not limited to, the following shall be included in the development report: 
(1)  Total land area. 
(2)  Amount of land to be used for recreational or open space purpose. 
(3)  Total number of dwelling units and gross density by type of land use. 
(4)  Amount of space to be occupied by streets and parking areas. 
(5)  Amount of any submerged land within the project boundary. 
(6)  The total ground coverage and floor area of all buildings. 
(7)  A breakdown of the number of kinds of proposed buildings, including squared footage, and the number and range of lot sizes and proposed setback and yard dimensions for typical lots and/or building types. 
(8)  Deed record names of adjoining property owners or subdivisions. 
7.5-2  Plan format. Plan format refers to section 18.3-3c, site plan format. 
7.5-3  General site development and design regulations for commercial and industrial districts. 
7.5-3.1  Purpose and intent. Careful attention to attractive and citizen-friendly community design is in the economic interests of Cherokee County, its citizens, and business owners. Attractive and integrated community design features tend to improve the county's image, raise overall property values, attract new businesses, and improve the quality of life. Investment in design features tends to result in a positive return on investment for property owners, private industry, and government. For example, the money spent on landscaped roadway medians, sidewalks, and street trees is likely to be amply returned in the form of increased tax revenue resulting from the overall increase in property values that accompanies attractive and desirable urban and suburban areas. 
Much of the existing commercial and industrial development in Cherokee County, particularly development along the county's principal highways, is in need of aesthetic and functional enhancement. Existing conditions that are inconsistent with the objectives quality community design include: chain link fencing enclosures of autos and trailers without adequate screening; various building materials and/or equipment stored in front yards in view of the traveling public; continuous, uncurbed, highway access; old, dilapidated, and/or unattractive awnings and facade treatments; excessive signage in the form of fluttering ribbons, portable signs, sandwich signs, and welcome flags; a lack of front yard landscaping; storage/maintenance bay doors and loading areas facing the highway; dumpsters placed in front/side yards in unobstructed view from highways; and a general lack of interparcel access (i.e., connections between adjacent developments). 
It is the intent of Cherokee County to require new commercial and industrial developments install appropriate improvements and comply with general design regulations intended to improve aesthetic appearance and function. It is also the intent of the county to require substantial progress toward compliance with these improvement requirements and general design regulations in cases where existing businesses are expanded. 
These design regulations are intended to merge traffic engineering, civil engineering, urban design, landscape architecture, and land use planning principles into a set of regulations for commercial developments and properties in the unincorporated areas of the county. The regulations are the minimum necessary to: preserve the carrying capacity of major arteries; reduce the number of vehicular turning movements to and from the major artery, thereby reducing the potential for automobile and pedestrian traffic accidents; encourage and promote the most suitable uses of land; ensure the adequate grading and draining of developments; promote an environment which reduces the visual clutter and other distracting characteristics resulting from various aspects typical of urban and suburban commercial strip development; prohibit the needless, wasteful and purposeless aesthetic degradation of the county's highway and major street corridors; and promote a more healthy environment. 
7.5-3.2  Applicability. This article shall apply to all properties located within commercial (GC, NC, HC, OI) and Industrial (LI) zoning districts of unincorporated Cherokee County. New development shall be required to conform to these regulations. A substantial improvement of an existing development shall be required to conform to these regulations or, in cases where physically impossible, make substantial progress toward meeting the regulations contained within this chapter. Substantial improvement shall be defined as increasing the floor space dedicated to commercial/industrial operations by more than 50 percent the addition of a new or increase of an open storage area by more than 30 percent of the existing area. 
7.5-3.3  Site requirements. The following requirements are applicable to the development of all commercial and industrial sites or properties in Cherokee County. 
a.  Utilities. All utilities, including but not limited to electric and telephone lines, serving uses on site should be installed underground where appropriate and permissible. 
b.  Grading and site development. Buildings and parking lots shall be appropriately drained so as to prevent damage to abutting properties or public streets. Grading plans for new development shall be submitted to the county engineer for review and approval, and all grading activities shall comply with approved plans. Stormwater management plans shall be submitted to the county engineer for review and approval. All disturbed or graded ground areas of a building site not used for buildings or open storage areas shall be appropriately stabilized and grassed or covered with plants or landscaping materials. 
c.  Screening of outside storage yards. All areas devoted to the outside storage of vehicles, merchandise, and/or equipment not intended for display for public rent, lease, or sale, shall be screened from view from the right-of-way of the highway or major street along the entire property frontage, except in areas where access crossings have been approved. Screening may be accomplished by a vegetative buffer either planted or undisturbed or a combination of both, by a building that meets architectural standards of this chapter, by use of landscape material, either planted or existing, by an earthen berm, by a 70 percent opaque, wooden fence or wall, or combination of these screening methods. The use of low-lying landscaping that does not screen the display areas from view from the public right-of-way shall not be deemed to comply with this requirement. 
d.  Outdoor lighting. All outdoor lighting installed shall be of such height, location and intensity so that direct illumination of the right-of-way of the highway or major street is avoided. The installation of shields or hoods on such lighting facilities may be required to comply with this standard. All lighting shall comply with the Zoning Ordinance of Cherokee County, Article 24 Outdoor Lighting and Road Glare Ordinance. 
e.  Landscaping. Every building site and commercial/industrial use area shall be landscaped. A minimum ten-foot wide landscape strip shall be installed and maintained along the entire property fronting the highway or major street, except in cases where access areas are approved. A minimum six-foot wide landscape strip shall be required along all side and rear lot or lease lines, except in cases where shared driveways or access areas are approved. The area surrounding the road entrance(s) to the site or area, the front landscape strip, required parking lot landscaping, and all other required landscape and/or open spaces, shall be designed, installed, and maintained according to plans prepared by a professional landscape architect, architect, surveyor, engineer, or land planner submitted to and approved by Cherokee County. Landscaping shall be completed prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy by the County, unless appropriate provisions are made to guarantee the installation of landscaping after such certificate is issued, such as approval by the County of a bond for landscaping. Tree installation and removal shall be in compliance standards provided in the Zoning Ordinance of Cherokee County, Article 25 Tree Preservation and Replanting Standards, as may be amended from time to time, and administrative standards for the preservation and replacement of trees as adopted and as may be amended from time to time. 
f.  Location of parking areas. Parking areas shall be set back at least ten feet from public rights-of-way. Parking areas are encouraged but not required to be located in side and rear yards where such parking areas can be partially or wholly screening by buildings from the public right-of-way. The ten-foot strip between the public ROW and the edge of parking area shall be landscaped with evergreen vegetation capable of reaching a height of three feet and/or able to withstand pruning to a height of three feet. The purpose of the vegetation is to reduce the visual impact of the parked vehicles by screening from public view the parking area. 
g.  Open display of vehicles, equipment, and merchandise. In commercial/industrial zoning districts where permitted, the outside storage or display of vehicles, equipment, and merchandise to be rented, leased, or sold, shall be visible along no more than 50 percent of the frontage of the property abutting the highway or major street, excluding approved driveway entrances and exits. Screening may be accomplished by a natural and/or planted vegetative buffer, by a building that meets architectural standards of this chapter, by use of landscape material, either planted or existing, by an earthen berm, by a 70 percent opaque, solid wooden fence or wall, or combination of these screening methods. The use of low-lying landscaping that does not screen the display areas from view from the public right-of-way shall not be deemed to comply with this requirement. 
h.  Plans. Site development as-built drawings, containing a boundary survey, location, elevation, height, and square footage of buildings, parking areas, utilities, walls, and stormwater facilities, pertinent site development data, and any other requirements of the planning director or county engineer, shall be submitted to and approved by the department prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or completion. 
7.5-3.4  Commercial building requirements. The following requirements are applicable to all commercial and buildings in Cherokee County. 
a.  Screening of dumpsters. All garbage dumpsters and other similar areas devoted to the storage of waste materials shall be screened on three sides of said dumpster or area with a minimum six-foot high solid wooden fence, or a wall constructed of materials substantially similar in appearance to the building on site that complies with the architectural requirements of these regulations. In addition, said dumpster areas shall be gated on the fourth side, and the gate shall be architecturally finished. 
b.  Building materials. Building exteriors not screened (50 percent opaque) from view from the right-of-way or shall have an architectural treatment of brick, stone, split face blocks, painted/stained wood, architectural metal, vinyl, stucco, or imitations of the same or other architectural treatments approved by the planning director. Prohibited building materials are: 
1.  *Industrial or agricultural metal sheeting. 
2.  *Standard painted or unpainted concrete block. 
3.  Any awnings shall be maintained in good order, and any dilapidated awnings or canopies shall be removed. 
* These finishes are allowed on the side or rear of buildings if a minimum of 50 percent opaque from thoroughfare ROW. 
c.  Building and utility appurtenances. All water towers, cooling towers, storage tanks, and other structures or equipment incidental to the primary use of a building or site shall be architecturally compatible with the principal building or effectively screened from view from the public right-of-ways. All rooftop mechanical equipment shall be screened from the view from the public right-of-way and adjacent streets by material compatible with the building architecture, by the use of a parapet wall, or by specially designed rooftop penthouse enclosures. Ground mounted equipment such as power transformers and air-conditioning units shall be screened from view from public rights-of-way by fencing or landscaping, or painted to match the primary building. 
d.  Signage. All freestanding signs in commercial/industrial districts shall be of monument-style, have a base of masonry construction, or if the sign consists of columns instead of a base, said columns shall be constructed of materials to match or compliment the principal structure or structures located on the site. All such signs shall be considered "Freestanding" for purposes of allowable sign area and height requirements according to the Cherokee County Signs and Outdoor Advertising Ordinance (Cherokee County Zoning Ordinance, Article 11), and shall be constructed in compliance with the Cherokee County Sign Ordinance, as may be amended from time to time. 
e.  Roof lines on commercial buildings. 
1.  All buildings in commercial buildings districts shall have a pitched roof with a minimum pitch of four and half (4.5) inches vertical elevation per one foot of horizontal distance, except as provided herein. 
2.  Commercial buildings without a pitched roof shall have a detailed parapet and cornice in keeping with the overall architectural style of the building. 
3.  Exposed roofing (defined as having a pitch greater than 1:12) shall be finished in architectural metal or synthetic panels, or dimensional shingles. 
f.  Building arrangement and architectural consistency. When commercial buildings are developed as a planned center, all buildings located within the center shall be constructed such that the architectural styles, building materials and roof materials are similar. Additionally, color schemes for the outside of the buildings should be similar such that the center or park presents a consistent style of architecture and architectural treatments. 
7.5-3.5  Industrial building requirements. The following requirements are applicable to all industrial buildings in Cherokee County, excepting those industrial buildings which are interior to a planned industrial park, adjoin only other industrial parcels, and have frontage only on roads developed as part of the industrial park. 
a.  Screening of dumpsters. All garbage dumpsters and other similar areas devoted to the storage of waste materials shall be screened on three sides of said dumpster or area with a minimum six-foot high solid wooden fence, or a wall constructed of materials substantially similar in appearance to the building on site that complies with the architectural requirements of these regulations. In addition, said dumpster areas shall be gated on the fourth side, and the gate shall be architecturally finished. 
b.  Building materials. Building exteriors not screened (50 percent opaque) from view from the right-of-way shall have an architectural treatment of brick, stone, split face blocks, painted/stained wood, architectural metal, vinyl, stucco, or imitations of the same or other architectural treatments approved by the Planning Director. Prohibited building materials are: 
1.  * Industrial or agricultural metal sheeting. 
2.  * Standard painted or unpainted concrete block. 
3.  Any awnings shall be maintained in good order, and any dilapidated awnings or canopies shall be removed. 
* These finishes are allowed on the side or rear of buildings if a minimum of 50 percent opaque from thoroughfare ROW. 
c.  Building and utility appurtenances. All water towers, cooling towers, storage tanks, and other structures or equipment incidental to the primary use of a building or site shall be architecturally compatible with the principal building or effectively screened from view from the public rights-of-way. All rooftop mechanical equipment shall be screened from the view from the public right-of-way and adjacent streets by material compatible with the building architecture, by the use of a parapet wall, or by specially designed rooftop penthouse enclosures. Ground mounted equipment such as power transformers and air-conditioning units shall be screened from view from public right-of-ways by fencing or landscaping. 
d.  Signage. All freestanding signs in industrial districts shall be of monument-style, have a base of masonry construction, or if the sign consists of columns instead of a base, said columns shall be constructed of materials to match or compliment the principal structure or structures located on the site. All such signs shall be considered "freestanding" for purposes of allowable sign area and height requirements according to the Cherokee County Signs and Outdoor Advertising Ordinance (Cherokee County Zoning Ordinance, Article 11), and shall be constructed in compliance with the Cherokee County Sign Ordinance, as may be amended from time to time. 
7.5-3.6  Access requirements. The following development requirements are applicable to all commercial/industrial sites or properties in Cherokee County. 
a.  Curb cuts and access specifications. All entrances or exits of any street or driveway, public or private, from or to any state highway shall be approved by the State Department of Transportation and the county engineer prior to the construction of such entrances or exits and prior to the issuance of any development permit for any improvement to be served by such entrances or exits. 
No curb cut or access driveway shall be permitted to be located closer than 100 feet to the nearest existing or proposed right-of-way of an intersecting roadway or closer than 40 feet to a side property line unless the adjacent property owner is in agreement with the encroachment of the driveway and approval is obtained from the county engineer. Curb cuts or access driveways shall be no narrower than 24 feet from back of curb to back of curb. Strict adherence to these requirements may not be practical in all instances as determined by the county engineer. The county engineer may limit the maximum width of a curb cut and/or the number of curb cuts to a parcel as necessary when it is deemed to be of benefit to the safety and welfare of the public. 
In cases of a substantial improvement of an existing development on a site that does not meet these curb cut and access specifications, the applicant may be required by the county engineer to prepare an access plan as part of plans for the substantial improvement that either meets these requirements or moves substantially toward compliance with these regulations. Approval by the Georgia Department of Transportation and the county engineer shall be required, as applicable. 
Additional right-of-way shall be dedicated to the public as required by the most current functional classification of Cherokee County roads as designated by the county engineer, and as reasonable at the discretion of the county engineer. Roadway entrances and improvements, including necessary deceleration lane(s) and right/left turn lanes, shall be designed, installed, and maintained as approved by the State Department of Transportation, as applicable, or the county engineer, in accordance with state or county requirements, as applicable and as may be amended from time to time. 
The following factors may be considered during the review and approval of a specific location of an entrance: 
1.  The location of existing or planned median breaks; 
2.  Separation requirements between the entrance and major intersections; 
3.  Separation requirements between other entrances; 
4.  The need to provide shared access with other sites; 
5.  The need to align with previously approved or constructed access points on the opposite side of the street; and 
6.  The minimum number of entrances needed to move traffic onto and off the site safely and efficiently. 
b.  Interparcel connections. New commercial/industrial development containing, or that is intended to contain, more than one building or use on site shall provide connections so that automobile trips between and among such buildings or uses can be accomplished without using the adjacent highway(s) or major street(s). Joint or shared drives are encouraged. Where possible and practical, new developments and substantial improvements to existing developments shall provide for pedestrian and automobile access connections between adjacent properties under different ownership when the uses of the properties are of such compatibility that patrons may frequent both buildings or uses in the same vehicle trip. 
c.  Location of loading and unloading areas. All areas and facilities devoted to the loading and unloading of goods and merchandise shall be located to the side or rear of the building and lot. Loading and unloading areas shall not front the right-of-way of the adjacent highway or major street. Overhead doors for loading bays shall not face the adjacent highway or major street. This section does not apply to those industrial buildings which are interior to a planned industrial park, adjoin only other industrial parcels, and have frontage only on roads developed as part of the industrial park. 
In cases where this regulation is not practical for new development or in cases where an existing building to be substantially improved does not meet the requirements in this section, the property shall be screened from view from the adjacent highway or major street along the entire property frontage, except in cases where access areas are approved. Buildings that are permitted to have overhead doors facing the public right-of-way shall incorporate design features so that aesthetic impact of the overhead doors is softened through architectural detailing, or staggering with recesses and projections or additional landscape buffer. 
7.5-4.  Commercial architectural standards. 
A.  Facades— Major commercial buildings (over 5,000 square foot footprint) must have primarily naturally-colored brick or natural stone facades, with stucco, cast stone and hardiplank used only as accent materials. Smaller commercial buildings may use hardiplank or stucco ad the primary facade material, if they are built in a "residential" architectural style compatible with such materials. This requirement applies to all sides of buildings, except where one or more sides are 80 percent visually from view from any point off the property. 
Buildings of exceptional architectural value, as determined by the planning director, may use other materials consistent and compatible with exceptional-quality design. 
B.  Roof lines— All commercial roof lines must include detailed cornices and/or detailed parapets. 
C.  Where parking lots adjoin public roads, they must have low (two to three feet) shrubbery and/or a landscaped berm to partially shield the parked cars from view. 
D.  Inter- and intra-parcel access— Except where determined by county staff to be impractical, commercial parking areas must provide inter-parcel access to adjacent commercial properties. Parcels over five acres with access on two or more public roads must provide intra-parcel streets to connect between their entrances on different roads. These connecting streets cannot just be lanes in a parking area; they must be separated from parking areas by curbs. 
E.  Freestanding outdoor lighting— Shall consist of decorative poles and fixtures not more than 30 feet tall. 
F.  Parcels inside the City of Canton's growth boundary that are developed or re-developed without annexing shall substantially conform to Canton's "Streetscapes" requirements and guidelines. 
7.5-5.  Location of large retail stores— To promote public safety, mitigate, and accommodate traffic congestion, individual retail stores with building areas greater than 80,000 square feet must be located as follows: 
A.  With at least one primary access point on a multi-lane road. 
B.  At least ½ mile away from schools. 
For the purpose, the following definitions and clarifications shall apply: 
A.  The building areas of adjacent stores shall be aggregated and considered a single individual store if they are under common management and/or have common customer check-out processes. 
B.  "Multi-lane road" means a public road with at least four through-lanes (excluding turning and accel/decel lanes) with a length of at least one mile from the store's point of public road access and/or leading to other multi-lane roads combining for at least one mile in length. 
C.  "School" means a public school serving any or all of grades kindergarten through 12. 
D.  Distance from a school shall be measured as the shortest straight line from any point on a school property to the closest point of the actual store building. 
(Ord. No. 2004-Z-001, 4-6-04; Ord. No. 2006-Z-001, 4-4-06; Ord. No. 2006-Z-003, 4-4-06) 
7.6 - Permitted uses. 
No use shall be permitted, except in the zoning districts indicated and for the purposes permitted in the Table 7.2 Permitted Uses Table. 
a.  General. Each use is mutually exclusive and does not encompass other uses listed in the table. All uses are subject to all terms and conditions of this zoning ordinance, any other ordinance of Cherokee County, state and federal law, and any other applicable rules and regulations. 
b.  Open use. A principal use listed in Table 7.2 in any district denoted by the letter "O" is permitted by right for open use within that district without additional, specialized requirements. 
c.  Restricted use. A principal use listed in Table 7.2 in any district denoted by the letter "R" is permitted by right as a restricted use within that district only if additional, specialized requirements have been met as provided in Section 7.7 Permitted Uses Additional Requirements. 
d.  Special use. A principal use listed in Table 7.2 in any district denoted by the letter "S" is designated as a special use within that district and permitted only upon compliance with Article 18.4 Special Use Permits of this ordinance and the grant of a special use permit by the board of commissioners. In addition, any special use is subject to the Section 7.7 Permitted Uses Additional Requirements for that special use. 
e.  Classification Standards and Codes. The Permitted Uses in Table 7.2 are organized utilizing the Land Based Classification Standards (LBCS) developed by the American Planning Association and the North American Industrial Classification System (NAICS) used by the U.S. Census Bureau. The LBCS classifies land uses across five dimensions: Activity, function, structure type, site development character, and ownership. For the purposes of this ordinance, the function classification has been used because it refers to the economic function or type of establishment using the land. The NAICS is the standard used by federal statistical agencies in classifying business establishments for the purpose of collecting, analyzing, and publishing statistical data related to the U.S. business economy. Cherokee County uses the NAICS codes to classify businesses for the purpose of issuing occupational tax certificates (i.e., commonly referred to as business licenses). The use of these two classification systems together allows for a comprehensive and detailed regulation of land use. Each use provided for in Table 7.2 should be read in conjunction with the applicable LBCS and NAICS permitted uses and description of uses. If a conflict exists between the LBCS and NAICS permitted uses and description of uses and the terms and conditions of this zoning ordinance, this zoning ordinance shall govern and control. 
(Ord. No. 2011-Z-001, 3-1-11; Ord. No. 2018-O-003, 4-3-18) 
7.7 - Permitted uses additional requirements. 
7.7-1 Residential households (LBCS 1100). 
a.  Manufactured home regulations. 
(1)  Definition: "Manufactured home" means a structure, transportable in one or more section, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet and which is built of a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning and electrical systems contained therein; except that such term shall include any structure which meets all the requirements of this paragraph except the size requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development and complies with the standards established under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 U.S.C. Section 5401, et seq. (Ga. L. 1968, p.415, Section 2; Ga. L. 1973, p.4, Section 2; Code 1981, Section 8-2-131; Ga. L. 1982, p. 1376, Section 3, Section 7; Ga. L. 1989, p. 14, Section 8.) 
(2)  Development standards: As to manufactured homes constructed in compliance with the HUD Code (June 15, 1976), the following development standards must be met: 
(i)  The home has a length not to exceed three times its width measured at the most narrow point and have a minimum floor area of 900 square feet. 
(ii)  The pitch of the home's roof has a minimum vertical rise of 2.3 feet for every 12 feet of horizontal run and the roof is finished with a type of shingle that is commonly used in standard residential construction. 
(iii)  The exterior siding will consist of wood, vinyl, hardboard or stucco brick comparable in composition, appearance and durability to the exterior siding and use in standard residential construction. Such homes will not be allowed to utilize metal siding. 
(iv)  A manufactured home must be placed and anchored on permanent foundation, either slab or pier, which meets the requirements of the standard building code until such time as the building code is supplanted by state law or regulations pertaining to placement and anchoring of manufactured housing, January 1, 1993. Thereafter, state law shall control. In addition, masonry curtain wall, unpierced except for the required ventilation and access, must be installed so that it encloses the area under the manufactured home to ground level. 
(v)  Landscaping must consist of at least grass seed and straw. 
(vi)  Utility meters for the manufactured home are to be mounted to the structure rather than on a utility pole. This does not apply to units within existing manufactured home parks. 
(vii)  A manufactured home must have at each door, steps and landing, as per Section 1113—Stairway Construction, Chapter X1 of the Georgia State Building Code. 
(viii)  All the above requirements must be met prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy and plans must be submitted to the building department verifying the above standards. (Ord. No. 2008-Z-002, 09-16-08) 
(3)  Zoning districts: 
(i)  Manufactured housing is not allowed in the R-30, R-20, R-15, RD-3, RZL, RM-10, RM-16, OI, CP, NC, GC, LI or HI zoning districts except temporarily according to the terms of this ordinance. 
(ii)  Single-wide manufactured homes are only allowed in the AG zoning district with a minimum of two acres or more acres on a paved road. 
(iii)  Single-wide manufactured homes are only allowed in the AG zoning district with a minimum of five acres or more acres on an unpaved road. 
(iv)  Single-wide manufactured homes so allowed in the AG zoning district shall not be required to meet the requirements contained in section (ii) of this ordinance. 
(4)  Manufactured homes existing in Cherokee County as of August 25th, 1991, may continue to exist in whatever district it may be located as a legal non-conforming use and may be replaced if destroyed by natural disaster, such as storms, tornadoes, or natural fires. Additionally, such manufactured homes or mobile homes may be upgraded or replaced by manufactured homes, meeting the HUD code standards without having been destroyed and without losing the legal non-conforming or grandfathered status as a parcel in use of that property. All existing manufactured homes, parks and subdivisions will continue to exist as a legal non-conforming uses after the adoption or amendment of the Cherokee County Zoning Ordinance. (Resolution #94-9, amended 6-14-94). 
(5)  Real estate sales or construction manufactured housing shall be permitted upon a temporary basis until 100 percent of the subdivision or phase being constructed has been issued certificates of occupancy. (Ord. No. 2008-Z-002, 09-16-08) 
(6)  Hardship situations: A manufactured home may be temporarily placed upon an individual lot when the applicant can show extreme hardship resulting from loss of use of a home or building due to fire, flood or other damage making it unfit or; unsafe for use or occupancy; resulting from extensive remodeling of a home or business making it unsuitable for use or occupancy; or a health or health related problem of a family member which warrants proximity of that relative for monitoring purposes. In cases of hardship, where a temporary use permit is granted, such use is limited to a period not to exceed 12 months without specific written approval of the board of commissioners, who may require new evidence of the conditions upon which the hardship was based. Prior to the issuance of a temporary use permit based on hardship, the applicant must execute a statement that he acknowledges and agrees that the permit is valid only so long as the conditions of the permit are met, that upon the termination of any of the conditions, the applicant shall cause the removal of the manufactured home at his own expense and failure to do so grants to Cherokee County the right to remove the same from the premises at the applicant's expense. 
(i)  An application for hardship due to the loss of use of a home or building due to fire, flood, or other damage making it unfit or unsafe for occupancy must be supported by affidavits as to the facts alleged, which affidavits are submitted to the zoning administrator at the time of application on the form provided by planning and zoning. 
(ii)  An application for hardship due to extensive remodeling of a home or building making the structure unsuitable for use or occupancy must be supported by affidavits as to the facts alleged, which affidavits are submitted to the zoning administrator at the time of application on the form provided by planning and zoning. 
(iii)  An application for hardship due to a health or health related problem of a family relative which warrants proximity of that relative for monitoring purposes must be supported by affidavits as to the facts alleged, which affidavits are submitted to the zoning administrator at the time of application on forms provided by planning and zoning. Both the lack of space within the applicant's home to accommodate the family relative and the health or health related problem must be evidenced and certified to the zoning administrator and the application based upon health considerations must be accompanied by an affidavit from a physician stating the health problems necessitating monitoring. The affidavit from the doctor stating the health problem shall contain the sworn statement of such physician that: 
a.  The family relative for whom the temporary use of a mobile home is requested requires 24-hour nursing care involving the physical presence of a monitor, nurse or attendant or the presence of such monitor, nurse or attendant within voice communication of the attended relative; or 
b.  The health or health related condition or disability of the family relative has existed for six or more months before the date of the application for the temporary use permit, and/or in the professional medical opinion of the physician completing the affidavit, the condition of disability is likely or continue for six or more months. (Ord. 2008-Z-002, 09-16-08) 
c.  A manufactured home may be placed on a site temporarily for six months for residential purposes while a site-built home is constructed in all residential zoning districts. Upon appeal to the board of commissioners, one six-month extension shall be allowed. The applicant/property owner shall sign an acknowledgement letter authorizing Cherokee County to stop the provision of utilities to the manufactured home at the end of the approved time limit for this temporary placement of a manufactured home. (Ord. No. 2008-Z-002, 09-16-08) 
b.  Parking of commercial, industrial, and heavy vehicles. Parking of commercial, industrial, and heavy vehicles, and any other vehicles, in AG and residential districts shall be governed by the Cherokee County Property Maintenance Ordinance. (Ord. No. 2009-Z-006, 10-20-09) 
7.7-2 Hotels, motels or other accommodations (LBCS 1300). 
a.  Lodge, retreat, and/or campground (facilities to include lodging and food service for social, educational, and/or recreational purposes) are permitted provided that: 
(1)  Minimum lot size shall be ten acres. 
(2)  Permitted curb cut access shall not be derived from a local street. 
(3)  A minimum 50-foot wide buffer is required adjacent to all property except right-of-way. 
(4)  Length of the stay for all but permanent staff shall not exceed 30 consecutive days. 
(5)  Sanitary facilities or trash receptacles shall be located a minimum of 200 feet from any residential district and/or AG district when used for single-family. 
(6)  Recreational facilities associated with the use shall be for staff and guests only. 
(7)  One parking space per lodging unit or five per 1,000 square feet of floor area, whichever is greater. 
b.  Bed and breakfast inns. 
(1)  Definition. A use that takes place within a structure that was primarily used as a single-family dwelling, consisting of renting from one to six dwelling rooms on a daily basis to tourists, vacationers, and business travelers, where only breakfast meals are served and provided for those guests only. The homeowner shall reside on site and employment shall not exceed three full time employees in addition to the owner(s). 
(2)  Location. Bed and breakfast inns should be located in areas with aesthetic value and/or historical significance, i.e. recognized landmark, lakes, view of mountains, etc. 
(3)  Applicable zoning districts. Bed and breakfast inns shall be permitted in AG, R-80, R-60, and R-40 zoning districts outside existing platted subdivisions. 
(4)  Parking requirements. All parking (including handicap parking) shall be onsite, and it shall be provided in the side and/or rear of the property. The total number of parking spaces shall be based on the formula of one parking space per guest room, and one parking space for each employee. Parking areas shall be set back a minimum of ten feet and screened from adjacent properties. 
(5)  Length of stay for guests. No guest may stay at the facility for more than 14 days within any 30-day period. There shall be no cooking facilities within the guest rooms. Furthermore, the facility shall not be used for receptions, parties, or public gatherings. 
c.  Hotels/motels/motor lodges. New commercial facilities only—the following minimum standards shall apply to what will be defined as hotels/suite hotel/motel/motor lodge: 
(1)  Any hotel/suite hotel/hotel/motel/motor lodge in which more than 35 percent of the units include kitchenettes or kitchen facilities 1 , the following shall apply: 
(i)  Minimum acreage is two acres. 
(ii)  All rooms shall be accessed through a main or central lobby. 
(iii)  No rooms shall access to the exterior of the building unless required by fire/safety regulations. 
(iv)  Architectural style/design to be approved per Cherokee County Development Regulations and Commercial Architectural Standards. 
(v)  "Continental" style dining for the guests of the facility only is allowed within or near the main or central lobby without additional parking. 
(vi)  At a minimum, provisions for weekly cleaning of each suite must be provided. 
(vii)  Each suite must be protected with a smoke detector and sprinkler system approved by the fire marshal. 
(viii)  Each suite shall be required to include an automatic power shut off timer for each stove/cook top unit or other type burner. 
(ix)  There shall be no outside storage allowed or long term parking of heavy equipment, or parking of construction or related equipment. 
(x)  No facility under this section is to be converted or used primarily as an apartment or condominium. 
1 For the purpose of this section, kitchenettes or kitchen facilities are defined as a kitchen sink, a stove/cook top, microwave and/or a refrigerator. 
7.7-3 Retail sales or services (LBCS 2100). 
a.  Vehicle repair and service shall be conducted in a wholly enclosed building. 
b.  Vehicles or farm equipment for sale or display are permitted provided that all vehicles are setback at least ten feet from the street right-of-way. 
c.  General merchandise repair is permitted provided that: 
(1)  Such service shall be conducted in a wholly enclosed building. 
(2)  No outdoor storage of material, equipment or items being repaired is permitted. 
(3)  Such repair service shall not generate any noise, odors or fumes which can be detected beyond the walls of the building in which housed. 
d.  Heavy repair services and trade shops, including sheet metal, upholstering, electrical, plumbing carpentry, sign painting and other similar activities are permitted provided that all activities shall be conducted within a building or fenced area. 
e.  Building and landscape material sales (including wholesale) are permitted provided that: 
(1)  Outdoor lumber yards or storage areas shall be setback 50 feet from any road right-of-way and screened with landscaped berm or a six feet high privacy fence. 
f.  Lawn and garden centers may not sell or store bulk (i.e. loose or unpackaged) building or landscape materials. 
g.  Agricultural produce stands to sell produce that meets the Georgia Department of Agriculture "Georgia Grown" criteria are permitted in the AG zoning district subject to the requirements of this Section. Specifically, to qualify as "Georgia Grown", such agricultural produce shall be non-processed agriculture products grown in Georgia and/or processed or manufactured agriculture products if the key ingredient is grown in Georgia, and/or agricultural products grown on the property on which the produce stand is located. The following conditions shall also be met: 
(1)  Any structure for sales is located 35 feet or more from any property line; 
(2)  The building footprint (including all areas under roof) is less than 2,500 sq. ft.; and 
(3)  Not less than 20 percent of product offered for sale must be grown or produced on the property on which the produce stand is located. 
7.7-4 Real estate, rental and leasing (LBCS 2300). 
a.  Outdoor storage areas for vehicles (automobiles, boats, RVs, trailers, etc.) shall be screened from view with an opaque vegetative screen in front of a six feet high privacy fence. 
b.  Special event facilities, including but not limited to banquet halls, reception halls, and wedding chapels, are permitted in the AG district proved the following requirements are met: 
(1)  Parcel shall be a minimum of five acres and the occupancy of the assembly space is limited to a maximum of 200 people. 
(2)  The special event facility shall be subject to the commercial development standards set forth in article 7.5-3 and the Cherokee County Development Regulations. 
(3)  The special event facility shall have the outward appearance of a residential or agricultural structure. All buildings must comply with adopted building and life safety codes. 
(4)  The special event facility shall be open only for scheduled, event-based operations. Events include personal celebrations such as weddings, showers, birthday parties, fundraisers and similar occasions. All operations shall cease by 11:00 p.m. 
(5)  A traffic control plan approved by the county engineer shall be followed during hours of operation. 
(6)  Lighting shall be designed in accordance with the Article 25—Outdoor lighting and road glare ordinance. 
(7)  Outdoor loudspeakers shall not be permitted. 
7.7-5 Business, professional, scientific and technical services (LBCS 2400). 
a.  Laboratory research facilities are permitted provided that: 
(1)  Except district CP, the gross floor area shall not exceed 20,000 square feet. 
(2)  Such facilities are not objectionable by reason of emission of noise, vibration, smoke, dust, gas, fumes, odors, radiation and create fire or explosion hazards. 
(3)  There shall be no outdoor storage of goods. 
b.  The fabrication, repair and maintenance of outdoor advertising signs are permitted only in LI and HI provided that all activities shall be conducted within a building or fenced area. 
c.  Veterinary services is permitted in AG, R-80, R-60 and R40 but is limited to the treatment of large animals, including but not limited to horses, goats, llamas, alpacas, deer, donkeys, camels, bovine, swine, and sheep, etc. 
d.  Veterinary services that include outdoor boarding facilities are subject to section 7.7-7a. 
e.  Repossession services with outdoor storage areas is permitted provided that: 
(1)  The storage areas shall not exceed 5,000 square feet. 
(2)  The storage area shall be enclosed with a solid fence not projecting into the required front yard, not less than eight feet high and in no case less than such height as will effectively screen all storage and operations from view. 
(3)  Sales of auto parts shall not be permitted on the site. 
f.  Pest control is permitted in GC provided that: 
(1)  Other than vehicles, there shall be no outdoor storage of goods or equipment. 
(2)  Vehicles used in conjunction with the business shall be parked in the side and/or rear yard. Where it is impractical for business-related vehicles to be parked in the side or rear yard, such vehicles shall be allowed in the front yard provided that said vehicles shall not be permitted overnight or when the business is closed. 
(3)  This use shall have a maximum allowed floor space of 5,000 square feet per acre of total building floor space. 
7.7-6 Personal services (LBCS 2600). 
a.  Reserved. 
7.7-7 Pet and animal sales or services, excluding veterinary (LBCS 2700). 
a.  Animal shelters, boarding, breeding and kennels for the 24-hour care of domestic pets and animals shall be permitted provided that: 
(1)  All outdoor runs and fenced exercise areas shall be setback a minimum of 75 feet from any adjacent property in residential use. 
(2)  Outdoor runs and fenced exercise areas are encouraged to be located to the side and rear of the primary building. When outdoor runs and fenced exercise areas are located in the front yard area, fencing materials will need to be approved by planning staff. 
b.  Pet day care, pet sitting, pet grooming, and obedience training with less than 24-hour care of domestic pets and animals shall be permitted provided that any outdoor fenced areas meet the primary building setbacks. 
7.7-8 Manufacturing uses (LBCS 3100—3400). 
a.  Light manufacturing establishments involved in the production, processing, assembly, manufacturing, compounding, preparation, cleaning, servicing, storage, testing or repair of materials, goods or products are permitted in LI; however, the manufacturing and production of any product which emits noxious noise, odor or fumes shall not be permitted. 
b.  Heavy manufacturing establishments, other than those classified as light manufacturing, involved in the conversion of raw materials, such as ore, crude oil, timber, or unprocessed farm products, into usable finished products, are permitted in HI provided that wastes and air pollutants generated from the manufacturing process shall comply with all county, state and federal anti-pollution regulations. 
c.  Feed mill production and packing is permitted provided that any structure for such processing is located no closer than 100 feet to any property line. 
d.  Sawmills are permitted provided that outdoor storage shall be at least 50 feet from the street right-of-way line. 
e.  Temporary or portable sawmills are permitted provided that: 
(1)  Except in districts AG, GC and LI such mill shall only be permitted on a lot containing not less than five acres. 
(2)  A temporary use permit is required for a period not to exceed six months. 
(3)  Such mill may only process timber removed from the property on which it is located. 
(4)  No machine operation is located closer than 200 feet to any property line. If the adjoining district is zoned for residential use, such use shall be set back no less than 500 feet to a residential structure on adjoining property. 
f.  Farm wineries as defined and permitted under O.C.G.A. § 3-6-21.1 shall be permitted in the AG district, provided that the following additional conditions are met: 
(1)  Winery is located on a parcel of land greater than five acres. 
(2)  The winery may have a total of one tasting room on premises for purposes of on-site consumption of wine and related activities to the extent such additional activities are expressly provided in this section (the "tasting room"). 
(3)  The entrance and exit used for access to and from the winery and the tasting room shall be from a public road. 
(4)  Alcoholic beverage sales shall be limited to wine only. 
(5)  Outdoor loudspeakers shall not be permitted at any time. 
(6)  Food service shall only be permitted in the tasting room in conjunction with, and as a compliment to, wine tasting, and shall be limited to pre-prepared and/or pre-packaged finger foods, appetizers, cheese trays, and charcuterie boards, commonly served as an accompaniment to wine service. No ovens, fryers, grills, burners, or other commercial kitchen equipment shall be utilized in the preparation of such food. 
(7)  A retail sales area may be included in the tasting room, with package sales limited to wine grown and/or produced on the winery property. Retail sales other than wine shall be limited to wine-related incidental branded merchandise such as shirts, hats, glasses, and corkscrews. 
(8)  All buildings or site work not expressly involved in the agricultural operations of growing grapes, shall be subject to commercial development standards set forth in Article 7.5-3 and the Cherokee County Development Regulations, and must have an architectural appearance of a residential or agricultural building(s). 
(9)  Hosting of special events at the winery shall be governed by this section, rather than by Section 7.7-4b. Special events may be held at the winery, including but not limited to, personal celebrations such as weddings, birthday parties, corporate parties, fundraisers, and similar events, provided that the following additional requirements are met: 
i.  The special event shall be limited to a maximum of 200 guests. 
ii.  The special event is limited to specific, scheduled event-based operations, not ongoing, repetitive events that are advertised as open to the public. 
iii.  A traffic control plan approved by the County Engineer shall be followed during the hours of any special event upon the winery property. 
iv.  Lighting shall be designed in accordance with article 25—Outdoor Lighting and Road Glare ordinance. 
v.  Outdoor loudspeakers shall not be permitted. 
vi.  A caterer may be utilized to provide food and beverages for a special event. If a caterer is utilized and is properly licensed for the preparation and/or sale of food and alcoholic beverages, the prohibitions and limitations set forth above in this section as to food and beverages shall not apply to catering service for special events. 
(10)  Except for viticulture activities, all operations, activities, and events shall cease by 11:00 p.m. Monday-Saturday and by 8:00 p.m. on Sundays. 
7.7-9 Wholesale trade uses (LBCS 3500). 
a.  Wholesale trade and distribution establishments, including packing or wholesale commodities for distribution are permitted provided that: 
(1)  There shall be no outdoor storage of goods unless storage is permitted elsewhere in the district. 
(2)  Unless in a district in which manufacturing is permitted, no fabricating of goods to be sold shall be permitted. 
(3)  Unless in a district in which heavy manufacturing is permitted, no wholesaling activity shall be permitted which processes the goods handled in a manner that produces liquid or solid wastes or noise, odor, fumes or dust which can be detected beyond the walls of the building in which such wholesaling activity is housed. 
b.  Junk yards, scrap metal handling and salvage are permitted provided that: 
(1)  The yard shall be located not closer than three (300) feet to properties zoned or used for residential or commercial purposes. 
(2)  The yard shall be completely enclosed with a solid fence not projecting into the required front yard, not less than eight feet high and in no case less than such height as will effectively screen all storage and operations from view from any adjacent property or right-of-way. 
(3)  The incidental sale of auto parts removed from cars on the site shall be permitted. 
7.7-10 Warehouse and storage service uses (LBCS 3600). 
a.  Reserved. 
7.7-11 Transportation Service Uses (LBCS 4100). 
a.  Private airstrips for personal use require approval from the board of commissioners. 
b.  In AG, scenic and sightseeing transportation is limited to hot air balloon operations. 
c.  Towing service with storage areas is permitted provided that: 
(1)  The vehicle storage areas shall not exceed 5,000 square feet. 
(2)  The vehicle storage area shall be enclosed with a solid fence not projecting into the required front yard, not less than eight feet high and in no case less than such height as will effectively screen all storage and operations from view. 
(3)  Sales of auto parts shall not be permitted on the site. 
7.7-12 Communications and information uses (LBCS 4200). 
a.  Telecommunication towers. 
(1)  Applicability. 
(i)  Public property. Towers or antennas located on property owned, leased or otherwise controlled by the governing authority shall be exempt from the requirements of this section, provided a license or lease authorizing such tower or antenna has been approved by the governing authority. 
(ii)  Amateur radio. Receive-only antennas. This regulation shall not govern any tower or the installation of any antenna that is under 70 feet in height and is owned and operated by a federally-licensed amateur radio operator or is exclusively for receive only antennas. 
(iii)  Pre-existing towers and antennas. Any tower or antenna for which a permit has been properly issued prior to the effective date of this regulation shall not be required to meet the requirements of 7.7-12a(2)(v) and 7.7-12a(2)(vi). 
(2)  General guidelines and requirements. 
(i)  Purpose and goals. The purpose of this regulation is to establish general guidelines for the siting of towers and antennas. The goals of this regulation are to: 
a.  Encourage the location of towers in non-residential areas and minimize the total number of towers throughout the community, 
b.  Encourage strongly the joint use of new and existing tower sites throughout the county, 
c.  Encourage users of towers and antennas to locate them to the extent possible, in areas where the adverse impact on the community is minimal, 
d.  Encourage users of towers and antennas to configure them in a way that minimizes the adverse visual impact of the towers and antennas, and 
e.  Enhance the ability of the providers of telecommunications services to provide such services to the community quickly, effectively and efficiently. 
(ii)  Principal or accessory use. Towers and antennas may be considered either principal or accessory uses. A different existing use or an existing structure on the same lot shall not preclude the installation of an antenna or tower on such lot. For purposes of determining whether the installation of a tower or antenna complies with district development regulations, including but not limited to setback requirements, lot coverage requirements and other such requirements, the dimensions of the entire parcel of land shall control, even though the tower or antenna may be located on leased parcels within said parcel of land. Towers that are constructed, and antennas that are installed, in accordance with the provisions of this section shall not be deemed to constitute the expansion of a non-conforming use or structure. 
(iii)  Inventory of existing sites. Each applicant for an antenna or tower shall provide to the planning and zoning department an inventory of its existing towers that are either within the jurisdiction of the governing authority or within one-quarter (0.25) mile of the border thereof, height and design of each tower. The planning and zoning department may share such information with other applicants applying for approval under this section or other organizations seeking to locate antennas within the jurisdiction of the governing authority, provided the planning and zoning department is not, by sharing such information, in any way representing or warranting that such sites are available or suitable. 
(iv)  Aesthetics; lighting. The guidelines set forth in this section 7.7-12a(2)(iv) shall govern the location of all towers and the installation of all antennas governed by this section; provided, however, that the governing authority may waive these requirements if it determines that the goals of this section are better served thereby. 
a.  Towers shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish or subject to any applicable standards of the FAA, be painted a neutral color, so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness. 
b.  At a tower site, the design of the buildings and related structures shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening and landscaping that will blend the tower facilities to the natural setting and built environment. 
c.  If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment must be of a neutral color that is identical to or closely compatible with the color or the supporting structure so as to make the antenna and related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible. 
d.  Towers shall not be artificially lighted unless required by the FAA or other applicable authority. If lighting is required, the governing authority may review the available lighting alternatives and approve the design that would cause the least disturbance to the surrounding views. 
(v)  Federal requirements. All towers must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC and any other agency of the federal government with the authority to regulate towers and antennas. If such standards and regulations are changed, then the owners of the antennas and towers governed by this section shall bring such antennas and towers into compliance with such revised standards and regulations within six months of the effective date of such standards and regulations unless a more stringent compliance schedule in mandated by the controlling federal agency. Failure to bring towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and regulations shall constitute grounds for the removal of the antenna or tower at the owners' expense. Any such removal by the governing authority shall be in the manner provided in sections 41-2-8 through 41-2-17 of the Official Code of Georgia. 
(vi)  Building codes; safety standards. To ensure the structural integrity of towers, the owner of a tower shall ensure that it is maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable standards for towers that are published by the Electronic Industries Association, as amended from time to time. If, upon inspection, the governing authority concludes that a tower fails to comply with such codes and standards and constitutes a danger to persons or property, then upon notice being provided to the owner of the tower, the owner shall have 30 days to bring such tower into compliance within such standards. If the owner fails to bring such tower into compliance within said 30 days, the governing authority may remove such tower at the owners' expense. Any such removal by the governing authority shall be in that manner provided in sections 41-2-8 through 41-217 of the Official Code of Georgia. 
(3)  Permitted uses. 
(i)  General. All towers and antennas permitted by this subsection (a)(3) shall comply with all other requirements of the zoning ordinance, including but not limited to subsections 7.7-12a(2)(iv), 7.7-12a(2)(v) and 7.7-12a(2)(vi). 
(ii)  Location of towers or antennas. 
a.  Locating a tower or antenna, including the placement of additional buildings or other supporting equipment used in connection with said tower or antenna, is permitted in GC, NC, CP, OI, OD, HI and LI zoning districts; provided, however, that such tower or antenna shall be set back from any property line a distance equal to the height of the tower or antenna. 
b.  Locating a tower or antenna, including the placement of additional buildings or other supporting equipment used in connection with said tower or antenna, is permitted in AG zoning district; provided, however, that: 
1)  Such tower or antenna shall be set back from any property line a distance equal to the height of the tower or antenna; 
2)  Such tower or antenna shall be an alternative tower structure as defined in Article 4; and 
3)  Such tower or antenna may not be located on AG property located in a platted residential major subdivision as defined in Article 4. 
c.  Locating a tower or antenna, including the placement of additional buildings or other supporting equipment used in connection with said tower or antenna, is permitted in PUD zoning districts; provided, however, that such tower or antenna shall be located on portions of the property designated and approved for non-residential use and shall be set back from any property line a distance equal to the height of the tower or antenna. No tower or antenna may be located on portions of PUD zoned property designated, approved or used for residential or amenity purposes. "Amenity purposes" shall mean passive and active recreation areas, including but not limited to swimming pools, tennis courts, basketball courts, athletic fields, parks, playgrounds, golf courses, pedestrian trails, and reserved greenspace, intended for the enjoyment and benefit of residents in close proximity to the property being used for amenity purposes. 
d.  Locating a tower or antenna, including the placement of additional buildings or other supporting equipment used in connection with said tower or antenna, is prohibited in R-80, R-60, R-40, R-30, R-20, R-15, RD-3, RZL, RA, RTH, RM-10, and RM-16 districts. 
e.  An antenna may be installed on an existing structure other than a tower (such as a building, light pole, water tower or other freestanding nonresidential structure) that is 50 feet in height or greater, so long as said additional antenna adds no more than 20 feet to the height of said existing structure. 
f.  An antenna may be installed on an existing tower, so long as the addition of said antenna adds no more than 20 feet to the height of said existing tower; provided, however, that such a specific use shall not include the placement of additional buildings or other supporting equipment used in connection with said antenna. 
g.  Nonconforming towers and antennas. Any tower or antenna lawfully existing on the effective date of the adoption of this ordinance or an amendment thereto, and any tower or antenna for which a permit has been properly issued shall be considered a legal nonconforming use of the property on which it is permitted and erected and shall be allowed to remain despite otherwise failing to comply with the use restrictions and performance standards of the zoning district in which it is located even if such property should be rezoned in the future to a district that does not permit the tower or antenna; provided, however, notwithstanding the designation as a lawful nonconforming use, any addition or modification of equipment or antennae shall conform to the requirements of this section. 
(iii)  Availability of suitable existing towers or other structures. No new tower shall be permitted unless the applicant demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of the governing authority that no existing tower or structure can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna. Evidence submitted by a certified engineer to demonstrate that no existing tower or structure can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna shall consist of the following: 
a.  No existing towers or structures are located within the geographic area required to meet the applicant's engineering requirements. 
b.  Existing towers or structures are not of sufficient height to meet the applicant's engineering requirements. 
c.  Existing towers or structures do not have sufficient structural strength to support the applicant's proposed antenna and related equipment. 
d.  The applicant's proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic interference with the antenna on the existing towers or structures or the antenna on the existing towers or structures would cause interference with the applicant's proposed antenna. 
e.  The fees, costs or contractual provisions required by the owner in order to share an existing tower or structure for sharing are in excess of the cost of new tower development. 
f.  The applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting factors that render existing towers and structures unsuitable. 
(iv)  Setbacks and separation. The following setbacks and separation requirements shall apply to all towers and antennas for which local government approval is required; provided, however, that the governing authority may reduce the standard setbacks and separation requirements if the goals of this Section would be better served thereby. 
a.  Towers must be set back a distance equal to the height of the tower from any on-site property line. 
b.  Towers, guy wires and accessory facilities must satisfy the minimum zoning district setback requirements. 
c.  In zoning districts other than industrial or commercial zoning districts, towers over 90 feet in height shall not be located within one-quarter (0.25) of a mile from any existing tower that is over 90 feet in height. 
(v)  Security fencing. Towers shall be enclosed by security fencing not less than six feet in height and shall also be equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing device. 
(vi)  Landscaping. The following requirements shall govern the landscaping surrounding towers; provided, however, that the governing authority may waive such requirements if the goals of this Section would better be served thereby. 
a.  Tower facilities shall be landscaped with a buffer of plant materials that provides a solid visual screen from adjacent residential property. The standards buffer shall consist of a landscaped strip at least five feet wide outside the perimeter of the compound. 
b.  In locations where the visual impact of the tower would be minimal, the landscaping requirements may be reduced or waived. 
c.  Existing mature tree growth and natural land forms on the site shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible. In some cases, such as towers sited on large, wooded lots, natural growth around the property perimeter may be sufficient buffer. 
(4)  Removal of abandoned towers or antennas. Any tower or antenna that is not operated for a continuous period of 12 months shall be considered abandoned and the owner of such tower or antenna shall remove same within 90 days of receipt of notice from the governing authority notifying the owner of such abandonment. If such antenna or tower is not removed within said 90 days, the governing authority may in the manner provided in Sections 41-2-8 through 41-2-17 of the Official Code of Georgia, remove such antenna or tower at the owners' expense. If there are two or more users of a single tower, then this provision shall not become effective until all users cease using the tower. (As amended October 25, 1996 by the Board of Commissioners). 
b.  Ham radio operator broadcast towers. Poles, master towers and antennas used in operation of amateur radios licensed by the Federal Communication Commission shall be governed by the following requirements: 
(1)  Amateur radio service antenna structures (notwithstanding) any other code section of this ordinance may be erected to such heights appropriate to accommodate communications provided that no such structure shall be placed less than one-half its height from the nearest property line, provided all such structures are painted neutral colors to minimize visual intrusion and that all such structures are equipped with suitable anti-climbing devices. All antenna structures must comply with FCC and FAA regulations. 
(2)  Antennas shall meet all manufacturers' specifications. The mast or tower shall be of non-combustible and non-corrosive hardware. Hardware such as brackets, turnbuckles, clips and similar type equipment subject to rust or corrosion shall be protected with a zinc or cadmium coating by either galvanizing or a sheradizing process after forming. These finishes are selected to guard against corrosion and to protect the elements against electrolytic action due to the use of adjoining dissimilar metals. 
(3)  Every antenna must be adequately grounded. 
(4)  No antenna towers are permitted in the front yard area of any zoning district. Guy wires, support anchor structures and a maximum of one wire antenna are permitted within the front yard area in all zoning districts. All guy wires and support anchor structures within a front yard may not be located between the front of the house and the front property line and should be as close as possible to the side property line. Guy wires and wire antennas within a front yard may be anchored to a tree located on the property instead of a support anchor structure. 
(5)  Guy wires support anchor structures and wire antennas may be located within the required setbacks in all zoning districts. 
7.7-13 Utilities and utility services (LBCS 4300). 
a.  Public utilities such as electric transformer stations, gas regulator stations and telephone exchanges are permitted provided that: 
(1)  Any building or structure, except an enclosing fence shall be set back not less than 20 feet from any property line and shall meet all applicable yard requirements in excess thereof. 
(2)  Such uses shall be enclosed by a fence not less than eight feet in height. 
(3)  The required front yard and other open space on the premises outside the fenced area shall be grassed, landscaped and maintained in an appropriate manner. 
(4)  The storage of vehicles and equipment on the premises shall be prohibited. 
b.  Solid waste transfer stations and landfills are permitted in the HI district. For purposes of amendments to this resolution, the Cherokee County Landfill and Waste Disposal Ordinance enacted July 24, 1990, is incorporated herein and made a part of this ordinance. Where a conflict between the provisions exists, the stricter provisions shall apply. 
c.  Inert waste landfills are permitted in district HI, provided that the following conditions have been met: 
(1)  Such facility shall conform to State of Georgia Rules and Regulations for Solid Wastes Management. 
(2)  The operation can and shall be conducted in such a manner that air, land and water pollution and public health hazard nuisances are prevented. 
(3)  Such facility shall not be located in any wetland, or area being designated as 100-year floodplain. 
(4)  Such facility shall not be located near a significant groundwater recharge area. 
(5)  Such facility shall not be situated within two miles up gradient of any surface water intake for a public drinking water source. 
(6)  The location, the boundaries and the proposed method of operation shall have been approved by the Cherokee County Health Department and the county engineer. The health department and county engineer shall both collect reasonable and appropriate fees for the inspection in advance. 
(7)  Such facility shall be accessible without excessive travel over residential streets. Proposed truck traffic routes and entrances to the facility shall be approved in advance of the board's hearing by the county engineer. Turn lanes and expansion necessary to improve sight distance and other safety requirement shall be made a condition by the board. 
(8)  All-weather access roads shall be provided to the disposal site. 
(9)  Such facility shall be suitably fenced to prevent the spread of papers and other materials and shall be screened and planted so that it is not visible from any residential, commercial or industrial structure or from any street. 
(10)  A minimum of [200] feet buffer area with dense natural foliage shall be provided between the property line and the operation line. No clearing and grubbing shall take place in buffer areas except as required for the construction of drainage devices, groundwater monitoring wells and access roads. 
d.  Private sewage treatment facilities serving multiple developments are limited to the HI zoning district. 
7.7-14 Arts, entertainment, and recreation uses (LBCS 5100—5500). 
a.  Amusements and outdoor recreational facilities, including but not limited to, driving ranges (golf or baseball), miniature golf courses, tennis courts, sports training facilities, and shooting ranges, together with their related commercial activities are permitted subject to the grant of a special use permit or as a restricted use as set forth in Table 7.2, provided that the following requirements are met: 
(1)  The facility shall be enclosed by a wall or fence. 
(2)  A perimeter landscape buffer area of ten feet is required adjacent to surrounding property. The buffer must meet county standards for year-round visual screening. 
(3)  Central loudspeakers shall be prohibited. 
(4)  All other requirements in this Section 7.7-14 shall be met as applicable for the specific use. 
(5)  All related commercial activities permitted under this section shall be limited to the hours of operation for the primary amusement and recreation use. 
b.  In addition to meeting the requirements of Section 7.7-14a, if an outdoor recreational facility is in AG, the following additional conditions must be met: 
(1)  Parcel must be ten acres or more. 
(2)  A perimeter landscape buffer of 50 feet is required adjacent to surrounding property. The buffer must meet county standards for year-round visual screening. This is in place of the ten foot buffer required above. 
(3)  A traffic control plan approved by the county engineer shall be followed during hours of operation. 
c.  Indoor recreational facilities are permitted subject to the grant of a special use permit or as a restricted use as set forth in Table 7.2, provided the following conditions are met: 
(1)  Outdoor loudspeakers shall be prohibited. 
(2)  A traffic control plan may be required at the discretion of the county engineer. 
(3)  Related commercial activities shall be permitted, but shall be within the enclosed area and limited to the hours of operation for the primary indoor recreation use. 
d.  Golf courses and clubhouses not associated with a residential neighborhood are permitted provided that: 
(1)  The golf course shall be a full nine-hole or more course. 
(2)  Any building or structure established in connection with such use shall be set back no less than 100 feet from any property line except where such property line is a street line. 
(3)  Lighting shall be designed in accordance with the article 25—Outdoor lighting and road glare ordinance. 
(4)  Central loudspeakers shall be prohibited. 
e.  Community or neighborhood centers including subdivision clubhouses with or without swimming and tennis facilities are permitted provided that: 
(1)  The facility shall be designed to provide adequate screening of the facility to create a visual and sound buffer for adjacent properties. The facility shall be designed to accommodate no more than those residing within two adjoining residential developments. 
(2)  Buildings and structures established in connection with such use shall be set back not less than 75 feet from any property line: 
(i)  The setback may be reduced to 20 feet from an interior property line of the property line of the property on which the use is located if a ten-foot landscaped buffer is provided along said property line and a six-foot privacy fence is erected and maintained along said line so as to provide a visual and noise screen for adjacent property; provided, however, the setback after reduction shall not be less than 100 feet from an exterior property line unless also reduced in accordance with above. 
(3)  Swimming pools must comply with all applicable ordinances and must have necessary approvals from the health department and Cherokee County Building Inspections Department; 
(4)  Outdoor activity shall cease by 11:00 p.m. 
(5)  Lighting shall be designed in accordance with the article 25—Outdoor lighting and road glare ordinance. 
(6)  Parking spaces: 
(i)  A minimum of 20 on-site parking spaces shall be provided for amenities which include a swim facility or swim/tennis with up to four courts. Additional spaces at the minimum of four spaces per court shall be provided for each court over four in number. A minimum of ten spaces for every two courts shall be provided for amenities which include tennis courts only; 
(ii)  In addition to the requirement above, a minimum of five spaces for each 50 residents or pro-rated portion thereof, over 100 shall be provided; and 
f.  Shooting ranges are permitted subject to the grant of a special use permit, and are subject to any conditions attached to such special use permit, and in addition to the requirements set forth in Section 7.7-14 a, b, and c, shooting ranges are subject to the following additional requirements: 
(1)  Indoor shooting ranges. 
i.  All indoor shooting ranges shall be of soundproof construction, whereby the sound from the discharge of any firearm and the impact of any projectile shall not be plainly audible across any adjoining property line or at a distance of 50 feet from the building, whichever distance is greater. 
ii.  No piece of the projectile or target shall leave the building as a result of the activities taking place therein. 
iii.  The National Association of Shooting Ranges and the Occupational Safety and Health Administration publication titled "Lead Management and OSHA Compliance for Indoor Shooting Ranges" should be consulted in planning and constructing an indoor shooting range. 
(2)  Outdoor shooting ranges. 
i.  All outdoor shooting ranges shall be located on property with a minimum of 20 acres. 
ii.  No buildings, facilities, ranges, or lanes associated with the use shall be located closer than 300 feet from any property line. Within that 300 feet, a perimeter landscape buffer of 50 feet is required adjacent to surrounding property. The buffer must meet county standards for year-round visual screening. 
iii.  Outdoor ranges shall require the preparation and submittal of a plan/study from an acoustical expert, demonstrating that the proposed range design plan is the most effective noise-diminishing plan possible to protect neighboring landowners, and shall include details as to all sound attenuation techniques used to reduce noise. Such plan shall be submitted in conjunction with the special use permit process for such outdoor range to be considered for permitting. 
(3)  Applicable to indoor and outdoor shooting ranges. 
i.  All indoor and outdoor shooting ranges shall comply with all local, state, and/or federal regulations related to shooting ranges. 
ii.  In planning for an indoor or outdoor shooting range the National Rifle Association publication titled "The NRA Range Sourcebook" should be consulted. 
7.7-15 Educational services (LBCS 6100). 
a.  Group day care homes are permitted within AG, R-80, R-60, R-40, R-30, R-20, R-15 districts with the following requirements: 
(1)  Group day care homes must be licensed by the State of Georgia and meet all applicable requirements. 
(2)  All proposed locations for group day care homes must meet the minimum lot area requirements for the designated zoning district. 
(3)  A group day care home shall be located on an arterial, major or minor collector road. 
(4)  The group day care home shall retain the outward appearance of a single-family home. 
(5)  Outdoor loudspeakers shall not be permitted. 
(6)  All exterior play structures, such as swing sets, playground equipment, etc., shall be located at least 50 feet from any side or rear property line. If a year-round vegetative screen is provided at 85% opacity the setback may be reduced to 25 feet. 
(7)  Off-street parking shall conform to the parking regulations as provided in article 12. 
b.  Commercial day care centers are permitted within OI, NC, GC, CP and LI districts with the following requirements: 
(1)  Commercial day care centers must be licensed by the State of Georgia and meet all applicable requirements. 
(2)  Commercial day care centers shall be subject to the commercial development standards set forth in article 7.5-3 and the Cherokee County Development Regulations. 
(3)  All exterior play structures, such as swing sets, playground equipment, etc., shall be located at least 50 feet from any side or rear property line. If a yearround vegetative screen is provided at 85 percent opacity the setback may be reduced to 25 feet. 
(4)  Outdoor loudspeakers shall not be permitted. 
c.  Private or parochial schools are permitted provided that: 
(1)  Minimum lot size for such developments located in the AG and all residential districts shall be five acres. Minimum lot size for such developments located in the OI, CP, NC and GC districts shall meet the minimum area for the district as shown in Table 7.1. 
(2)  The main entrance of such development shall be on an arterial, major or minor collector road. 
(3)  A private or parochial school shall be subject to the commercial development standards set forth in article 7.5-3 and the Cherokee County Development Regulations. 
(4)  A commercial day care center shall be allowed to be operated in conjunction with and as an integral part of a private or parochial school, provided that the requirements set forth in article 7.7-15b are met. 
(5)  A private or parochial school may be an accessory use to an existing or planned Place of Worship, provided such development has the minimum acreage required above in addition to the area required for the Place of Worship to which the school may be accessory; and a Special Use permit is obtained in accordance with the provisions outlined in article 18 of the Zoning Ordinance. 
7.7-16 Public administration, government and safety (LBCS 6200—6400). 
a.  Reserved. 
7.7-17 Housing services for the elderly (LBCS 1200) and health and human services (LBCS 6500). 
a.  Homes for the elderly without nursing care, residential mental retardation facilities, residential mental health facilities, residential substance abuse facilities, and other residential care facilities are permitted in AG and all residential districts only to the extent they function as small personal care homes, and subject to the following additional conditions: 
(1)  The home is approved and licensed by the State of Georgia or any agency through which it acts. 
(2)  Number of residents: 
i.  A maximum of six ambulatory residents and necessary staff may reside in a small personal care home. 
(3)  Small personal care homes shall retain the outward appearance of a single-family home. 
(4)  Off-street parking for small personal care homes shall conform to residential parking standards. 
(5)  No small personal care home shall be operated within a 1,000 feet of any other residential care facility. The 1,000 foot distance is measured by the straight line which is the shortest distance between the property lines of the two tracts of land on which each facility is located. 
b.  Accommodations. Notwithstanding any other provisions in this section to the contrary, a property owner or applicant may petition the board of commissioners for an accommodation under either the Fair Housing Act or the Americans with Disabilities Act upon a showing that, based on medical or scientific studies, that the requested accommodation is the minimum necessary variance from the restrictions of this section, that the requested accommodation does not impose an undue burden or expense on the county or its citizens, and that the requested accommodation does not effectively create a fundamental alteration of the existing zoning scheme. All procedural requirements related to consideration, approval, and appeal of hardship variances shall apply, with the exception that the request shall come before the board of commissioners, rather than the zoning board of appeals. 
7.7-18 Religious institutions (LBCS 6600). 
a.  Places of Worship in the AG district and all residential zoning districts that conform to the requirements of this subsection (a) shall be allowed as a matter of right. Places of Worship in the AG district or any residential zoning district that do not meet the requirements of this subsection (a) shall be allowed if a Special Use Permit is obtained in accordance with the provisions outlined in article 18 of the Zoning Ordinance. 
(1)  The place of worship shall: 
(a)  Have primary access from an arterial or collector road, 
(b)  Be located on a site of not less than two acres, and 
(c)  Have not less than 200 feet of road frontage. 
(2)  The aggregate square footage of all buildings on the property shall not be greater than 10,000 square feet. 
(3)  All buildings must be setback at least 50 feet from any street and at least 30 feet from any side or rear property line. If located on an existing two lane Arterial road, the front building setback shall be 75 feet. If located on an existing two lane Collector road, the front building setback shall be 65 feet. 
(4)  No parking within the front yard setback area. 
(5)  If adjacent to property zoned residential, or adjacent to property zoned AG with a residential use thereon, a buffer of at least 30 feet shall be provided along the property lines adjacent to said property. 
(6)  Regardless of zoning classification, all buildings and related appurtenances shall comply with the provisions of article 7.5-3. A building used as a parsonage associated with the Place of Worship on the property is exempt from this requirement. 
b.  Places of Worship in any commercial district or the LI zoning district that conform to the requirements of this subsection (b) shall be allowed as a matter of right. Places of Worship in a commercial district or the LI zoning district that do not meet the requirements of this subsection (b) shall be allowed if a Special Use Permit is obtained in accordance with the provisions outlined in article 18 of the Zoning Ordinance. 
(1)  The Place of Worship shall have primary access from an arterial or collector road, unless the place of worship is located within a planned industrial park. 
(2)  The buildings must be setback at least 50 feet from any street and at least 30 feet from any side or rear property line. If located on an existing two lane Arterial road, the front building setback shall be 75 feet. If located on an existing two lane Collector road, the front building setback shall be 65 feet. 
(3)  Regardless of zoning classification, all buildings and related appurtenances shall comply with the provisions of Ordinance article 7.5-3. A building used as a parsonage associated with the Place of Worship on the property is exempt from this requirement. 
c.  The following additional uses may be permitted as an accessory use (as defined in article 4 of the Zoning Ordinance) to a Place of Worship only upon approval of a Special Use Permit in accordance with the provisions outlined in article 18 of the Zoning Ordinance and only to the extent the purported accessory use and related accessory structure complies with the limitations for an accessory use and accessory structure as specified in article 4 of the Zoning Ordinance: 
(1)  Outdoor ball fields (lighted or unlighted), pools, or similar outdoor recreational facilities whether in conjunction with an accessory use identified herein as a daycare center, kindergarten, or private school, or whether as a separate accessory use. 
(2)  Cemeteries, mausoleums, or other legally permitted interment space or burial chamber. 
(3)  Day care centers. 
(4)  Kindergartens. 
(5)  Private schools (K-12). 
(6)  Health and social services, including but not limited to, temporary shelters, transitional housing, and other similar facilities that are provided free of charge in furtherance of the ministry and/or goals of the Place of Worship. 
d.  No commercial uses or uses that result in a profit-seeking or profit based enterprise shall be permitted as an accessory use, even if the proceeds derived from the commercial use are said to be for purposes of supporting the religious organization. 
7.7-19 Death care services (LBCS 6700). 
a.  The development of a funeral establishment is permitted provided that: 
(1)  Such development may front only on a collector, or major street or state highway and the entrance and exits to it shall be only from the street on which it fronts, unless the funeral establishment is a part of a planned commercial center utilizing common access drives and entrances. 
(2)  Such funeral establishment shall be licensed by and comply with the rules of the State of Georgia. 
(3)  A crematory located on or adjacent to a tract or parcel of land which contains a funeral establishment is permitted in a GC (General Commercial) zoning district only as an accessory use to the funeral establishment provided the following criteria are met: 
(i)  Retort exhaust not be located within 1,000 feet of the property lines of a residential subdivision platted and recorded in the office of the clerk of the superior court. 
(ii)  Shall comply with all relevant requirements, including emissions, air quality and separation or distance standards established by federal or state agencies related to cremators and/or crematories. 
(iii)  Shall be licensed by and comply with the rules of the State of Georgia. 
b.  The development of a cemetery or mausoleum is permitted provided that: 
(1)  Such development may front only on a collector, or major street or state highway and the entrance and exits to it shall be only from the street on which it fronts. 
(2)  An existing cemetery in an AG zoning district may be extended into a contiguous AG, R-80 or R-60 district if a dense vegetative screen or combination screen and fence or ten-foot buffer is provided along the side and rear property lines of the expanded property. 
c.  Crematories may be permitted in LI and HI zoning districts provided that such facility: 
(1)  Shall be licensed by and comply with the rules of the State of Georgia. 
(2)  Shall comply with all relevant requirements, including emissions, air quality and separation or distance standards established by federal or state agencies related to cremators and/or crematories. 
7.7-20 Associations, nonprofit organizations, etc. (LBCS 6800). 
a.  Reserved. 
7.7-21 Construction-related businesses (LBCS 7100—7400). 
a.  Outdoor storage yards for vehicles, equipment and materials are permitted provided that: 
(1)  The storage yard shall be enclosed with a privacy fence not projecting into the required front yard, not less than eight feet high to effectively screen all storage and operations from view. 
(2)  Sales of materials shall not be permitted on the site. 
7.7-22 Crop production (LBCS 9100). 
a.  Commercial horticulture, which includes the growing of fruits, trees, nuts, vegetables and plants is permitted provided that no structure used in such activity is located closer than 100 feet to any property line. 
7.7-23 Support functions for agriculture (LBCS 9200). 
a.  Livestock sales pavilions or auction facilities, show rings or other arena for the display, exhibition, training or sales of livestock are permitted provided that no animal quarters are located closer than 75 feet to any property line. Adequate off-street parking shall be provided for livestock trailers, recreational vehicles, etc., associated with the proposed use in addition to the minimum requirements of the Zoning Ordinance. 
7.7-24 Animal production (LBCS 9300). 
a.  The raising and keeping of livestock for non-commercial purposes (i.e. personal pleasure) shall be allowed in all residential districts on tracts of two acres or more, but limited to one animal per acre. 
b.  Animal quarters may be located no closer than 75 feet to any property line when used in the care and breeding of livestock such as cattle, hogs, sheep, horses, i.e. farm animals. 
c.  Commercial stables and riding academies are permitted in R-80, R-60 and R-40 districts provided that: 
(1)  The parcel is a minimum of five acres. 
(2)  The quantity of livestock on the parcel does not exceed one animal per acre. 
d.  The raising and keeping of wild animals is permitted provided that the owner or custodian of such wild animals has received an appropriate permit and meets all the requirements of the State of Georgia and further provided that no animal quarters are located closer than 200 feet to any property line. 
7.7-25 Forestry and logging (LBCS 9400). 
a.  Reserved. 
7.7-26 Fishing, hunting and trapping, game preserves (LBCS 9500). 
a.  Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 94-9, 6-14-94; Ord. No. 95-19, 8-25-95; Ord. No. 96-08, §§ 1, 2, 4-9-96; Ord. No. 96-15, § 2, 10-25-96; Ord. No. 97-2, 2-28-97; Ord. No. 98-O-15, 8-28-98; Ord. No. 99-O-29, §§ 2, 3, 9-14-99; Ord. No. 2001-019, §§ 1, 2, 4-10-01; Ord. No. 2002-Z-005, 8-20-02; Ord. No. 2003-Z-002, 4-22-03; Ord. No. 2003-Z-006, 12-2-03; Ord. No. 2006-Z-005, 6-20-06; Ord. No. 2006-Z-008, 5-16-06; Ord. No. 2007-Z-002, 8-7-07; Ord. No. 2008-Z-002, § 2, 09-16-08; Ord. No. 2009-O-006, § IB, 10-20-09; Ord. No. 2010-Z-002, Exh. A, 10-5-10; Ord. No. 2011-Z-001, 3-1-11; Ord. No. 2012-Z-001, Exh. A, 3-20-12; Ord. of 11-6-12; Ord. No. 2015-O-008, Exh. A, 10-6-15; Ord. No. 2016-O-006, 12-6-16; Ord. No. 2018-O-003, 4-3-18; Ord. No. 2018-O-013, § 1, 10-16-18; Ord. No. 2018-O-014, §§ 2, 4, 10-16-18) 
7.8 - Prohibited uses. 
The following uses are prohibited in all districts: 
7.8-1 Uses other than those which are permitted pursuant to this ordinance. 
7.8-2 No more than one dwelling unit in agriculture and residential zoned districts except where specifically provided or except as permitted pursuant to variance. 
7.8-3 Uses by the Cherokee County governing authority for governmental purposes on behalf of Cherokee County are not prohibited in any zoned district. 
ARTICLE 8. - TRADITIONAL NEIGHBORHOOD DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2006-Z-004, adopted May 2, 2006, repealed the former article 8, §§ 8.1—8.10, and enacted a new article 8 as set out herein. The former article 8 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord No. 2000-17, adopted Oct. 24, 2000. 

8.1 - Purpose. 
8.1.1 The traditional neighborhood development ordinance serves to encourage developing as one project, tracts of land that are sufficiently large to allow a site design for a group of uses, as a mixed-use development, while maintaining compatibility with the surrounding area and creating an attractive, efficient and stable environment. It encourages a mixture of housing types, prominently sited civic or community buildings, and commercial or office/institutional workplaces to provide a balanced mix of activities and public spaces. To this end, a project must consist of more than one type of land use to be considered a traditional neighborhood development. The ordinance promotes flexibility in the application of development standards, best possible site planning and arrangement of land uses in a master development plan aimed at ensuring the conservation of the natural environment, more efficient use of land, and efficiency in the extension of streets and utilities. It is further the purpose of the traditional neighborhood development ordinance to take into account the following: 
a)  Advances in technology and design, for example the use of pervious materials in the paving of parking lots, driveways, etc. 
b)  Recognition and resolution of problems associated with sprawl developments, through, for example, the creation of a network of interconnecting, pedestrian oriented streets and other public spaces. 
c)  A comprehensive development equal to or better than that resulting from typical lot-by-lot land use development, in which the design of the overall site permits increased freedom in the placement and uses of buildings and the location of open spaces, circulation facilities, off-street parking areas and other facilities. 
d)  The conservation of sites characterized by special features of geography, topography, size or shape. 
e)  The height and bulk characteristics of buildings can vary as long as the ratio of site area to buildings and openness of the project site will be in harmony with the area in which the proposed development is located. 
(Ord. No. 2006-Z-004, 5-2-06) 
8.2 - Findings for project approval. 
8.2.1 The traditional neighborhood development ordinance is not intended for speculative purposes to enhance the value of property. As such, approval of a traditional neighborhood development project shall be on a site-specific basis, as a conditional use, based upon the submission and approval of a detailed master plan. If construction is not commenced within one year, after obtaining all the necessary permits, or pursued contrary to the approved master plan, the board of commissioners may, upon written recommendation from the director of planning and zoning and written notice to the applicant, following a hearing, revoke the approval and/or reduce the size of the approved traditional neighborhood development project to fit the scope of actual development. The board of commissioners shall approve a traditional neighborhood development project only if it finds that the proposed project will satisfy standards of this article including the following: 
a)  That the proposed traditional neighborhood development project is an effective and unified treatment of development possibilities on the project site, while remaining consistent with the county's comprehensive development plan and future land use map, and making appropriate provisions for the preservation of natural features such as streams, and wetlands. 
b)  That the proposed traditional neighborhood development project will be compatible (location, size, design and operating characteristics) with the area surrounding the project site, and with no greater demand on public facilities and services than other authorized uses for the land. 
c)  That the statement of the proposed development schedule demonstrates a readiness to begin construction within one year, upon obtaining all necessary permits, and assures a timely completion of the proposed development. 
(Ord. No. 2006-Z-004, 5-2-06) 
8.3 - General standards and requirements. 
8.3.1 Size of the traditional neighborhood development site. A tract of land to be developed as a traditional neighborhood development shall contain not less than 20 contiguous acres and not more than 250 acres, and be of a configuration that is conducive to a traditional neighborhood development. The simultaneous planning of larger and adjacent parcels is encouraged. 
Notwithstanding the provisions noted above, a traditional neighborhood development may have land that is less than 20 acres if the board of commissioners, upon showing by the applicant, is convinced that a traditional neighborhood development is in the public interest because one or more of the following conditions exist: 
a)  The property is adjacent to or across a street from property that has been developed or redeveloped under a traditional neighborhood development ordinance, and a traditional neighborhood development will contribute to the maintenance of the character, amenities, values and architectural style of the neighboring traditional neighborhood development. 
8.3.2 Pedestrian shed. The basis of any traditional neighborhood development shall be the pedestrian shed. The pedestrian shed represents the physical limits most Americans will walk before choosing to drive. Traditional neighborhood development, by design, is compact, walkable, and mixed-use, and it is meant to be comfortable, safe, and ecologically sustainable. It allows a mix of uses within the neighborhood, so its residents or customers do not have to drive everywhere. A TND may be comprised of a partial or entire standard pedestrian shed (¼-mile radius) or more than one standard pedestrian shed including neighborhood edge T3, neighborhood general T4 and neighborhood center T5 as specified in Table 14-a. Larger sites shall be designed and developed as multiple pedestrian sheds, each with the individual neighborhood zone requirements as specified in Tables 1 and 14-a. 
8.3.3 Ownership of land. All of the land in a traditional neighborhood development shall initially be under one ownership. Individual properties in the traditional neighborhood development may be sold after a plat has been recorded, with the properties subject to deed covenants/restrictions that ensure the continuance of the traditional neighborhood development as originally approved and developed. 
8.3.4 Location. The traditional neighborhood developments shall be appropriate in the following locations: 
a)  On property within the alternate use corridors; 
b)  On land within the adopted future growth boundary areas of the cities of Cherokee County; 
c)  In areas planned for high density residential use on the adopted interim land use policy map; 
d)  On property outside of the areas listed above (subsections a)—c)), provided the following conditions exist: 
i.  Subject property is served by an urban road, as identified by the Georgia Department of Transportation Functional Classification Map 2005; and 
ii.  Subject property is within an area of a street density of 6.03 miles/square mile or greater, as determined by Cherokee County; and 
iii.  Subject property is not currently zoned for medium to low density residential or PUD use. 
8.3.5 Phasing. In the event the traditional neighborhood development project contains phases of development and construction, such phases shall be indicated and approved as part of the traditional neighborhood development master plan. 
8.3.6 Buffer requirements. No buffers shall be required between uses inside of traditional neighborhood developments. 
Buffers shall be required between TND and other zoning districts under the following circumstances: 
a)  TND to adjacent developed commercial or residential property. 
1.  Existing developed commercial or residential property adjacent to a planned TND which does not plan for connection points (either vehicular or pedestrian) within an approved neighborhood plan shall have a 30-foot buffer. 
2.  Where a neighborhood plan proposes similar building type, use, and lot configuration as found on adjacent developed property, and proposes to connect said properties, a minimum buffer of ten feet shall be maintained. 
b)  TND to other industrial districts. 
1.  Existing industrial development shall have a 50-foot buffer. 
(Ord. No. 2006-Z-004, 5-2-06; Ord. No. 2007-Z-002, 8-7-07) 
8.4 - Neighborhood plans. 
8.4.1 Neighborhood plans may be prepared by an owner, a developer, or by the planning office. Each neighborhood plan shall contain: 
a)  Regulating plan: 
i.  Proposed configuration of neighborhood zones. 
ii.  Proposed street network. 
iii.  Proposed civic building sites and civic spaces. 
iv.  Frontage characteristics of commercial streets. 
v.  Pedestrian shed circles. 
b)  Illustrative plan (building scale plan): 
i.  Building disposition (lots and building footprint). 
ii.  Configuration (frontages and building heights). 
iii.  Building function and density. 
iv.  Parking standards. 
c)  Community standards: 
i.  Covenants for community governance. 
ii.  Architectural standards. 
iii.  Environmental standards. 
iv.  Landscape standards. 
- Including a tree plan meeting the requirements of Article 25 Tree Preservation and Replacement Ordinance. 
v.  Signage. 
vi.  Ambient (lighting and sound). 
vii.  Visitibility. 
8.4.2 Neighborhoods shall be planned according to the provisions of this Code and shall be of the neighborhood zones described herein. 
8.4.3 Each neighborhood plan shall respond to the existing conditions of the site, adjacent developments, connecting thoroughfares, natural features and manmade traces. 
8.4.4 Each neighborhood plan, responding to existing conditions, shall be structured as one or several pedestrian sheds. 
8.4.5 Each neighborhood plan shall allocate the neighborhood zones and densities as specified in section 8.6 and Table 14. 
8.4.6 Each neighborhood plan shall lay out the thoroughfare network according to the provisions of section 8.7 and Tables 10A and B. 
8.4.7 Each neighborhood plan shall allocate the civic functions according to section 8.8. 
8.4.8 Each neighborhood plan shall be detailed with the special requirements described in section 8.11. 
8.4.9 Each neighborhood plan shall include a set of building standards prepared in accordance with the requirements of sections 8.10, 8.11 and 8.12. 
TABLE 1: Neighborhood zone descriptions. This table provides description of the character of each neighborhood zone. 
Neighborhood zone desc. 
(Ord. No. 2006-Z-004, 5-2-06) 
8.5 - TND planning process. 
8.5.1 Neighborhood plans shall demonstrate adherence to the following standard planning protocol for TND's: 
Step 1 Map existing site resources. 
a)  Identify and delineate paths, roads, ponds, woods, streams, slopes and wetlands. 
b)  Design the parks, squares, or greens around ponds, and wooded areas or specimen trees as much as practicable. 
c)  Define natural boundaries on the site excluding arterials, utility easements, steep slopes (those exceeding 35 percent in 5,000 square feet contiguous areas) and any area of land to be preserved for its natural use. 
Step 2 Locate the commercial center on thoroughfare or intersection with highest traffic. 
Step 3 Structure site into pedestrian sheds. 
a)  Pedestrian sheds form the basis for TND's. The size and shape of the neighborhood is determined by the pattern of the pedestrian shed. 
b)  Pedestrian shed is equivalent to a five-minute walk from edge to center. 
c)  One pedestrian shed should be centered upon the commercial center. 
d)  Additional sheds should cover the remainder of the site with substantial overlap to prevent dilution of each center as a viable mixed use center. 
e)  Can use irregular shape to represent actual walk times. 
Step 4 Adjust pedestrian sheds locations on site. 
a)  Centers of the pedestrian shed must coincide in with natural or manmade features on the site. Site designers should use the features in the landscape as the backbone for public spaces. 
Examples: 
•Cluster of specimen trees can become a green, park or square 
•A hedgerow may present the opportunity to become a tree lined street or avenue 
•Existing paths on site can determine the location of streets and roads. 
b)  Where such natural features either do not exist or do not provide such opportunities for becoming public space, introduce a public space as the center of each pedestrian shed. 
Step 5 Design street network/connect centers with thoroughfares. 
a)  Subsequent to this point in the design of the TND, the natural features have been delineated and designed into the neighborhood design, the main commercial area has been determined and the pedestrian sheds have been outlined. 
b)  Connect the centers with one another by "main" streets or avenues. They should be direct approaches but not necessarily straight. Using the terrain of the site to deflect and slow traffic through the neighborhood. 
c)  Fill in the areas between the main streets with streets and roads into a network. Adjust the network to create a pattern of blocks. Such blocks should be smaller when in close proximity to the centers, and larger in the edges. 
d)  Subdivide the blocks into lots. 
Step 6 Detail other neighborhood elements. 
Step 7 Reserve civic sites. 
Step 8 Provide covenants and establish local governance. 
(Ord. No. 2006-Z-004, 5-2-06) 
8.6 - Density calculations. 
8.6.1 The developable areas of the site shall be considered the net site area. The net site area shall be allocated to the various neighborhood zones according to the parameters specified in Table 14-a. 
8.6.2 The overall density shall be calculated in terms of building units as specified for the area of each neighborhood zone by Table 14-b. For purposes of density calculation, the neighborhood zone areas include the thoroughfares but not land allocated to civic function. 
8.6.3 The percent of the building units shown on Table 14-b shall be exchanged for other functions at the following rates: 
a)  For lodging: Two bedrooms for each unit of overall density. 
b)  For office or retail: 1,500 square feet for each unit of overall density. 
c)  The number of units exchanged shall be approved by warrant. 
8.6.4 The residential and other functions for each neighborhood zone shall be further adjusted at the building scale according to sections 8.10, 8.11 and 8.12. 
(Ord. No. 2006-Z-004, 5-2-06) 
8.7 - Streetscape requirements. 
8.7.1  General. 
a)  The thoroughfares are intended for use by vehicular and pedestrian traffic and to provide access to lots and open spaces. 
b)  The thoroughfares consist of vehicular lanes and public frontages (Table 16-a). The lanes provide the traffic and parking capacity. They consist of vehicular lanes in a variety of widths for parked and for moving vehicles. The frontages contribute to the character of the neighborhood zone. They include the types of sidewalk, curbing, planter, and street tree. 
c)  Thoroughfares should be designed in context with the appropriate development form and desired design speed of the neighborhood zones through which they pass. Thoroughfares that pass from one neighborhood zone to another shall adjust their public frontages accordingly or, alternatively, the neighborhood zone may follow the alignment of the thoroughfare to the depth of one lot, retaining a single public frontage throughout its trajectory. 
d)  Within the neighborhood general and neighborhood center zones pedestrian comfort shall be a primary consideration of the thoroughfare. Design conflict between vehicular and pedestrian movement shall be decided in favor of the pedestrian. 
8.7.2  Thoroughfares. 
a)  The standards for vehicular lanes shall be as shown in Table 3, 4, and 5. 
b)  The thoroughfare network shall be designed to define blocks not exceeding the size prescribed in Table 14-c. The size shall be measured as the sum of lot frontage lines. 
c)  All thoroughfares shall terminate at other thoroughfares, forming a network. Internal thoroughfares shall connect wherever possible to those on adjacent sites. Cul-de-sacs shall be permitted only when warranted by natural site conditions. 
d)  Lots shall front a vehicular thoroughfare, except that 20 percent of the lots within each neighborhood zone may front a pedestrian passage. 
e)  Thoroughfares along a designated secondary grid (subsection 8.9.1a) may be exempted from the specified frontage requirements. 
f)  A bicycle network consisting of trails, routes and lanes should be provided throughout as defined in section 8.20 Glossary and allocated in Table 14-d. A community bicycle network should be connected to existing or proposed networks wherever possible. 
8.7.3  Public frontages. 
a)  Public frontages shall be designed as shown in Table 5A and 5B and allocated within neighborhood zones as specified in Table 14-d. 
b)  Within the public frontages, the prescribed type of street trees and street lights shall be as shown in Tables 4, 5 and 6. The spacing may be adjusted by warrant to accommodate specific site conditions. 
(Ord. No. 2006-Z-004, 5-2-06) 
8.8 - Civic functions. 
8.8.1  General. 
a)  Places for public use shall be required for each community and designated on the neighborhood plans as civic space (CS) and civic building (CB). 
b)  Civic spaces are public sites permanently dedicated to open space. 
c)  Civic buildings are sites dedicated for buildings generally operated by not-for-profit organizations dedicated to culture, education, government, transit and municipal parking, or for a use approved by the Cherokee County Board of Commissioners. 
8.8.2  Civic space. 
a)  Each pedestrian shed shall assign at least five percent of its developed area to civic space. 
b)  Civic spaces shall be designed as generally described in Table 13 and approved by the board of commissioners and allocated to neighborhood zones as described in Table 14-e. 
c)  Each pedestrian shed shall contain at least one main civic space. The main civic space shall be within 800 feet of the geographic center of each pedestrian shed, unless topographic conditions, pre-existing thoroughfare alignments or other circumstances warrant it. 
d)  Within 800 feet of every lot in residential use, a civic space designed and equipped as a playground shall be provided, unless otherwise warranted. 
e)  Each civic space shall have a minimum of 50 percent of its perimeter fronting a thoroughfare. 
f)  Parks may be permitted in neighborhood general and neighborhood center zones by warrant (Table 14-e). 
8.8.3  Civic buildings. 
a)  The developer shall covenant to construct a meeting hall or other such community building in proximity to the main civic space of each pedestrian shed. 
b)  One civic building lot may be reserved for an elementary school. Its area shall be one acre for each increment of 100 dwelling units provided by the community plan. The school site may be within any neighborhood zone. 
c)  One civic building lot suitable for a childcare building should be reserved within each pedestrian shed. 
d)  Civic building sites shall not occupy more than 20 percent of the area of each pedestrian shed. 
e)  Civic building sites should be located within or adjacent to civic spaces, or at the axial termination of significant thoroughfares. 
f)  Civic buildings shall not be subject to the standards of sections 8.10, 8.11 and 8.12. The particulars of their design shall be determined by variance. 
g)  Parking for civic buildings shall be adjusted by warrant. Civic parking lots may remain unpaved if graded, compacted and landscaped, as recommended and approved by the engineering department. 
(Ord. No. 2006-Z-004, 5-2-06) 
8.9 - Special requirements. 
8.9.1  Neighborhood plan. A neighborhood plan may designate the following special requirements: 
a)  A differentiation of the thoroughfares as a primary-grid (P-Grid) and a secondary-grid (S-Grid). Buildings along the P-Grid shall be held to the highest standard of this Code in support of pedestrian activity. Buildings along the S-Grid may be more readily considered for warrants and Variances allowing automobile-oriented standards. The frontages assigned to the S-Grid shall not exceed 30 percent of the total length within a pedestrian shed. 
b)  A designation for mandatory or recommended retail frontage requiring that a building provide a shopfront at sidewalk level along the entire length of the frontage. The shopfront shall be no less than 70 percent glazed in clear glass and provided with an awning overlapping the sidewalk as generally illustrated in Table 7. The first floor shall be confined to retail use through the depth of the second layer. (See Table 16-d). 
c)  A designation for mandatory or recommended gallery frontage, requiring that a building provide a permanent cover over the sidewalk, either cantilevered or supported by columns. The gallery frontage may be combined with a retail frontage as shown in Table 7. 
d)  A designation of coordinated streetscape frontage, requiring that the public and private frontages be coordinated as a single, coherent landscape and paving design. 
e)  A designation of terminated vista location, requiring that the building be provided with architectural articulation of a type and character that responds to the location as approved by the Cherokee County Board of Commissioners. 
f)  A designation for cross block passages, requiring a minimum eight-foot-wide pedestrian access be reserved between buildings. 
(Ord. No. 2006-Z-004, 5-2-06) 
8.10 - Specific to neighborhood edge zone. 
8.10.1  Building disposition. 
a)  Newly platted lots shall be dimensioned according to section 8.10.11. 
b)  Buildings shall be disposed in relation to the boundaries of their lots according to section 8.10.11. 
c)  One principal building at the frontage, and one outbuilding to the rear of the principal building, may be built on each lot as shown in Table 16-c. 
d)  Lot coverage by building shall not exceed that shown in section 8.10.11. 
e)  Facades shall be built parallel to a rectilinear principal frontage line or parallel to the tangent of a curved principal frontage line. 
f)  Setbacks for principal buildings shall be as shown in Table 14-g. 
g)  Rear setbacks for outbuildings shall be a minimum of 12 feet measured from the centerline of the alley or rear lane easement. In the absence of rear alley or lane, the rear setback shall be as shown in section 8.10.11. 
h)  Building types shall be as shown in Table 9. 
8.10.2  Building configuration. 
a)  Private frontage types shall conform to and be allocated in accordance with Table 7 and section 8.10.11. 
b)  Building heights shall conform to Table 8 and be as shown in section 8.10.11. 
8.10.3  Building function and density. 
a)  Buildings in each neighborhood zone shall conform to the functions described in Table 10 or 11 and section 8.10.11. Functions that do not conform to the requirements of Tables 10 and 11 shall require approval by warrant. 
8.10.4  Parking standards. 
a)  Vehicular parking shall be required and adjusted for mixed-use as shown in Tables 11 and 12. 
b)  On-street parking available along the frontage lines that correspond to each lot shall be counted toward the parking requirement of the building on the lot. 
c)  Parking shall be accessed by the alley or rear lane, when such are available on the neighborhood plan. 
d)  Parking lots shall be masked from the frontage by a liner building or streetscreen as specified in sections 8.10, 8.11 and 8.12. 
e)  Open parking areas shall be located at the second and third lot layers, as shown in Table 16-d, except that driveway aprons and drop-offs may be located at the first layer. Garages shall be located at the third layer. 
f)  The required parking may be provided within one-quarter mile of the site that it serves, subject to approval by variance. 
g)  For buildings on secondary grids (S-Grids), parking lots may be allowed on the frontage by warrant (see sections 8.10, 8.11 and 8.12). 
8.10.5  Architectural standards. 
a)  Building wall materials may be combined on each facade only horizontally, with the heavier material below the lighter material. 
b)  Streetscreens should be between 3.5 and eight feet in height and constructed of a material matching the adjacent building facade. The streetscreen may be replaced by a hedge or fence by warrant. streetscreens shall have openings no larger than necessary to allow automobile and pedestrian access. 
c)  All openings, including porches, galleries, arcades and windows, with the exception of storefronts, shall be square or vertical in proportion. 
d)  Openings above the first story shall not exceed 50 percent of the total building wall area, with each facade being calculated independently. 
e)  Doors and windows that operate as sliders are prohibited along frontages. 
f)  Pitched roofs, if provided, shall be symmetrically sloped no less than 5:12, except that porches and attached sheds may be no less than 2:12. 
g)  The exterior finish material on all facades shall be limited to brick, wood siding, cementitious siding and/or stucco. 
h)  Flat roofs shall be enclosed by parapets a minimum of 42 inches high, or as required to conceal mechanical equipment to the satisfaction of the Cherokee County Board of Commissioners. 
i)  Balconies and porches shall be made of painted wood, brick, stone or masonry construction. 
j)  Fences, if provided at the first layer, shall be painted. Fences at lot lines may be of wood board or chain link. 
8.10.6  Environmental standards. 
a)  The landscape installed should consist primarily of native species requiring minimal irrigation, fertilization and maintenance. 
b)  Impermeable surface by building should be minimized and confined to the ratio of lot coverage by building shown in Table 14-f. 
c)  To the extent not inconsistent with applicable local, state or federal law, the management of storm water shall be primarily through retention and percolation on the individual lot or through swales in the public frontage, as recommended and approved by the engineering department. 
8.10.7  Landscape standards. 
a)  A minimum of one tree to match the species of street trees on the public frontage shall be planted within the first layer for each 30 feet of frontage line as illustrated in Table 16-d. 
b)  Trees shall be of various species, naturalistically clustered, with an understory stall below for maintenance. 
8.10.8  Signage standards. 
a)  One address number no more than six inches measured vertically shall be attached to the building in proximity to the principal entrance or at a mailbox. 
b)  One blade sign for each business may be permanently installed perpendicular to the facade. Such a sign shall not exceed a total of four square feet. 
c)  There shall be no signage permitted additional to that specified in this section. 
d)  Signage shall not be lit. 
8.10.9  Ambient standards. 
a)  Average lighting levels measured at the building frontage shall not exceed 1.0 fc (foot-candles). 
b)  Streetlights shall be of a general type illustrated in Table 5. 
c)  Outdoor storage shall be screened from view from any frontage by a streetscreen in conformance with sections 8.10, 8.11 and 8.12. 
8.10.10  Visiti bility standards. 
a)  There shall be provided one zero-step entrance to each building from an accessible path at the front, side, or rear of each building. 
b)  All first floor interior doors (including bathrooms) shall provide 32 inches of clear passage. 
c)  There shall be a half or full bath provided on the first story of each building. 
8.10.11  Neighborhood edge summary table. 

edge summary table 
(Ord. No. 2006-Z-004, 5-2-06) 
8.11 - Specific to neighborhood general zones. 
8.11.1  Building disposition. 
a)  Newly platted lots shall be dimensioned according to section 8.11.11. 
b)  Buildings shall be disposed in relation to the boundaries of their lots according to section 8.11.11. 
c)  One principal building at the frontage, and one outbuilding to the rear of the principal building, may be built on each lot as shown in Table 16-c. 
d)  Lot coverage by building shall not exceed that shown in section 8.11.11. 
e)  Facades shall be built parallel to a rectilinear principal frontage line or parallel to the tangent of a curved principal frontage line. 
f)  Setbacks for principal buildings shall be as shown in Table 14-g. 
g)  Rear setbacks for outbuildings shall be a minimum of 12 feet measured from the centerline of the alley or rear lane easement. In the absence of rear alley or lane, the rear setback shall be as shown in section 8.11.11. 
h)  Building types shall be as shown in Table 9. 
i)  A minimum residential housing mix of three types (none less than 20 percent) shall be required in the neighborhood general zone, selected from Table 9. 
8.11.2  Building configuration. 
a)  Private frontage types shall conform to and be allocated in accordance with Table 7 and section 8.11.11. 
b)  Awnings may encroach the public sidewalk without limit. Stoops may encroach 100 percent of the depth of a setback. Open porches and awnings may encroach up to 50 percent of the depth of the setback. Balconies and bay windows may encroach up to 25 percent of the depth of the setback. 
c)  Loading docks and service areas shall be permitted on frontages only by warrant. 
d)  Building heights shall conform to Table 8 and be as shown in section 8.11.11. 
8.11.3  Building function and density. 
a)  Buildings in each neighborhood zone shall conform to the functions described in Tables 10 or 11 and section 8.11.11. Functions that do not conform to the requirements of Tables 10 or 11 shall require approval by warrant. 
b)  Accessory uses of limited lodging or limited office shall be permitted within an outbuilding. 
8.11.4  Parking standards. 
a)  Vehicular parking shall be required as shown in Tables 11 and 12. 
b)  On-street parking available along the frontage lines that correspond to each lot shall be counted toward the parking requirement of the building on the lot. 
c)  Parking shall be accessed by the alley or rear lane, when such are available on the neighborhood plan. 
d)  Parking lots shall be masked from the frontage by a liner building or streetscreen as specified in sections 8.10, 8.11 and 8.12. 
e)  All parking areas except for driveways shall be located at the third layer as illustrated in Table 16-d. Garages shall be at the third layer. 
f)  The required parking may be provided within ¼-mile of the site that it serves, subject to approval by variance. 
g)  A minimum of one bicycle rack place should be provided within the public or private frontage for every ten vehicular parking spaces. This clause shall not apply to single-family detached home or townhomes. 
h)  For buildings on secondary grids (S-Grids), parking lots may be allowed on the frontage by warrant (see sections 8.10, 8.11 and 8.12). 
8.11.5  Architectural standards. 
a)  Building wall materials may be combined on each facade only horizontally, with the heavier material below the lighter material. 
b)  Streetscreens should be between 3.5 and eight feet in height and constructed of a material matching the adjacent building facade. The streetscreen may be replaced by a hedge or fence by warrant. Streetscreens shall have openings no larger than necessary to allow automobile and pedestrian access. 
c)  All openings, including porches, galleries, arcades and windows, with the exception of storefronts, shall be square or vertical in proportion. 
d)  Openings above the first story shall not exceed 50 percent of the total building wall area, with each facade being calculated independently. 
e)  Doors and windows that operate as sliders are prohibited along frontages. 
f)  Pitched roofs, if provided, shall be symmetrically sloped no less than 5:12, except that porches and attached sheds may be no less than 2:12. 
g)  Flat roofs shall be enclosed by parapets a minimum of 42 inches high, or as required to conceal mechanical equipment to the satisfaction of the Cherokee County Board of Commissioners. 
h)  The exterior finish material on all facades shall be limited to brick, wood siding, fiber-cement siding and/or stucco. 
i)  Balconies and porches shall be made of painted wood, brick, stone, other masonry construction or metal. 
j)  Fences, if provided within the first lot layer shall be painted. Fences at other layers may be of wood board or chain link. 
8.11.6  Environmental standards. 
a)  The species of landscape installed shall consist primarily of durable species tolerant of soil compaction. 
b)  Impermeable surface shall be confined to the ratio of lot coverage by building, as shown in Table 14-f. 
8.11.7  Landscape standards. 
a)  A minimum of one tree to match the species of street trees on the public frontage shall be planted within the first layer for each 30 feet of frontage line as illustrated in Table 16-d. 
b)  Trees of species matching the planting on the public frontage as shown in Table 4. 
8.11.8  Signage standards. 
a)  One address number no more than six inches measured vertically shall be attached to the building in proximity to the principal entrance or at a mailbox. 
b)  One blade sign for each business may be permanently installed perpendicular to the facade. Such a sign shall not exceed a total of four square feet. 
c)  There shall be no signage permitted additional to that specified in this section. 
8.11.9  Ambient standards. 
a)  Average lighting levels measured at the building frontage shall not exceed 2.0 fc (foot-candles). 
b)  Streetlights shall be of a general type illustrated in Table 5. All streetlight fixtures shall be of full cut off design so that all light is directed down. 
c)  Outdoor storage shall be screened from view from any frontage by a streetscreen in conformance with sections 8.10, 8.11 and 8.12. 
8.11.10  Visitibility standards. 
a)  There shall be provided one zero-step entrance to each building from an accessible path at the front, side, or rear of each building. 
b)  All first floor interior doors (including bathrooms) shall provide 32 inches of clear passage. 
c)  There shall be a half or full bath provided on the first habitable story of each building. 
8.11.11.  Neighborhood general summary table. 

general summary 
(Ord. No. 2006-Z-004, 5-2-06) 
8.12 - Specific to neighborhood center zones. 
8.12.1  Building disposition. 
a)  Newly platted lots shall be dimensioned according to section 8.12.11. 
b)  Buildings shall be disposed in relation to the boundaries of their lots according to section 8.12.11. 
c)  One principal building at the frontage, and one outbuilding to the rear of the principal building, may be built on each lot as shown in Table 16-c. 
d)  Lot coverage by building shall not exceed that shown in section 8.12.11. 
e)  Facades shall be built parallel to the principal frontage line along a minimum of 70 percent of its length on the setback shown in section 8.12.11. In the absence of a building along the remainder of the frontage line, a streetscreen shall be built co-planar with the facade. 
f)  Setbacks for principal buildings shall be as shown in Table 14-g. 
g)  Rear setbacks for outbuildings shall be a minimum of 12 feet measured from the centerline of the alley or rear lane easement. In the absence of rear alley or lane, the rear setback shall be as shown in section 8.12.11. 
h)  Building types shall be as shown in Table 9. 
j)  Buildings shall have their principal pedestrian entrances on a frontage line. 
8.12.2  Building configuration. 
a)  Private frontage types shall conform to and be allocated in accordance with Table 7 and section 8.12.11. 
b)  Awnings may encroach the public sidewalk without limit. Stoops may encroach 100 percent of the depth of a setback. Open porches and awnings may encroach up to 50 percent of the depth of the setback. Balconies and bay windows may encroach up to 25 percent of the depth of the setback. 
c)  Loading docks and service areas shall be permitted on frontages only by warrant. 
d)  Building heights shall conform to Table 8 and be as shown in section 8.12.11. 
e)  A first level residential or lodging function shall be raised a minimum of two feet from average sidewalk grade. 
8.12.3  Building function and density. 
a)  Buildings in each neighborhood zone shall conform to the functions described in Tables 10 or 11 and section 8.12.11. Functions that do not conform to the requirements of Tables 10 or 11 shall require approval by warrant. 
b)  Accessory uses of limited lodging or limited office shall be permitted within an outbuilding. 
c)  First story commercial shall be permitted throughout and shall be required at mandatory shopfront frontages. 
d)  Manufacturing within the first story may be permitted by variance. 
8.12.4  Parking standards. 
a)  Vehicular parking shall be required as shown in Tables 11 and 12. 
b)  On-street parking available along the frontage lines that correspond to each lot shall be counted toward the parking requirement of the building on the lot. 
c)  Parking shall be accessed by the alley or rear lane when such is available in the neighborhood plan. 
d)  Parking lots shall be masked from the frontage by a liner building or streetscreen as specified in sections 8.10, 8.11 and 8.12. 
e)  All parking areas shall be located at the third lot layer. 
f)  The required parking may be provided within ¼-mile of the site that it serves, subject to approval by variance. 
g)  The vehicular entrance of a parking lot or garage on a frontage shall be no wider than 30 feet. 
h)  Pedestrian entrances to all parking lots and parking structures shall be directly from a frontage line. Only underground parking structures may be entered by pedestrians directly from a principal building. 
i)  A minimum of one bicycle rack place should be provided within the public or private frontage for every ten vehicular parking spaces. 
j)  For buildings on secondary grids (S-Grids), parking lots may be allowed on the frontage by warrant (see sections 8.10, 8.11 and 8.12). 
8.12.5  Architectural standards. 
a)  Building wall materials may be combined on each facade only horizontally, with the heavier material below the lighter material. 
b)  Streetscreens should be between 3.5 and eight feet in height and constructed of a material matching the adjacent building facade. The streetscreen may be replaced by a hedge or fence by warrant. Streetscreens shall have openings no larger than necessary to allow automobile and pedestrian access. 
c)  All openings, including porches, galleries, arcades and windows, with the exception of storefronts, shall be square or vertical in proportion. 
d)  Openings above the first story shall not exceed 50 percent of the total building wall area, with each facade being calculated independently. 
e)  The facades on retail frontages shall be detailed as storefronts and glazed with clear glass no less than 70 percent of the sidewalk-level story. 
f)  Doors and windows that operate as sliders are prohibited along frontages. 
g)  Buildings may have flat roofs enclosed by parapets or sloped roofs. Pitched roofs shall be symmetrically sloped no less than 5:12, except that porches and attached sheds may be no less than 2:12. 
h)  Flat roofs shall be enclosed by parapets a minimum of 42 inches high, or as required to conceal mechanical equipment to the satisfaction of the Cherokee County Board of Commissioners. 
i)  The exterior finish materials on all facades shall be limited to stone, brick and/or stucco. 
j)  Balconies, galleries and arcades shall be made of concrete, painted wood or metal. 
k)  Streetscreens shall be located coplanar with the building facade line as shown in Table 16-d. 
8.12.6  Environmental standards. 
a)  The landscape installed shall consist primarily of durable species tolerant of soil compaction. 
b)  Impermeable surface by building shall be confined to the ratio of lot coverage as shown in Table 14-f. 
c)  To the extent not inconsistent with applicable local, state or federal law, management of storm water shall be primarily off-site through regional retention or detention facilities, as recommended and approved by the engineering department. There shall be no retention or detention required on the individual lot. 
8.12.7  Landscape standards. 
a)  A minimum of one tree to match the species of street trees on the public frontage shall be planted within the first layer for each 30 feet of frontage line as illustrated in Table 16-d. 
b)  The first layer as shown in Table 16-d shall be landscaped or paved to match the fronting public frontage as shown in Table 4A. 
c)  Trees shall be a species with shade canopies that, at maturity, begin higher than the top of the second story of buildings. 
8.12.8  Signage standards. 
a)  One address number no more than six inches measured vertically shall be attached to the building in proximity to the principal entrance or at a mailbox. 
b)  Blade signs, not to exceed six square feet for each separate business entrance, may be attached perpendicular to the facade. 
c)  A single external sign band may be applied to the facade of each building, providing that such sign not exceed three feet in height by any length. 
d)  Signage shall be externally lit, except that signage within the shopfront glazing may be neon lit. 
8.12.9  Ambient standards. 
a)  Average lighting levels measured at the building frontage shall not exceed 5.0 fc (foot-candles). 
b)  Streetlights shall be of a general type illustrated in Table 5. All streetlight fixtures shall be of full cut off design so that all light is directed down. 
c)  Outdoor storage shall be screened from view from any frontage by a streetscreen in conformance with sections 8.10, 8.11 and 8.12. 
8.12.10  Visitability standards. 
a)  There shall be provided one zero-step entrance to each building from an accessible path at the front, side, or rear of each building. 
b)  All first floor interior doors (including bathrooms) shall provide 32 inches of clear passage. 
c)  There shall be a half or full bath provided on the first story of each building. 
8.12.11  Neighborhood center summary table. 

center summary 
TABLE 3A: Vehicular lane dimensions. This table assigns lane widths to neighborhood zones. The design ADT (average daily traffic) is the determinant for each of these sections. The most typical assemblies are shown in Table 3B. Specific requirements for truck and transit bus routes and truck loading shall be decided by warrant. 

 
TABLE 3B: Vehicular lane/parking assemblies. The projected design speeds determine the dimensions of the vehicular lanes and turning radii assembled to create thoroughfares. 

lane/parking assemb 
TABLE 3C: Thoroughfare assemblies. These thoroughfares are assembled from the elements that appear in Tables 3A and 3B and incorporate the public frontages of Table 4. The key gives the thoroughfare type followed by the right-of-way width, followed by the pavement width, and in some instances followed by specialized transportation capabiliity. 

thoroughfare assemb 

thoroughfare assemb-2 

thoroughfare assemb-3 

thoroughfare assemb-4 

thoroughfare assemb-5 
TABLE 4A: Public frontages—General The public frontage is the area between the private lot line and the edge of the vehicular lanes. Dimensions are given in Table 4B (Public frontages - specific) 

table4a 
Table 4B: Public frontages—Specific. This table assembles prescriptions and dimensions for the public frontage elements—curbs, walkways and planters — relative to specific thoroughfare types within neighborhood zones. Table 4B-a assembles all of the elements for the various street types. Locally appropriate planting species should be filled in to the calibrated Code. 

table4b 
TABLE 5: Public lighting. Lighting varies in brightness and also in the character of the fixture according to the transect. The table shows four common types. A listed set of streetlights corresponding to these types would be approved by the utility company and listed on the page. 

table5 
TABLE 6: Public planting. This table shows six common types of street tree shapes and their appropriateness within the neighborhood zones. The Cherokee County Arborist selects species appropriate for the bioregion. 

table6 
TABLE 7: Private frontages. The private frontage is the area between the building and the lot lines. 

table7 
TABLE 8: Building configuration. This table shows prescribed building heights for each neighborhood zone. The vertical extent of a building is measured by number of stories, not including a raised basement or an inhabited attic. Heights are measured from the average grade of the frontage line to the eave of a pitched roof or to the surface of a flat roof. The term "tower" here refers to an attached or detached addition to a building, not to an entire building. 
table8 
TABLE 9: Building type. This table approximates the location of the structure relative to the boundaries of each individual lot, establishing suitable basic building types for each neighborhood zone. 
table9 
TABLE 10: Specific function. This table expands the building function categories of Table 11 to delegate specific functions within neighborhood zones. Table 10 should be customized for local character and requirements. 

 
TABLE 11: Building function—General. This table categorizes building functions within neighborhood zones. For greater precision describing the functions, see Table 10. 

 
TABLE 12: Parking calculation. The required parking table summarizes the parking requirements of Table 11 for each site or, conversely, the amount of building allowed on each site given the parking available. 
table12 

table13 

table14 

table16 
(Ord. No. 2006-Z-004, 5-2-06; Ord. No. 2007-Z-002, 8-7-07) 
8.13 - Pre-existing conditions. 
8.13.1  Existing buildings that do not conform to the provisions of this Code may continue in use as they are until a substantial modification is requested, at which time the zoning board of appeals shall determine the provisions of this section that shall apply. 
8.13.2  Existing buildings that when renovated have at any time received a certificate of occupancy shall not require upgrade to the requirements of this code and may meet the standards of the code under which they were originally permitted. 
8.13.3  The modification of existing buildings is permitted by right if such changes result in greater conformance with the specifications of this section or Article 4 of the Cherokee County Zoning Ordinance. 
8.13.4  Where buildings exist on adjacent lots, the planning office may require that a proposed building match one or the other of the adjacent setbacks and heights rather than the provisions of this Code. 
8.13.5  Any addition to or modification of a building of value that has been designated as such by the Cherokee County Board of Commissioners or is actually or potentially eligible for inclusion on a state, local or national historic register, including without limitation, the architectural harmony (similar materials, window proportions, color range, mass/void ratio, roof type and pitch) of such addition or modification, shall be subject to approval by the Cherokee County Board of Commissioners. 
8.13.6  The restoration or rehabilitation of an existing building shall not require the provision of (a) parking in addition to that existing or (b) on-site stormwater retention/detention in addition to that existing, except to the extent required by applicable local, state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 2006-Z-004, 5-2-06) 
8.14 - Application submission. 
8.14.1  Pre-application conference. Prior to filing a formal application for a traditional neighborhood development, the applicant shall confer with the planning and zoning staff to review the requirements of the ordinance and the proposed mix of uses and the general character of the proposed development. 
An applicant seeking approval for a traditional neighborhood development shall utilize the application procedure outlined below. The applicant shall prepare and submit a written statement and a preliminary neighborhood plan as described in the section below. The information shall deal with the proposed traditional neighborhood development, and enough of the area surrounding the proposed traditional neighborhood development to demonstrate the relationship of the proposed development to adjoining existing uses. 
8.14.2  Preliminary submission. 
A)  Written statement. The written statement shall contain the following information: 
i)  An explanation of the character of the proposed project, and the manner in which it shall be planned to take advantage of the traditional neighborhood development ordinance. 
ii)  An explanation of the ownership of all the land included within the proposed traditional neighborhood development project. 
iii)  An indication of the expected schedule of development. 
B)  Preliminary neighborhood plan. The preliminary neighborhood plan shall be prepared and shall include that information required in section 8.4-1a and including the following information: 
i)  A boundary survey with computed acreage of the tract bearing the seal of registered land surveyor. 
ii)  The existing topographic character of the land at 20 feet contour interval with all slopes shown. 
iii)  Location of major thoroughfares and thoroughfare types. 
iv)  Existing land uses, including schools, parks, playgrounds and other public buildings and structures. 
v)  Areas proposed to be conveyed, dedicated or reserved for public streets, parks, parkways, play grounds, school sites, public buildings and similar public uses. 
vi)  A plan for each building site and common open space area, showing the approximate location of buildings, structures, and other improvements and indicating the open spaces around buildings and structures. 
vii)  Proposed internal site planning standards such as setbacks and buffers aimed at addressing potential incompatibility between adjacent land uses and activities. 
viii)  Elevation and perspective drawings of proposed typical structures. 
C)  Development schedule. A development schedule indicating: 
i)  The approximate date when construction of the project can be expected to begin. 
ii)  The stages in which the project will be built and the approximate date when construction of each stage can be expected to begin. 
iii)  The anticipated rate of development. 
iv)  The approximate dates when each stage in the development will be completed. 
v)  The area, location and degree of development of common open space that will be provided at each stage. 
D)  Traffic and circulation plan. The applicant shall address the traffic patterns, the current and fully built out traffic volume projections of the roads that access the proposed development and determine the impact of the proposed development. In addition, the applicant shall provide the following: 
•An off-street parking and loading plan. 
•A circulation diagram indicating proposed movement of vehicles, goods and pedestrians within the traditional neighborhood development project to and from the adjoining thoroughfares. Any special engineering feature(s) and traffic regulation devices needed to facilitate or insure the safety of this circulation pattern shall be shown. 
(Ord. No. 2006-Z-004, 5-2-06) 
8.15 - Preliminary neighborhood plan review and action. 
8.15.1  Public hearing. An application for a traditional neighborhood development project approval shall be subject to a site plan review and a public hearing by the planning commission. 
8.15.2  Action on the proposed traditional neighborhood development project. After the review of the preliminary neighborhood plan and required public hearing, the planning commission shall submit its written recommendation for action to the board of commissioners. The board shall then approve, approve with modifications or deny the proposed traditional neighborhood development project. 
(Ord. No. 2006-Z-004, 5-2-06) 
8.16 - Submission of the final neighborhood plan. 
8.16.1  Following the approval of a preliminary neighborhood plan, the applicant shall prepare a final development plan, wrapping up the design specifics of the preliminary plan in final form, and including the review comments of technical items by county departments. The final neighborhood plan shall be submitted to the community development director within six months following the approval of the preliminary neighborhood plan. For good cause, the community development director may extend for up to six months the period for the filing of the development plan. 
8.16.2  If the community development director finds evidence of a material deviation (change of density, change of location of a roadway, a change of right-of-way of a roadway, a decrease in buffers/screening or an addition of acreage), from the approved preliminary neighborhood plan, the community development director shall advise the applicant to submit an application for amendment of the traditional neighborhood development project. An amendment shall be considered in the same manner as an original application. 
(Ord. No. 2006-Z-004, 5-2-06) 
8.17 - Control of the development plan after completion. 
8.17.1  The final neighborhood plan shall continue to control the traditional neighborhood development project after construction is complete, and the following shall apply: 
A)  After the approval of the final neighborhood plan, the use of the land and the construction, modifications or alterations of a building or structure within the traditional neighborhood development project shall be governed by the approved final neighborhood plan. 
B)  After the final neighborhood plan has been approved, no change shall be made in the development contrary to the approved plan without approval of an amendment to the plan except as follows: 
i)  Minor modifications of existing buildings or structures may be authorized by the community development director, if they are consistent with the purposes and intent of the final development plan and do not increase the size of a building or structure. 
ii)  A building or structure that is totally or substantially destroyed may be reconstructed without the need to amend the traditional neighborhood development project, if the building is in compliance with the purpose and intent of the final neighborhood plan. 
C)  An amendment to a completed traditional neighborhood development project may be approved if it is required for the continued success of the development, and if it is deemed appropriate, because of changes in conditions that have occurred since the final neighborhood plan was approved or because there have been changes in the development policy of the county, as reflected by the county's comprehensive plan or related land use regulations. 
D)  No modification or amendment to a completed traditional neighborhood development project is to be considered as a waiver of covenants or conditional use permit limiting the use of land, buildings, structures and improvements within the area of the traditional neighborhood development; and all rights to enforce these covenants against any change permitted by this ordinance should be expressly reserved. 
(Ord. No. 2006-Z-004, 5-2-2006) 
8.18 - Variances. 
8.18.1  There shall be two levels of variance: Warranted variances (warrants) and exceptional variances (exceptions). 
8.18.2  Warrants permit a practice that is not consistent with a specific provision of this Code, but is justified by its intent (section 8.1) or by hardship. Warrants may be granted administratively through the director of planning and zoning. 
8.18.3  Exceptions permit a practice that is not consistent with a provision nor the intent of this Code (section 8.1). Exceptions shall be granted only by the Cherokee County Zoning Board of Appeals. 
8.18.4  The request for an exception shall not subject the entire application to public hearing, but only that portion necessary to rule on the issue under consideration. 
8.18.5  Warrants and cxceptions shall be considered unique and shall not set precedent for others. 
8.18.6  The following standards and requirements shall not be available for warrants or exceptions: 
a.  The allocation ratios of each neighborhood zone. 
b.  The maximum dimensions of traffic lanes. 
c.  The required provision of alleys and rear lanes. 
d.  The minimum residential densities. 
e.  The permission to build ancillary apartments. 
f.  The requirements of parking location. 
(Ord. No. 2006-Z-004, 5-2-2006) 
8.20 - Glossary. 
Allee: A regularly spaced and aligned row of trees usually planted along a thoroughfare or pedestrian path. 
Ancillary unit: An apartment not greater than 600 square feet sharing ownership and utility connections with a principal building. An ancillary unit may or may not be within an outbuilding. ancillary units do not count toward maximum density calculations (see Tables 16 and 12). 
Apartment: A dwelling unit sharing a building and a lot with other dwellings and/or uses. Apartments may be for rent or for sale as condominiums. 
Avenue (AV): A thoroughfare of high vehicular capacity and low speed. Avenues are short distance connectors between urban centers. Avenues may be equipped with a landscaped median. Avenues become collectors upon exiting urban areas. 
Backbuilding: A single-story structure connecting a principal building to an outbuilding (see Table 16). 
Bicycle lane (BL): A dedicated bicycle lane running within a moderate-speed vehicular thoroughfare, demarcated by striping. 
Bicycle route (BR): A thoroughfare suitable for the shared use of bicycles and automobiles moving at low speeds. 
Bicycle trail (BT): A bicycle way running independently of a high-speed vehicular thoroughfare. 
Block: The aggregate of private lots, passages, rear lanes and alleys, circumscribed by thoroughfares. 
Block face: The aggregate of all the building facades on one side of a block. The block face provides the context for establishing architectural harmony. 
Boulevard (BV): A thoroughfare designed for high vehicular capacity and moderate speed. Boulevards are long-distance thoroughfares traversing urbanized areas. Boulevards are usually equipped with slip roads buffering sidewalks and buildings. Boulevards become arterials upon exiting urban areas. 
Building configuration: The form of a building, based on its massing, private frontage, and height. 
Building disposition: The placement of a building on its lot (see Tables 9 and 16). 
Building function: The uses accommodated by a building and its lot. Functions are categorized as restricted, limited, or open, according to the intensity of the use (see Tables 10 and 11). 
Building height: The vertical extent of a building measured in stories, not including a raised basement or a habitable attic. Height limits do not apply to masts, belfries, clock towers, chimney flues, water tanks, elevator bulkheads and similar structures. Building height shall be measured from the average grade of the enfronting thoroughfare (see Table 8). 
Building type: A structure category determined by function, disposition on the lot, and configuration, including frontage and height. 
By right permit: A proposal for a building or community plan that complies with this Code and may thereby be processed administratively, without public hearing (see Deviations). 
Civic: The term defining organizations dedicated to arts, culture, education, recreation, government, transit, and municipal parking, or other uses deemed by the board of commissioners to be of particular public interest. 
Civic building: A building designed specifically for a civic function. Civic buildings shall not be subject to the requirements of sections 8.10, 8.11, and 8.12. The particulars of their design shall be determined by variance. 
Civic parking reserve: Parking structure or lot within a quarter-mile of the site that it serves. Space may be leased or bought from this reserve to satisfy parking requirements. 
Civic space: An outdoor area dedicated for public use. Civic space types are defined by the combination of certain physical constants including the relationship between their intended use, their size, their landscaping and their enfronting buildings (see Table 13). 
Commercial: The term collectively defining workplace, office and retail functions. 
Common destination: An area of focused community activity defining the approximate center of a pedestrian shed. It may include without limitation one or more of the following: a civic space, a civic building, a commercial center, a bus stop. A common destination may act as the social center of a neighborhood. (See section 8.9 Civic function). 
Context: Surroundings made up of the particular combination of elements that create specific habitat. 
Corridor: A lineal geographic system incorporating transportation and/or greenway trajectories. A transportation corridor may be a lineal urban neighborhood zone. 
Cottage: An edgeyard building type. A single-family dwelling, on a regular lot, often shared with an ancillary building in the rearyard. 
Courtyard building: A building that occupies the boundaries of its lot while internally defining one or more private patios. 
Curb: The edge of the vehicular pavement detailed as a raised curb or flush to a swale. The curb usually incorporates the drainage system (see Table 4). 
Density: The number of building units within a standard measure of land area, usually given as units per acre (see section 8.7). 
Design speed: Is the velocity at which a thoroughfare tends to be driven without the constraints of signage or enforcement. There are three ranges of speed: Very Low: (below 20 MPH); Low: (20-25 MPH); Moderate: (25-35 MPH); High: (above 35 MPH). Lane width is determined by desired design speed. 
Developable areas: The net site area exclusive of all environmentally sensitive areas protected by federal, state or local regulation. (ie. Streams, floodways, wetlands, etc.). 
Driveway: A vehicular lane within a lot, usually leading to a garage. A driveway in the first layer may be used for parking if it is no more than 18 feet wide, thereby becoming subject to the constraints of a parking lot. 
Edgeyard building: A building that occupies the center of its lot with setbacks on all sides. 
Elevation: An exterior wall of a building not along a frontage line. See: Facade (Table 16). 
Enfront: To place an element along a frontage line, as in "porches enfront the street." 
Entrance, principal: the main point of access of pedestrians into a building. 
Estate house (Syn.: Country house, Villa): An edgeyard building type. A single family dwelling on a very large lot of rural character, often shared by one or more ancillary buildings. 
Facade: The exterior wall of a building that is set along a frontage line (see Elevation; frontage line). 
Frontage line: Those lot lines that coincide with a public frontage. Facades along frontage lines define the public realm and are therefore more regulated than the elevations that coincide with other lot lines (see Table 16). 
Greenway: An open space corridor in largely natural conditions which may include trails for bicycles and pedestrians. 
Home occupation: Non-retail commercial enterprises permitted in all neighborhood zones. The work quarters should be invisible from the frontage, located either within the house or in an outbuilding. Permitted activities are defined by the restricted office category (Table 11). 
House (Syn.: Single): An edgeyard building type. A single-family dwelling on a large lot, often shared with an ancillary building in the rearyard. 
Inside turning radius: The curved edge of a thoroughfare at an intersection, measured at the inside edge of the vehicular tracking. The smaller the turning radius, the smaller the pedestrian crossing distance and the more slowly the vehicle is forced to make the turn. (See Tables 3 and 16). 
Layer: A range of depth of a lot within which certain elements are permitted (see Table 16). 
Linear pedestrian shed: A pedestrian shed that is elongated along an important commercial corridor such as a main street. 
Liner building: A building specifically designed to mask a parking lot or a parking garage from a frontage. A liner building, if less than 30 feet deep and two stories, may be exempt from parking requirements. 
Live-work: A fee-simple dwelling unit that contains a commercial component anywhere in the unit. (Syn.: Flexhouse.) (See Work-Live.) 
Lodging: Premises available for daily and weekly renting of bedrooms. The area allocated for food service shall be calculated and provided with parking according to retail use. 
Lot line: The boundary that legally and geometrically demarcates a lot (see frontage line). Such lines appear graphically on community and site plans. Codes reference lot lines as the baseline for measuring setbacks (see Tables 16 and 14-g). 
Lot width: The length of the principal frontage line of a lot. 
Manufacturing: Premises available for the creation, assemblage and/or repair of artifacts, using table-mounted electrical machinery and including their retail sale. 
Meeting hall: A building available for gatherings, including conferences. It should accommodate at least one room equivalent to a minimum of ten square feet per projected dwelling unit within the pedestrian shed in which the meeting hall is located. A meeting hall shall be completed upon the sale of 75 percent of the dwelling units. The meeting hall may be used for the marketing purposes of the development until the sale of 75 percent of the dwelling units, at which time control of its use shall be given to the homeowners association or other such group or entity established for the purpose of managing common or private property within the development. 
Mixed use: Multiple functions within the same building through superimposition or adjacency, or in multiple buildings within the same area by adjacency. Mixed use is one of the principles of TND development from which many of its benefits are derived, including compactness, pedestrian activity, and parking space reduction. 
Neighborhood: An urbanized area at least 20 acres that is primarily residential. A neighborhood shall be based upon a partial or entire standard pedestrian shed. The physical center of the neighborhood should be located at an important traffic intersection associated with a civic or commercial institution. 
Net developable area, net site area: The developable areas of a site. The net site area shall be allocated to the various neighborhood zones according to the parameters in Table 14-a. 
Office: Premises available for the transaction of general business but excluding retail, artisan and manufacturing uses. 
Outbuilding: An accessory building, usually located towards the rear of the same lot as a principal building. It is sometimes connected to the principal building by a backbuilding. Outbuildings shall not exceed 600 square feet of habitable space, excluding parking areas (see Table 16). 
Parking structure: A building containing two or more stories of parking. Parking structures shall have liner buildings at the first story or higher. 
Passage (PS): A pedestrian connector passing between buildings, providing shortcuts through long blocks and connecting rear parking areas to frontages. Passages may be roofed over. 
Path (PT): A pedestrian way traversing a park or rural area, with landscape matching the contiguous open space. Paths should connect directly with the urban sidewalk network. 
Pedestrian shed: An area, approximately circular, that is centered on a common destination. A pedestrian shed is applied to determine the approximate size of a neighborhood. A standard pedestrian shed is ¼ mile radius or 1,320 feet, about the distance of a five-minute walk at a leisurely pace. It has been shown that provided with a pedestrian environment, most people will walk this distance rather than drive. The outline of the shed must be refined according to actual site conditions, particularly along thoroughfares. A long pedestrian shed is ½-mile radius or 2,640 feet. (Sometimes called a "walkshed" or "walkable catchment.") A linear pedestrian shed is elongated to follow a commercial corridor. See standard, long, or linear pedestrian shed. 
Planter: The element of the public streetscape which accommodates street trees. Planters may be continuous or individual. 
Primary-secondary grid: Thoroughfare designations appearing on the regulating plan. Buildings on the P-Grid are subject to all of the provisions of this Code. Buildings on the S-Grid are exempt from certain provisions, allowing for warranted open parking lots, unlined parking decks, drive-throughs and hermetic building fronts. 
Principal building: The main building on a lot, usually located toward the frontage (see Table 16). 
Private frontage: The privately held layer between the frontage line and the principal building facade. The structures and landscaping within the private frontage may be held to specific standards. The variables of private frontage are the depth of the setback and the combination of architectural elements such as fences, stoops, porches and galleries (see Table 7). 
Public frontage: The area between the curb of the vehicular lanes and the frontage line. Elements of the public frontage include the type of curb, walk, planter, street tree and streetlight (see Table 4). 
Rear alley (AL): A vehicular driveway located to the rear of lots providing access to service areas and parking, and containing utility easements. Alleys may be paved from building face to building face, with drainage by inverted crown at the center or with roll curbs at the edges. 
Rear lane (LA): A vehicular driveway located to the rear of lots providing access to parking and outbuildings and containing utility easements. Rear lanes may be paved lightly to driveway standards. Its streetscape consists of gravel or landscaped edges, no raised curb and is drained by percolation. 
Rearyard building: A building that occupies the full frontage line, leaving the rear of the lot as the sole yard. This is a more urban type, as the continuous facade spatially defines the public thoroughfare. For its residential function, this type yields a rowhouse. For its commercial function, the rear yard can accommodate substantial parking. 
Residential: Premises available for long-term human dwelling. 
Retail: Premises available for the sale of merchandise and food service. 
Retail frontage line: Frontage lines designated on a community plan that require the provision of a shopfront, causing the ground level to be available for retail use. 
Road (RD): A local, rural and suburban thoroughfare of low vehicular speed and capacity. Its public frontage consists of swales drained by percolation and a walking path or bicycle trail along one or both sides. The landscaping consists of multiple species composed in naturalistic clusters. 
Rowhouse: A single-family dwelling that shares a party wall with another of the same type and occupies the full frontage line (Syn: Townhouse; see Rearyard Building). 
Secondary grid: See primary-secondary grid. 
Setback: The area of a lot measured from the lot line to a building facade or elevation. This area must be maintained clear of permanent structures with the exception of: galleries, fences, garden walls, arcades, porches, stoops, balconies, bay windows, terraces and decks (that align with the first story level) which are permitted to encroach into the setback (see sections 8.10, 8.11 and 8.12 and Table 14-g). 
Shared parking: An accounting for parking spaces that are available to more than one function. The requirement is reduced by a factor, shown as a calculation. The shared parking ratio varies according to multiple functions in close proximity which are unlikely to require the spaces at the same time (see Tables 11 and 12). 
Sideyard building: A building that occupies one side of the lot with a setback to the other side. 
Sidewalk: The paved layer of the public frontage dedicated exclusively to pedestrian activity. 
Specialized building: A building that is not subject to residential, commercial, or lodging classification. 
Standard pedestrian shed: An area, approximately circular, that is centered on a common destination. A pedestrian shed is applied to determine the approximate size of a neighborhood. A standard pedestrian shed is ¼-mile radius or 1,320 feet, about the distance of a five-minute walk at a leisurely pace. It has been shown that provided with a pedestrian environment, most people will walk this distance rather than drive. The outline of the shed must be refined according to actual site conditions, particularly along thoroughfares. (Sometimes called a "walkshed" or "walkable catchment.") See pedestrian shed. 
Story: A habitable level within a building of no more than 14 feet in height from finished floor to finished ceiling. Attics and raised basements are not considered stories for the purposes of determining building height. 
Street (ST): A local urban thoroughfare of low speed and capacity. Its public frontage consists of raised curbs drained by inlets and sidewalks separated from the vehicular lanes by a planter and parking on both sides. The landscaping consists of regularly placed street trees. 
Streetscape: The urban element that establishes the major part of the public realm. The streetscape is composed of thoroughfares (travel lanes for vehicles and bicycles, parking lanes for cars, and sidewalks or paths for pedestrians) as well as the visible private frontages (building facades and elevations, porches, yards, fences, awnings, etc.), and the amenities of the public frontages (street trees and plantings, benches, streetlights, etc.). 
Streetscreen: Sometimes called streetwall. A freestanding wall built along the frontage line, or coplanar with the facade, often for the purpose of masking a parking lot from the thoroughfare. Streetscreens [should] be between 3.5 and eight feet in height and constructed of a material matching the adjacent building facade. The streetscreen may be a hedge or fence by warrant. Streetscreens shall have openings no larger than is necessary to allow automobile and pedestrian access. In addition, all streetscreens over five feet high should be 30 percent permeable or articulated to avoid blank walls. 
Substantial modification: Alterations to a building that are valued at more than 50 percent of the replacement cost of the entire building, if new. 
Terminated vista: A location at the axial conclusion of a thoroughfare. A building located at a terminated vista designated on a community plan is required to be designed in response to the axis. 
Thoroughfare: A vehicular way incorporating moving lanes and parking lanes within a right-of-way (see Tables 3 and 16). 
Townhouse: Syn. Rowhouse. (See Rearyard building.) 
Transition line: A horizontal line spanning the full width of a facade, expressed by a material change or by a continuous horizontal articulation such as a cornice or a balcony. 
Type: A category determined by function, disposition, and configuration, including size or extent. There are street types, civic space types, etc. (See also: Building type.) 
Variance: A ruling that would permit a practice that is not consistent with either a provision or the intent of this Code (sections 8.1 and 8.2). Variances are usually granted by the board of appeals in a public hearing. See section 8.19. 
Warrant: A ruling that would permit a practice that is not consistent with a specific provision of this Code, but is justified by its intent (sections 8.1 and 8.2). Warrants are usually granted administratively by the planning director. See section 8.19. 
Work-live: A fee-simple mixed-use unit with a substantial commercial component that may accommodate employees and walk-in trade. Therefore the unit shall require ADA compliance for accessibility. (Syn.: Live-With.) (See Live-Work.) 
(Ord. No. 2006-Z-004, 5-2-2006) 
ARTICLE 9. - HOME OCCUPATIONS 

9.1 - Intent. 
Home occupations shall be defined under article 4. The purpose of this article is to: 
9.1-1 Maintain the residential character, look and feel of residential areas from the adverse impacts of activities associated with home occupations. 
9.1-2 Permit residents of the community a broad choice in the use of their homes as a place of livelihood and the production or supplementing of personal and family income. 
9.1-3 Establish criteria and development standards for home occupations conducted in dwelling units and accessory structures in residential zones. 
(Ord. No. 2008-Z-002, § 3, 9-16-08) 
9.2 - Performance criteria. 
Permitted uses of home occupation shall be allowed if much uses are: 
9.2-1 Incidental to the use of the premises as a residence. 
9.2-2 Compatible with residential use. 
9.2-3 Limited in extent. 
9.2-4 Not detracting from the residential character of the neighborhood. 
9.3 - Development standards. 
For all home occupations, except as otherwise provided for child day care, the following requirements shall be applied: 
9.3-1 Retail sales shall be prohibited on the premises except for products or goods produced or fabricated on the premises as a result of the home occupation. Said items may only be those produced on the premises or incidental supplies necessary for and consumed in the conduct of the home occupation. Samples, however, may be kept on the premises but neither sold nor distributed from the residence. Said retail sales shall not be defined to include the exhibition of a sample and the subsequent order and delivery of goods. 
9.3-2 Except for permitted outdoor instructional services, the home occupation shall be conducted within the enclosed living area of the home which may include the basement, or within an enclosed accessory building or detached garage 
9.3-3 A home occupation and any storage of goods, materials, or products connected with a home occupation shall be allowed in an accessory building or detached garage. 
9.3-4 No alteration of the residential appearance of the premises shall occur. 
9.3-5 There shall be no display or storage of products, materials, equipment, or machinery where they may be visible from the exterior of the residence. 
9.3-6 The conduct of the home occupation shall not increase the normal flow of traffic or on-street or off-street parking. 
9.3-7 There shall be no increased noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical interference created by the home occupation distracting from general appearance. 
9.3-8 No process shall be used which is hazardous to public health, safety, morals or welfare. 
9.3-9 In no case shall a customary home occupation be opened to the public at times earlier than 8:00 a.m. nor later than 10:00 p.m. 
9.3-10 No more than two vehicles shall be utilized in the business. In any event, no vehicle shall be allowed in violation of the Cherokee County Property Maintenance Ordinance. (Ord. No. 2009-Z-006, 10-20-09) 
9.3-11 Adequate off-street parking in a manner consistent with the residential nature of the property shall be provided for the allowed use. (Ord. No. 2008-Z-002, 9-16-08) 
9.3-12 The home occupation shall be conducted from the property upon which the owner's/operator's principal domicile or permanent home is located. In no circumstance shall the residence and/or accessory building/detached garage be leased to others for use as a home occupation/business. 
9.3-13 The number of part time or full time non-resident employees working on the premises of the home occupation shall not exceed two employees. 
9.3-14 The home occupation shall utilize not more than 1,000 square feet of floor area for operation or storage purposes, including space within the primary residence and any accessory structure or detached garage. Of the 1,000 square feet of floor area, no more than 600 square feet may be used in any accessory structure or detached garage. 
9.3-15 Owners/operators of all home occupations shall maintain a current occupational tax certificate. Failure to hold a current occupational tax certificate will invalidate the home occupation. 
9.3-16 Owners/operators of a home occupation shall permit a limited inspection of the premises by the director or other duly authorized agent of the board of commissioners or other agency having jurisdiction or responsibility for enforcing applicable laws, requirements and regulations at the time of application, or after the home occupation has commenced operation in order to determine compliance with the requirements of this code. Failure to cooperate in providing such access may result in the immediate discontinuation of the home occupation. 
(Ord. No. 2008-Z-002, § 3, 9-16-08; Ord. No. 2009-O-006, § IC, 10-20-09; Ord. No. 2017-O-004, § 1, 4-18-17) 
9.4 - Permitted home occupations. 
The following uses shall be permitted provided that they shall meet the development standards as provided in section 9.3 and are operated so as not to create a nuisance. 
9.4-1 A family day care home is a day care facility, as that term is defined in article 4, which provides care for no more than six children in a residential home. Upon proof presented to the zoning administrator of Cherokee County that the owner of any parcel of land located in Cherokee County, desiring to maintain a family day care home has complied with and met all State Regulations as required by the appropriate department of the State of Georgia having authority over the same, further showing that said compliance and approval is current, then maintenance of family day care home shall be an allowed home occupation in the following declared zoning districts of Cherokee County, subject to the conditions and limitations hereinafter stated, to-wit: 
(a)  A family day care home, providing care for up to and including a total of six children in a residential home, for which the possessor of the home receives compensation, shall be allowed as a permitted use in zoning classifications AG, R-80, R-60, R-40, R-30, R-20, R-15, and PUD, provided that the parcel has a total acreage for said zoning classification. 
Under no event shall the permitted uses under this ordinance be deemed to circumvent any of the regulations of the State of Georgia, nor be deemed to allow a use by any individual who has not first been approved by the appropriate department having authority over the same for the State of Georgia. 
In no event shall the uses as permitted under this ordinance require Cherokee County, its departments or employees to be responsible for enforcement of any requirements placed on an individual by the State of Georgia, or to have any responsibility to anyone, where someone is maintaining a facility as would otherwise be allowed under this ordinance without first meeting all State of Georgia requirements and regulations. 
9.4-2 Home crafts, such, as model making, rug weaving and lapidary work. 
9.4-3 Instructional or tutoring services within an enclosed building. 
9.4-4 Outdoor instructional services for swimming, outdoor instructional services for tennis. Other outdoor instructional services shall be permitted with the approval by the planning commission. 
9.4-5 Office facility of a salesman, sales representative or manufacturers representative provided there is no manufacturing, production or storage on the premises provided. 
9.4-6 Office facility of an architect, broker, engineer, insurance agent, land surveyor, lawyer, real estate agent, computer programmer, dentist, physician and other similar professions for consultation. 
9.4-7 Painting, sculpturing, composing and writing. 
9.4-8 Telephone answering service and office service to include typing, bookkeeping, transcribing and data entry. 
9.4-9 Operation of any wholesale or retail business, which is conducted entirely by mail, and does not involve the sale, shipment, or delivery of merchandise on the premises. 
9.4-10 Barber shop and beauty salon. 
(Ord. No. 2011-Z-001, 3-1-11; Ord. No. 2018-O-11, 10-16-18) 
9.5 - Prohibited home occupations. 
The following uses shall be prohibited: 
9.5-1 Major appliance repair. 
9.5-2 Automobile, truck or motorcycle repair; parts sales, upholstery or detailing; washing service. 
9.5-3 Boarding House, time share condominium. 
9.5-4—9.5-8 Reserved. 
9.5-9 Private clubs. 
9.5-10 Restaurants and taverns. 
9.5-11 Tow truck services. 
9.5-12 Veterinary uses. 
9.5-13 Automobile and related vehicular sales lot. 
9.5-14 Automobile, motorcycle, boat/watercraft, and/or farm/construction equipment repair or service/maintenance, on premise. 
9.5-15 Ambulance service. 
9.5-16 Amusement or recreational activities. 
9.5-17 Animal hospital. 
9.5-18 Pawn shop. 
9.5-19 Chemical storage and manufacturing. 
9.5-20 Manufacturing. 
9.5-21 Repair service (lawn mower, small engine, and appliance). 
9.5-22 Tire sales and storage. 
9.5-23 Tanning salon. 
9.5-24 Funeral services. 
9.5-25 Tattooing, body or ear piercing. 
9.5-26 Massage therapy, on-premises. 
9.5-27 Special event facility. 
(Ord. No. 2017-O-004, § 1, 4-18-17) 
9.6 - Unspecified home occupations. 
Any proposed home occupation that is not specifically listed as permitted or prohibited shall be evaluated by the zoning administrator, subject to approval based on criteria as provided in section 9.3. 
9.7 - Permit application procedure. 
9.7-1  Application. Application for a home occupation permit shall be made to the Cherokee County Planning Department on a form provided by the department. The zoning administrator will make a decision and notify the applicant in writing within 15 calendar days of the date the application is received. 
9.7-2  Scope. In cases where the planning department considers the application not within the scope of the home occupation criteria, the application will be denied. 
9.7-3  Time limit. All home occupation permits shall be valid for a period of one year from initial date of approval. 
9.7-4  Voiding of permit. The planning department may void any home occupation permit for noncompliance with the criteria set forth in this article. Revocation may take place at any time prior to expiration date of the permit. If the permit is revoked or is not renewed, it becomes null and void, and said use shall be terminated. 
9.7-5  Appeal. The decision of the planning department concerning approval or revocation shall be final unless a written appeal is filed with the zoning board of appeals within ten calendar days of the decision. An appeal may only be filed by the applicant or persons residing within 300 feet of the subject property. 
9.7-6  Renewal. Home occupation permits shall be renewed annually provided there has not been any violation of the provisions of this article. Requests for renewal shall be submitted to the planning department in writing, accompanied by the prevailing renewal fee, one month prior to expiration of the permit. 
9.8 - Other provisions. 
9.8-1 Should a permittee die or move to a new location, the existing permit shall be automatically terminated, except that, in the case of death, should a surviving spouse or child residing at the same address desire to continue the home occupation, written notice to that effect shall be given to the zoning administrator, and the commissioner shall authorize continuation of that permit without further hearing. 
9.8-2 Persons with demonstrated physical handicaps may be permitted special consideration by the planning commission. The applicant may request waiver of a portion or all of one or more of the requirements as provided in section 9.3. This special request shall be considered by the zoning boards of appeals at a public hearing, after notice to property owners within 300 feet of the subject property. The zoning board of appeals may only grant waivers on the basis of applicant's physical inability to function within said requirements. 
ARTICLE 10. - BUFFER REQUIREMENTS 
Division 1. - Generally 

10.1 - Intent. 
This article shall apply to all properties or portions thereof located within the unincorporated areas of Cherokee County, Georgia, to the extent of the provisions contained herein. The board of commissioners hereby finds that the protection and preservation of trees, the planting of new trees and other landscape material, and the provision of buffers between dissimilar uses as part of the land development progress is a public purpose and provides for the public health and general welfare. 
10.2 - Purpose. 
10.2-1 The purpose of this article is to preserve and enhance the county's natural environment through tree protection and preservation, the planting of trees and other landscape material, and the provision of natural and/or planted buffers between dissimilar uses. The article is intended to further the county's policy that all development sites, where trees are most commonly removed, will achieve upon project completion a uniform standard for buffer requirements. 
10.2-2 This article is also intended to further the county's policy of encouraging all individuals or firms who propose to develop land, and which are required to meet the requirements of this article, to consider the use of water-efficient landscaping principles and techniques. 
10.3 - Title. 
This article shall be known as "The Buffer Requirements of Cherokee County, Georgia" and may be referred to generally as "the buffer requirements." 
10.4 - Definitions. 
In construing the provisions hereof and the meaning of each and every word, term, phrase, or part thereof, where the context will permit, the definitions of words as contained in the adopted Zoning Ordinance of Cherokee County, supplemented by the following, shall apply: 
Buffer. Land area used to visibly separate one use from another through screening and distance; to shield or block noise, light, glare, or visual or other conditions; to block physical passage to nonsimilar areas, or to reduce air pollution dust, dirt, and litter. 
Clearing. The removal of vegetation from a property, whether by cutting or other means. 
Construction buffer. A type of buffer which is temporary and remains in effect during the construction of a project. 
Department. The Cherokee County Municipal Planning Commission (CCMPC) as established by the Cherokee County Board of Commissioners, and as operated through the actions and administration of the appointed director of said department or his/her designee. 
Development regulations. The adopted regulations providing for the subdivision and development of real property within Cherokee County, Georgia, as amended from time-to-time by the Board of Commissioners of Cherokee County. 
Diameter breast height (DBH). The diameter of a tree measured at a point 4½ feet above the ground. 
Director. The director of the department of planning and development or his/her designee. 
Grading. The placement, removal, or movement of earth by use of mechanical equipment on a property. 
Land disturbance permit (LDP). Any permit other than a building permit issued by Cherokee County that authorizes clearing or grading activities on a site or portion of a site. Said permit may be clearing, clearing and grubbing, grading, or development permit as defined and authorized under the Development Regulations of Cherokee County. 
Landscape strip. Land area located within the boundary of a lot and required to be set aside and used for landscaping upon which only limited encroachments are authorized. 
Screening. A method of shielding or obscuring one abutting or nearby structure or use from another by opaque fencing, walls, berms, densely planted vegetation, or the like. 
Shrub. A woody plant of relatively low height, as distinguished from a tree by having several stems rather than a single trunk. 
Timber harvests. The felling, loading and transporting of timber products (pulpwood, etc.). The term "timber harvesting" may include both clear-cutting and selective cutting of timber. 
Tree. Any self-supporting woody perennial plant, usually having a main stem or trunk and many branches, and at maturity normally attaining a trunk diameter greater than three inches at any point and a height of over ten feet. 
Tree diameter. The widest cross-sectional dimension of a tree trunk measured at diameter breast height (dbh) or at a point below dbh for new trees or multitrunked species, but in no case less than six inches from the ground. 
Tree thinning. Selective cutting or thinning of trees only for the clear purpose of good forestry management in order to protect said forest from disease or infestation and in no way shall be construed as clear-cutting. 
Zoning buffer. A buffer required by the zoning ordinance or as a condition of zoning or variance approval for a specific property. 
Zoning ordinance. The 1992 Zoning Ordinance of Cherokee County, Georgia, as amended from time-to-time by the Board of Commissioners of Cherokee County. 
10.5 - Applicability. 
Buffers shall be required between dissimilar districts or uses in accordance with the provisions of the zoning ordinance or as a condition of zoning or variance approval. 
10.6 - Standard for permanent buffers. 
10.6-1  Width of buffers. Buffers shall meet the minimum width requirements contained in this article, except as authorized to be reduced by the applicable buffer reduction process, as follows: 
a.  As specified in the minimum buffer strip requirement table 10.1; 
b.  As specified in a residential zoning district for a permitted nonresidential use (e.g. a church, temple, synagogue, etc.); or 
c.  As required by a condition of zoning or variance approval. 
10.6-2  Screening requirements. 
a.  Buffers shall be natural, undisturbed, and free of encroachments except as authorized by a condition of zoning or variance approval, or as authorized herein, and shall contain the existing tree cover and vegetation as well as any supplemental plantings or replanting as may be required. 
b.  Buffers shall be of such nature and density so as to screen activities, structures and uses on the property from view from the normal level of a first story window on an abutting lot and shall further provide a year-round effective visual screen. 
c.  Buffers required along side property lines shall extend to a street right-of-way line unless otherwise required by the director/designee in order to observe the sight distance requirements contained in the development regulations and the zoning ordinance, or as authorized by a condition of zoning approval or variance approval. 
d.  In situations where the required buffer width is partially or completely contained within an existing easement (e.g. power or natural gas transmission. etc.), the screening requirements of this article shall be met outside of the easement area. 
10.6-3  Supplemental plantings. 
a.  Buffers in which vegetation is nonexistent or is inadequate to meet the screening requirements of this article shall be planted with supplemental plantings so as to provide a year-round effective visual screen. A buffer/landscape plan shall be submitted to the department for approval, delineating the type, size, and location of all supplemental plantings as well as any nonvegetative screening mechanism proposed for use, in accordance with the terms of this article. 
b.  Supplemental plantings and replanting shall consist of evergreen trees, shrubs, or combination thereof, native or adaptable to the region. All trees planted shall be a minimum of six feet in height at time of planting and shall be a species which will achieve a height of at least 20 feet at maturity. All shrubs planted shall be of a large growing species, shall be a minimum of three feet in height at time of planting and shall be a species which will achieve a height of at least ten feet at maturity. 
c.  All supplemental plantings shall be installed to allow for proper plant growth and maintenance. 
10.6-4  Nonvegetative screening. 
a.  Nonvegetative materials utilized to satisfy the screening requirements of this article, in addition to the use of existing vegetation and/or supplemental plantings, may consist of walls, fences, earthen berms or any combination thereof. 
b.  If walls or fences are to be utilized, their placement and installation shall be such so as to cause minimal disturbance of existing vegetation and located so as to provide an effective visual screen. 
10.6-5  Disturbances or encroachments. 
a.  Ditches, swales, stormwater conveyance facilities, stormwater detention ponds, sanitary sewer conveyance facilities, similar facilities, and any associated easements, shall not encroach into a buffer except that necessary access and utility crossings (e.g. stormwater or sanitary sewer pipes) may encroach into the buffer as near to perpendicular as practical. 
b.  Supplemental plantings or replantings of vegetation, or authorized nonvegetative screening devices shall be authorized to encroach into a buffer provided their is minimal disturbance of any significant existing vegetation. 
c.  Land disturbance is authorized in areas of a buffer that are devoid of significant vegetation provided that the final grade and replanting of vegetation meet the screening requirements contained herein. 
d.  Dying, diseased or dead vegetation may be removed from a buffer provided minimal disturbance occurs. Vegetation thus removed shall be replaced where necessary to met the screening requirements contained herein. 
10.6-6  Protection during land disturbing activities. 
a.  During authorized land disturbing activities, buffers shall be clearly demarcated and protected prior to commencement of, and during construction. 
b.  The method of demarcation and protection utilized shall be in accordance with best management practices or as required by the department. 
10.6-7  Stream buffer protection. 
(1)  Title. This ordinance shall be known as the "Cherokee County Stream Buffer Protection Ordinance. 
(2)  Findings and purposes. 
a.  Findings. Whereas, the Cherokee County Board of Commissioners find that buffers adjacent to streams provide numerous benefits including: 
1.  Protecting, restoring and maintaining the chemical, physical and biological integrity of streams and their water resources. 
2.  Removing pollutants delivered in urban stormwater. 
3.  Reducing erosion and controlling sedimentation. 
4.  Protecting and stabilizing stream banks. 
5.  Providing for infiltration of stormwater runoff. 
6.  Maintaining base flow of streams. 
7.  Contributing organic matter that is a source of food and energy for the aquatic ecosystem. 
8.  Providing tree canopy to shade streams and promote desirable aquatic habitat. 
9.  Providing riparian wildlife habitat. 
10.  Furnishing scenic value and recreational opportunity. 
11.  Providing opportunities for the protection and restoration of greenspace. 
b.  Purposes. It is the purpose of this ordinance is to protect the public health, safety, environment and general welfare; to minimize public and private losses due to erosion, siltation and water pollution; and to maintain stream water quality by provisions designed to: 
1.  Create buffer zones along the streams of Cherokee County for the protection of water resources; and, 
2.  Minimize land development within such buffers by establishing buffer zone requirements and by requiring authorization for any such activities. 
(3)  Definitions. 
Buffer means, with respect to a stream, a natural or enhanced vegetated area (established by subsection (5)a.1. below), lying adjacent to the stream. 
Impervious cover means any manmade paved, hardened or structural surface regardless of material. Impervious cover includes but is not limited to rooftops, buildings, streets, roads, decks, swimming pools and any concrete or asphalt. 
Land development means any land change, including but not limited to clearing, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, construction, paving and any other installation of impervious cover. 
Land development activity means those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land development. 
Land disturbance means any land or vegetation change, including, but not limited to, clearing, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, that do not involve construction, paving or any other installation of impervious cover. 
Land disturbance activity means those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land disturbance. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding, which would have at least a one percent probability of flooding occurrence in any calendar year based on the basin being fully developed as shown on the current land use plan; i.e., the regulatory flood. 
Parcel means any plot, lot or acreage shown as a unit on the latest county tax assessment records. 
Permit means the permit issued by the Cherokee County Engineering Department required for undertaking any land development activity. 
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Protection area, or stream protection area means, with respect to a stream, the combined areas of all required buffers and setbacks applicable to such stream. 
Riparian means belonging or related to the bank of a river, stream, lake, pond or impoundment. 
Setback means, with respect to a stream, the area established by subsection (5)a.2. extending beyond any buffer applicable to the stream. 
State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural and artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership or corporation. 
Stream means any stream, beginning at: 
1.  The location of a spring, seep, or groundwater outflow that sustains stream flow: or 
2.  The point in the stream channel with a drainage area of 25 acres or more; or 
3.  Where evidence indicates the presence of a stream in a drainage area of less than 25 acres, the Cherokee County Engineering Department may require field studies to verify the existence of a stream. 
Stream bank means the sloping land that contains the stream channel and the normal flows of the stream. 
Stream channel means the portion of a watercourse that contains the base flow of the stream and is usually the point where the normal stream flow has wrested the vegetation. 
Stream hierarchy means a body of water that flows in a cumulative series to the main body of water. 
Watershed means the land area that drains into a particular stream. 
(4)  Applicability. This ordinance shall apply to all land development activity on property containing a stream protection area as defined in subsection (3) of this ordinance. These requirements are in addition to, and do not replace or supersede, any other applicable buffer requirements established under state law and approval or exemption from these requirements do not constitute approval or exemption from buffer requirements established under state law or from other applicable local, state or federal regulations. 
a.  Grandfather provisions. This ordinance shall not apply to the following activities: 
1.  Work consisting of the repair or maintenance of any lawful use of land that is zoned and approved for such use on or before the effective date of this ordinance. 
2.  Existing development and on-going land disturbance activities including but not limited to existing agriculture, silviculture, landscaping, gardening and lawn maintenance, except that new development or land disturbance activities on such properties will be subject to all applicable buffer requirements. 
3.  Any land development activity that is under construction, fully approved for development, scheduled for permit approval or has been submitted for approval as of the effective date of this ordinance. 
4.  Land development activity that has not been submitted for approval, but that is part of a larger master development plan, such as for an office park or other phased development that has been previously approved within two years of the effective date of this ordinance. 
b.  Exemptions. The following specific activities are exempt from this ordinance. Exemption of these activities does not constitute an exemption for any other activity proposed on a property. 
1.  Activities for the purpose of building one of the following: 
• A stream crossing by a driveway, transportation route or utility line; 
• Public water supply intake or public wastewater outfall structures; 
• Intrusions necessary to provide access to a property; 
• Public access facilities that must be on the water including boat ramps, docks, foot trails leading directly to the river, fishing platforms and overlooks; 
• Unpaved foot trails and paths; 
• Activities to restore and enhance stream bank stability, vegetation, water quality and/or aquatic habitat, so long as native vegetation and bioengineering techniques are used. 
2.  Public sewer line easements paralleling the creek, except that all easements (permanent and construction) and land disturbance should be at least 25 feet from the top of the bank. This includes such impervious cover as is necessary for the operation and maintenance of the utility, including but not limited to manholes, vents and valve structures. This exemption shall not be construed as allowing the construction of roads, bike paths or other transportation routes in such easements, regardless of paving material, except for access for the uses specifically cited in subsection b.1., above. 
3.  Land development activities within any public road right-of-way existing at the time this ordinance takes effect or approved under the terms of this ordinance. 
4.  Within an easement of any utility existing at the time this ordinance takes effect or approved under the terms of this ordinance, land disturbance activities and such impervious cover as is necessary for the operation and maintenance of the utility, including but not limited to manholes, vents and valve structures. 
5.  Emergency work necessary to preserve life or property. However, when emergency work is performed under this section, the person performing it shall report such work to the (review and permitting authority) on the next business day after commencement of the work. Within ten days thereafter, the person shall apply for a permit and perform such work within such time period as may be determined by the (review and permitting authority) to be reasonably necessary to correct any impairment such emergency work may have caused to the water conveyance capacity, stability or water quality of the protection area. 
6.  Forestry and silviculture activities on land that is zoned for forestry, silvicultural or agricultural uses and are not incidental to other land development activity. If such activity results in land disturbance in the buffer that would otherwise be prohibited, then no other land disturbing activity other than normal forest management practices will be allowed on the entire property for three years after the end of the activities that intruded on the buffer. 
After the effective date of this ordinance, it shall apply to new subdividing and platting activities. 
Any land development activity within a buffer established hereunder or any impervious cover within a setback established hereunder is prohibited unless a variance is granted pursuant to subsection (5)b. below. 
(5)  Land development requirements. 
a.  Buffer and setback requirements. All land development activity subject to this ordinance shall meet the following requirements: 
1.  An undisturbed natural vegetative buffer shall be maintained for 50 feet, measured horizontally, on both banks (as applicable) of all streams as measured from the top of the stream bank. The first 25 feet of this vegetative buffer is established as a state waters buffer by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, Environmental Protection Division. 
2.  An additional setback shall be maintained for 25 feet, measured horizontally, beyond the undisturbed natural vegetative buffer, in which all impervious cover shall be prohibited. Grading, filling and earthmoving shall be minimized within the setback. 
3.  No septic tanks or septic tank drain fields shall be permitted within the buffer or the setback. 
4.  A 150-foot undisturbed natural buffer is established along both sides of the Etowah River and the Little River, in accordance with Article 26 of the Zoning Ordinance of Cherokee County, Georgia. 
b.  Variance procedures. Variances from the above buffer and setback requirements may be granted only in accordance with the following provisions: 
1.  Where a parcel was platted prior to the effective date of this ordinance, and its shape, topography or other existing physical condition prevents any land development consistent with this ordinance, and the Cherokee County Engineering Department finds and determines that the requirements of this ordinance prohibit the otherwise lawful use of the property by the owner, the Cherokee County Zoning Board of Appeals may grant a variance from the buffer and setback requirements hereunder, provided such variance require adequate mitigation measures are implemented by the property owner to offset the effects of such variance. 
2.  Except as provided above, the Cherokee County Zoning Board of Appeals shall grant no variance from any provision of this ordinance without first conducting a public hearing on the application for variance and authorizing the granting of the variance by an affirmative vote of the zoning board of appeals. The Cherokee County Planning and Zoning Department shall give public notice of each such public hearing in a newspaper of general circulation within Cherokee County. The Cherokee County Planning and Zoning Department shall require that the applicant post a sign giving notice of the proposed variance and the public hearing. The sign shall be of a size and posted in such a location on the property as to be clearly visible from the primary adjacent road right-of-way. 
3.  Any variance to the required 25-foot state waters buffer must be made to the director of the environmental protection division of the department of natural resources. 
Variances will not be considered when, following adoption of this ordinance, actions of any property owner of a given property have created conditions of a hardship on that property. 
4.  At a minimum, a variance request shall include the following information: 
a.  A site map that includes locations of all streams, wetlands, floodplain boundaries and other natural features, as determined by field survey; 
b.  A description of the shape, size, topography, slope, soils, vegetation and other physical characteristics of the property; 
c.  A detailed site plan that shows the locations of all existing and proposed structures and other impervious cover, the limits of all existing and proposed land disturbance, both inside and outside the buffer and setback. The exact area of the buffer to be affected shall be accurately and clearly indicated; 
d.  Documentation of unusual hardship should the buffer be maintained; 
e.  At least one alternative plan, which does not include a buffer or setback intrusion, or an explanation of why such a site plan is not possible; 
f.  A calculation of the total area and length of the proposed intrusion; 
g.  A stormwater management site plan, if applicable; and, 
h.  Proposed mitigation, if any, for the intrusion. If no mitigation is proposed, the request must include an explanation of why none is being proposed. 
5.  The following factors will be considered in determining whether to issue a variance: 
a.  The shape, size, topography, slope, soils, vegetation and other physical characteristics of the property; 
b.  The locations of all streams on the property, including along property boundaries; 
c.  The location and extent of the proposed buffer or setback intrusion; and, 
d.  Whether alternative designs are possible which require less intrusion or no intrusion; 
e.  The long-term and construction water-quality impacts of the proposed variance; 
f.  Whether issuance of the variance is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment. 
6.  An approved variance shall allow a reduction in buffer width only to the extent necessary to provide relief from the conditions which prevented land development activities on the parcel. 
(6)  Compatibility with other buffer regulations and requirements. This ordinance is not intended to interfere with, abrogate or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute or other provision of law. The requirements of this ordinance should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this ordinance imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence. 
(7)  Additional information requirements for development on buffer zone properties. Any permit applications for property requiring buffers and setbacks hereunder must include the following: 
a..  A site plan showing: 
1.  The location of all streams on the property; 
2.  Limits of required stream buffers and setbacks on the property; 
3.  Buffer zone topography with contour lines at no greater than five-foot contour intervals; 
4.  Delineation of forested and open areas in the buffer zone; and, 
5.  Detailed plans of all proposed land development in the buffer and of all proposed impervious cover within the setback; 
b.  A description of all proposed land development within the buffer and setback; and, 
c.  Any other documentation that the (review and permitting authority) may reasonably deem necessary for review of the application and to insure that the buffer zone ordinance is addressed in the approval process. 
All buffer and setback areas must be recorded on the final plat of the property following plan approval. 
(8)  Responsibility. Neither the issuance of a development permit nor compliance with the conditions thereof, nor with the provisions of this ordinance shall relieve any person from any responsibility otherwise imposed by law for damage to persons or property; nor shall the issuance of any permit hereunder serve to impose any liability upon Cherokee County, its officers or employees, for injury or damage to persons or property. 
(9)  Inspection. The Cherokee County Engineering Department may cause inspections of the work in the buffer or setback to be made periodically during the course thereof and shall make a final inspection following completion of the work. The permittee shall assist the Cherokee County Engineering Department in making such inspections. The Cherokee County Engineering Department shall have the authority to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out its duties as prescribed in this ordinance, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable time upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigating and inspecting the sites of any land development activities within the protection area. 
No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent who requests entry for purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out official duties. 
(10)  Violations, enforcement and penalties. Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this ordinance or the requirements of an approved site plan or permit may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this subsection. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
a.  Notice of violation. If the Cherokee County Engineering Department determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved site plan or the provisions of this ordinance, it shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this ordinance without having first secured the appropriate permit therefor, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. 
The notice of violation shall contain: 
1.  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
2.  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
3.  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
4.  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the approved site plan or this ordinance and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
5.  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and, 
6.  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the Cherokee County Engineering Department by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days after the notice of violation (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient). 
b.  Penalties. In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the Cherokee County Engineering Department shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten days (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the Cherokee County Engineering Department may take any one or more of the following actions or impose any one or more of the following penalties. 
1.  Stop work order. The Cherokee County Engineering Department may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
2.  Withhold certificate of occupancy. The Cherokee County Engineering Department may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
3.  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The Cherokee County Engineering Department may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the land development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the Cherokee County Engineering Department may deem necessary) to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
4.  Civil penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days (or such greater period as the Cherokee County Engineering Department shall deem appropriate) (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient) after the Cherokee County Engineering Department has taken one or more of the actions described above, the Cherokee County Engineering Department may impose a penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
5.  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this ordinance, the Cherokee County Marshal's Office may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in Cherokee County Magistrate Court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $2,500.00 or imprisonment for 60 days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(11)  Administrative appeal and judicial review. 
a.  Administrative appeal. Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of Cherokee County Engineering Department, may appeal in writing within 30 days after the issuance of such decision or order to the Cherokee County Board of Commissioners and shall be entitled to a hearing before the Cherokee County Board of Commissioners within 30 days of receipt of the written appeal. 
b.  Judicial review. Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of Cherokee County Engineering Department, after exhausting all administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal de novo to the Magistrate Court of Cherokee County. 
(Ord. No. 98-O-12, 8-28-98; Ord. No. 2003-Z-005, 6-3-03; Ord. No. 2005-Z-003, §§ 1—11, 7-19-05) 
10.7 - Standards for construction buffers. 
10.7-1  Where required. Construction buffers shall only be required where specifically provided as a condition of zoning or variance approval. 
10.7-2  Time constraints. Construction buffers shall only be in effect during the construction period of a project and shall terminate upon project completion. In the case of a residential subdivision, a construction buffer shall terminate upon each individual lot with the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the principal dwelling. 
10.7-3  Disturbance or encroachments. 
a.  Construction buffer shall be natural, undisturbed and free of encroachments except as authorized by a condition of zoning or variance approval, or as authorized herein. 
b.  The encroachments of ditches, swales, stormwater conveyance facilities, stormwater detention ponds, sediment basins, sanitary sewer conveyance facilities, similar facilities, and any associated easements, into a construction buffer shall not be authorized except that necessary access and utility crossings (e.g. stormwater or sanitary sewer pipes), and natural bottom detention ponds (sediment basins must be located outside of the construction buffer) and their appurtenant structures which require no grading and removal of trees, may encroach upon the construction buffer. 
c.  If the construction buffer on a residential lot is devoid of existing trees and vegetation, and a tree survey is submitted to document this situation prior to conducting land disturbing activities (including clearing) on the lot, then the department may authorize the encroachment of a building or structure into the construction buffer for a distance not to exceed ten feet. 
10.7-4  Protection during land disturbing activities. 
a.  During authorized land disturbing activities construction buffers shall be clearly demarcated and protected prior to commencement of, and during construction, 
b.  The method of demarcation and protection utilized shall be in accordance with best management practices or as required by the department. 
10.8 - Compliance. 
10.8-1  Artificial materials prohibited. All artificial plants, trees, shrubs, grass or other vegetation shall be prohibited from fulfilling the requirements of these regulations. 
10.8-2  Warranty or maintenance surety. Upon final installation of new trees, shrubs or other landscape material planted to meet the requirements of this ordinance, and following acceptance by the department in accordance with the procedures set forth in the development regulations, the owner shall either provide proof of warranty or post a maintenance bond or other acceptable surety, warranting the new trees, shrubs or landscape material for a period of no less than one year. 
10.8-3  Inspection. 
a.  The department shall perform an inspection of the plantings and landscape materials required by these regulations prior to expiration of the one year warranty or maintenance period. The owner shall be notified of any replacements or restoration that must be made to maintain compliance with these regulations or conditions of zoning or variance approval. 
b.  Required landscape material found to be dead or near death shall be replaced prior to release by the department of the warranty or maintenance surety. In no case shall replacement be delayed more than 30 days from notification, unless a performance bond is posted with the department. 
10.8-4  Buffers for interior subdivision lots. When a lot within a residential subdivision fronts on a local street within the subdivision and the back yard is located along either an arterial street, a collector street or freeway street, then any and all buffer requirements shall apply to the back yard of said lot and the arterial, collector or freeway street. 
(Ord. No. 03-Z-004, 6-3-03) 
10.9 - Enforcement. 
It shall be the responsibility of the department to enforce these regulations. The director or his/her designee shall have the authority to revoke, suspend, or void any clearing, clearing and grubbing, grading, development, or building permit, or to withhold issuance of a certificate of occupancy, and shall have the authority to suspend all work on a site or any portion thereof, where tree removal or damage occurs in violation of these regulations. 
10.10 - Violation and penalty. 
Any person violating the provisions of these regulations shall be guilty of violating a duly adopted ordinance of Cherokee County, and upon conviction by a court of competent jurisdiction may be punished either by a fine not to exceed $500.00, or confinement in the county jail not to exceed 60 days, or both. The court shall have the power and authority to place any person found guilty, of a violation of these regulations, on probation and to suspend or modify any fine or sentence. As a condition of said suspension, the court may require payment of restitution or impose other punishment allowed by law which may include mandatory attendance at an educational program regarding tree preservation. The owner of any property wherein a violation exists, and any builder, contractor, or agent who may have assisted in the commission of any such violation, shall be guilty of a separate offense. 
10.11 - Appeals and waivers. 
10.11-1  Variance from the zoning ordinance. The preservation of trees may be considered as a condition peculiar to a piece of property in support of a request for a variance from the literal application of the provisions of the zoning ordinance; under the procedures and requirements contained herein. 
10.11-2  Appeals. Appeals of the interpretation of the requirements of these regulations by the director shall be filed and processed in accordance with the appeal procedures as set forth in the zoning ordinance (article 15). 
10.12 - Repeal clause. 
The provisions of any ordinances or resolutions or parts thereof in conflict herewith are repealed, save and except such ordinances or resolutions or parts thereof, which provide stricter standards than those provided herein. 
10.13 - Severability. 
Should any section, subsection, clause, or provision of this article be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of this article in whole or any part thereof other than the part so declared to be invalid. 
10.14 - Amendment. 
This article may be amended from time to time by resolution of the Board of Commissioners of Cherokee County. Such amendments shall be effective as specified in the adopting resolution. 
10.15 - Effective date. 
This article shall become effective upon its adoption. 
Table 10.1. Minimum Buffer Width Between Abutting Districts 

 
*See Article 8—Traditional Neighborhood Development, Section 8.3.6 Buffer requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2007-Z-002, 8-7-07) 
Division 2. - Technology Ridge Tree Buffer Zone 

Sec. 10.16. - I-575 Technology Ridge Buffer Zone. 
The I-575 Technology Ridge Buffer Zone is herein recognized as all parcels lying within 75 feet to 120 feet in a horizontal linear distance measured perpendicular from each side of the I-575 right-of-way. It is the intent that the buffer zone will not only provide a visual aesthetic value, but also serve in a capacity to improve the quality of life by filtering noise, light, and air borne pollutants. All new development activity shall incorporate the following two criteria prior to issuance of land disturbance permit. Any new additions can utilize another option under each option as long as the option incorporates elements from existing plan and provides continuity among parcels. 
(1)  Corridor. The corridor for the I-575 Technology Ridge Tree Buffer Zone shall be recognized as those areas lying parallel on each side of I-575 connected by the interstate zones. Properties wholly contained within each of the buffers shall be allowed to be disturbed and replanted utilizing berms and underplantings of indigenous landscape species. County staff will conduct inspections to determine the required screening requirement. New development shall incorporate one of three tree protection buffers herein that create a sliding scale. 
(a)  Seventy-five-foot minimum tree buffer requiring underplantings to block 90 percent visibility of all buildings during all seasons. 
Architectural bonus : Reduction of underplanting to block 45 percent visibility of all buildings during all seasons if building facades have architectural treatments equal to the comprehensive interchange design and landscape plan of the nearest interchange zone. 
Tree bonus : No percent decrease in tree density units 
(b)  One hndred-foot minimum tree buffer requiring underplantings to block 75 percent visibility of all buildings during all seasons. 
Architectural bonus : Reduction of underplanting to block 45 percent visibility of all buildings during all seasons if building facades have architectural treatments equal to the comprehensive interchange design and landscape plan of the nearest interchange zone. 
Square footage bonus : 33 percent of total approved commercial, office and/or industrial square footage shall be permitted for residential uses. 
Zoning bonus : If zoned industrial, the following commercial uses are permitted: 
1.  Farmer's market. 
2.  Appliance sales and repair. 
3.  Bakery. 
4.  Books, cards and stationary store. 
5.  Florist shop. 
6.  Hardware, paint and wallpaper store. 
7.  Shoe repair. 
8.  Vocational school. 
If zoned commercial, the following industrial uses are permitted: 
1. Laundry, dry cleaning plant. 
2. Storage warehouse, no outside storage. 
3. Bottling plant. 
Tree bonus : 25 percent decrease in total overall site tree density units. 
(c)  One hundred twenty-foot minimum tree buffer requiring underplantings to block 60 percent visibility of all buildings during all seasons. 
Architectural bonus : Reduction of underplanting to block 45 percent visibility of all buildings during all seasons if building facades have architectural treatments equal to the comprehensive interchange design and landscape plan of the nearest interchange zone. 
Square footage bonus : 60 percent of total approved commercial, office and/or industrial shall be permitted for residential uses. 
Zoning bonus : If zoned industrial, the following commercial uses are permitted: 
1.  Farmer's market. 
2.  Appliance sales and repair. 
3.  Bakery. 
4.  Books, cards and stationary store. 
5.  Convenience store with/without fuel pumps. 
6.  Drug stores, pharmacies. 
7.  Fast food restaurant, drive in. 
8.  Florist shop. 
9.  Furniture, home furnishing store. 
10.  Garden, landscaping supplies. 
11.  Gasoline service station. 
12.  Hardware, paint and wallpaper store. 
13.  Shoe repair. 
14.  Vocational school. 
15.  Theater. 
16.  Recreation facilities, indoor or outdoor. 
If zoned commercial, the following industrial uses are permitted: 
1.  Laundry, dry cleaning plant. 
2.  Storage warehouse, no outside storage. 
3.  Bottling plant. 
4.  Laboratory research facilities. 
5.  Bottled gas, storage and distribution. 
6.  Building supplies and storage, no outside storage. 
7.  Equipment supplies (medical, dental, art, etc.). 
8.  Ice manufacturing. 
Tree bonus : 50 percent decrease in total overall site tree density units. 
(2)  Interchange zones. The area within a distance of 1,000 linear feet of the crossings of a right-of-way of an Interchange shall be recognized as an interstate zone. Properties wholly contained within each of the buffer areas shall be allowed to be disturbed and replanted utilizing berms and underplantings of indigenous landscape species. County staff will conduct inspections to determine the required screening elements. New developments shall incorporate one of three tree protection buffers herein that create a sliding scale. 
(a)  Seventy-five-foot minimum tree buffer requiring underplantings to block 90 percent visibility of all buildings during all seasons. 
Architectural bonus : Reduction of underplanting to block 45 percent visibility of all buildings during all seasons if building facades have architectural treatments equal to the comprehensive interchange design and landscape plan of the nearest interchange zone. 
Tree bonus : No percent decrease in tree density units. 
(2)  One hundred-foot minimum tree buffer requiring underplantings to block 75 percent visibility of all buildings during all seasons. 
Architectural bonus : Reduction of underplanting to block 45 percent visibility of all buildings during all seasons if building facades have architectural treatments equal to the comprehensive interchange design and landscape plan of the nearest interchange zone. 
Square footage bonus : 33 percent of total approved commercial, office and/or industrial square footage shall be permitted for residential uses. 
Zoning bonus : If zoned industrial, the following commercial uses are permitted: 
1.  Farmer's market. 
2.  Appliance sales and repair. 
3.  Bakery. 
4.  Books, cards and stationary store. 
5.  Florist shop. 
6.  Hardware, paint and wallpaper store. 
7.  Shoe repair. 
8.  Vocational school. 
If zoned commercial, the following industrial uses are permitted: 
1.  Laundry, dry cleaning plant. 
2.  Storage warehouse, no outside storage. 
3.  Bottling plant. 
Tree bonus : 25 percent decrease in total overall site tree density units. 
(c)  One hundred twenty-foot minimum tree buffer requiring underplantings to block 60 percent visibility of all buildings during all seasons. 
Architectural bonus : Reduction of underplanting to block 45 percent visibility of all buildings during all seasons if building facades have architectural treatments equal to the comprehensive interchange design and landscape plan of the nearest interchange zone. 
Square footage bonus : 60 percent of total approved commercial, office and/or industrial shall be permitted for residential uses. 
Zoning bonus : If zoned industrial, the following commercial uses are permitted: 
1.  Farmer's market. 
2.  Appliance sales and repair. 
3.  Bakery. 
4.  Books, cards and stationary store. 
5.  Convenience store with/without fuel pumps. 
6.  Drug stores, pharmacies. 
7.  Fast food restaurant, drive in. 
8.  Florist shop. 
9.  Furniture, home furnishing store. 
10.  Garden, landscaping supplies. 
11.  Gasoline service station. 
12.  Hardware, paint and wallpaper store. 
13.  Shoe repair. 
14.  Vocational school. 
15.  Theater. 
16.  Recreation facilities, indoor or outdoor. 
If zoned commercial, the following industrial uses are permitted: 
1.  Laundry, dry cleaning plant. 
2.  Storage warehouse, no outside storage. 
3.  Bottling plant. 
4.  Laboratory research facilities. 
5.  Bottled gas, storage and distribution. 
6.  Builder supplies and storage, no outside storage. 
7.  Equipment supplies (medical, dental, art, etc.). 
8.  Ice manufacturing. 
Tree bonus : 50 percent decrease in total overall site tree density units. 
(Ord. No. 99-O-24, 7-27-99) 
ARTICLE 11. - SIGNS AND OUTDOOR ADVERTISING[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-O-009, adopted September 15, 2015, repealed former Art. 11, §§ 11.1—11.9, and enacted a new Art. 11 as set out herein. The former Art. 11 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2004-Z-002, adopted March 2, 2004; an ordinance adopted November 15, 2004; Ord. No. 2006-Z-002, adopted April 4, 2006; Ord. No. 2007-Z-002, adopted August 7, 2007; and Ord. No. 20013-Z-001, adopted June 4, 2013. 

11.1 - Objectives and purpose. 
This article, which shall be known and may be cited as the Cherokee County Sign Ordinance, is to establish requirements for the placement, installation, and maintenance of signs in order to protect and promote the health, safety, welfare, and general well-being of the citizens of Cherokee County. The zoning regulation of the placement, construction, maintenance of buildings and structures is a valid use of the police power, including the regulation of the placement, installation, and maintenance of signs. Signs must ordinarily be considered structures, and are capable of producing many of the same nuisances as are produced by buildings. The intent of this article to regulate the size, height and number of signs in such a manner as to protect and preserve the aesthetic qualities of the county while promoting traffic safety without causing unsafe conditions. 
It is not the intent of this article to apply regulation to signs based upon the message that they convey. It is not the intent of this article to foreclose important and distinct mediums of expression for political, religious or personal messages. Furthermore, it is not the intent of the county, nor any of its boards, commissions, or agents, to regulate, in any manner, the message content of signs, except to the extent of obscenity or other messages prohibited by state or federal law. Accordingly and except as described in the prior sentence, the provisions of this article shall not be construed, interpreted, or enforced so as to regulate signage based upon the content of a sign's message 
The planning and land use department will only oversee the number of signs, height, size and placement of signs. Cherokee County makes no determination or permits signs in regard to on-site or off-site locations. With these objectives and purposes in mind, the intention of this article is to authorize the use of signs that are compatible with their surroundings in terms of zoning, existing land use, and architectural characteristics; are legible and compatible with the type of lawful activities to which the signs pertain in such a manner as to express the identity of the individual properties and/or of the county as a whole. 
In addition, the regulation of signs within the county is necessary and in the public interest: 
(1)  To protect property values within the county. 
(2)  To protect the motoring public from damage or injury caused or partially attributable to distractions or obstructions from improperly designed or situated signs. 
(3)  To promote the economic well-being of Cherokee County by creating a favorable physical image. 
(4)  To improve the legibility and effectiveness of all permitted signs. 
(5)  To allow individuals equal and fair opportunity to advertise and promote their products and services without discrimination. 
(6)  To eliminate excessive signage. 
(7)  To protect the right of citizens to enjoy Cherokee County's natural scenic beauty. 
(8)  To encourage economic development within the county. 
(9)  To regulate the construction, erection, maintenance and size of signs that may constitute a direct danger to pedestrians and property. 
(10)  To preserve and promote the public health, safety and welfare in Cherokee County. 
(Ord. No. 2015-O-009, Exh. A, 9-15-15; Ord. No. 2016-O-001; Exh. C, 2-2-16) 
11.2 - Jurisdiction and applicability of Code requirements. 
(a)  This article shall apply to all properties within the unincorporated areas of Cherokee County, Georgia. This article shall not relate to the copy or message on a sign within the unincorporated areas of Cherokee County. 
(b)  All signs and other advertising structures shall be constructed and maintained in conformance with the building and electrical codes adopted by Cherokee County. 
(c)  If any provisions or requirements of this article are in conflict with any other provision or requirement of this ordinance or any other applicable governmental law, ordinance, resolution, rule or other governmental regulation or any kind, the more restrictive rule or standard takes precedence. 
(Ord. No. 2015-O-009, Exh. A, 9-15-15; Ord. No. 2016-O-001; Exh. C, 2-2-16) 
11.3 - Appeals and variances. 
(a)  Appeals. 
(1)  A person whose permit application has been denied or a permittee whose permit has been revoked may appeal the decision of the planning director or his/her designee to the zoning board of appeals, pursuant to article 15 of this Code. 
(2)  Appeals of the decision of the zoning board of Appeals are made to the board of commissioners pursuant to section 15.8. 
(3)  Certiorari. In the event a person whose permit has been denied or revoked is dissatisfied with the decision of the board of commissioners, he/she may petition for writ of certiorari to the Superior Court of County as provided by law. 
(b)  Variances. Variances other than with respect to the frequency by which the image on an electronic sign may change may be requested. All such variances shall be considered and decided by the Cherokee County Zoning Board of Appeals in accordance with officially adopted procedures and standards contained in article 15 of the Cherokee County Zoning Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2015-O-009, Exh. A, 9-15-15; Ord. No. 2016-O-001; Exh. C, 2-2-16) 
11.4 - Definitions. 
Words and phrases used in this article have the meanings defined in this section. In addition, words and phrases not defined in this section, but defined in the Zoning Ordinance of the county shall be given the meanings as set forth in such ordinance. 
Abandoned sign. A sign and/or sign structure without copy area for more than 30 days and/or which requires maintenance and repairs in excess of 25 percent of the replacement cost of the sign. 
Advertising device. Any structure or device situated on or attached to real property that is erected or intended for the purpose of calling the attention of the public. 
Air and gas filled device. Any sign using, either wholly or in part, forced air or other gas as a means of supporting its structure. 
Animated illumination or effects means illumination or effects with action, moving characters or flashing lights. This may require electrical energy, but shall also include wind actuated devices. Specifically included is any motion picture or video mechanism used in conjunction with any outdoor advertising structure in such a manner as to permit or allow the images to be visible from any public right of way. This definition does not include electronic message signs as permitted within this article. 
Animated sign. Any sign that all or any part thereof visibly moves or imitates movement in any fashion whatsoever. Any sign that contains or uses for illumination any lights (or lighting devices) that change color, flash or alternate, show movement or motion, or change the appearance of said sign or any part automatically, including any electronic sign which contains anything other than static messages or changes its message more often than permitted by this ordinance. This includes flashing, moving, and revolving signs. 
Area of sign (copy area). The area within a continuous perimeter enclosing the limits of writing, representation, emblem, or any figure of similar character together with any frame, other material, open space, or color forming an integral part of the display or used to differentiate such sign from the background against which it is placed. 
Banner. A sign hung either with or without a frame, possessing characters, letters, illustrations, or ornamentation applied to paper, plastic, or fabric of any kind. 
Beacon. Any light with one or more beams directed into the atmosphere or directed at one or more points not on the same zone lot as the light source; also, any light with one or more beams that rotate or move. 
Bench sign. A sign located on any part of the surface of a bench or seat placed on or adjacent to a public right-of-way. 
Billboards. Freestanding signs or structures for the display of advertisements in public places or highways. All regulations relating to freestanding signs shall apply. 
Building sign. Any sign attached to any part of a building other than a freestanding sign. 
Canopy sign. A sign affixed to, imposed upon, or painted on any roof-like structure either permanently or temporarily extended over a sidewalk or walkway, which can be mounted flush or suspended. A flush canopy sign is one that is mounted in such a manner that a continuous plane with the canopy is formed. A hanging canopy sign is one suspended from beneath the canopy. 
Copy. The wording or graphics on a sign surface in either permanent or removable form. 
Development entrance sign. A sign located on either side of an intersection of the driveway, road or entryway of a residential major subdivision or a multi-family development, or a commercial/industrial development, with a county maintained road or state route. 
Distance. The measurement in linear feet from the closest point of a sign to the nearest property line or to the closest point of another sign, as the case may be. 
Double faced (back-to-back) sign. A sign with two parallel, or nearly parallel faces, back-to-back and located not more than 24 inches from each other. 
Electronic sign. A sign whose message may be changed at intervals by computer controller, microprocessor controller or remote control, and whose message is displayed through the use of LED, LCD, plasma or other similar type of panels or screens, including devices known as commercial electronic message signs and similar devices. 
Erect. To build, construct, attach, hang, place, suspend, paint or affix. 
Establishment. A commercial, industrial, institutional, educational, office, business [or] financial entity. 
Flag. Any fabric, banner, bunting or other flexible material containing distinctive colors, patterns, standards, words, or symbols. 
Flagpole. A permanently anchored pole on which a flag is hoisted and displayed. 
Flashing. A pattern of changing light illumination where the light intensity alternates suddenly during display of a message for the purpose of drawing attention to the sign. The term "flashing" excludes electronic signs operated in conformity with this ordinance. 
Frame effect. A visual effect on an electronic sign which depicts movement, fading, mosaic flips, wipes, or other changing effects associated with the transition from one static message to another. 
Freestanding sign. Any sign, which is physically independent from any building or other structure and is entirely supported by structures that are permanently at or below ground level. May be double faced or v-shaped as allowed by this article. 
Frontage, building. The length of an outside building wall facing a street. 
Frontage, street. The length of the property line of any one parcel along a street on which it borders. 
Historic sign. Any animated neon sign over 30 years old, any existing barber pole or any other sign so designated by the historic preservation commission. Extensions, additions and embellishments are not considered part of a historic sign. 
Identification sign. A sign depicting the address where the sign is located. 
Illuminated sign. A sign lighted by artificial sources on the inside of the sign or external lights directed towards the sign. 
Information sign. A temporary sign erected to provide information to people passing the property in a vehicle or on foot. 
Kiosk sign. A free-standing and multiple sided structure owned by the county and located in public rights-of-way. 
Mansard sign. Any sign attached to or erected within 12 inches of an actual or simulated mansard of a building, with the sign face parallel to and within the limits of the building, not deemed to be a roof sign. 
Monument style. A style of freestanding sign that has a solid-appearing base with no open space between the ground and the sign for the entire width of the copy area. The monument is constructed of brick, stone, stucco, or a combination thereof that is compatible with primary buildings on the site. The copy area is framed with a minimum of six inches of material consistent with remaining monument. See illustrations below. 

Nonconforming sign (legal). Any advertising device or sign, including billboards, which were legally erected and maintained prior to the adoption or amendment of this ordinance, but which no longer comply. 
Painted wall sign. Any sign that is applied with paint or similar substance on the face of a wall. 
Parcel (lot) (business lot). Any standard lot or parcel of land, the boundaries of which, have been established by a recorded legal instrument and is recognized and intended as a unit for the purpose of transfer of ownership. The said parcel being duly recorded with the clerk of Superior Court, Cherokee County. 
Permanent sign. A sign permanently affixed to a building or the ground. 
Person. Any association, company, corporation, firm, organization, or partnership, singular or plural, of any kind. 
Portable sign. Any sign supported by its own frame or trailer, with or without wheels, that is designed to move from one place to another. Includes A-frames, mobile signs, sandwich boards and trailer signs. 
Principal building. The building with the principal use of the parcel on which it is located. Parcels with multiple principal uses may have multiple principal buildings. However, storage buildings, garages, and other clearly accessory [buildings] are not considered principal buildings. 
Projecting sign. Any sign affixed to and supported by a building or wall, which horizontally extends more than twelve inches beyond the surface of a building or wall. 
Residential district. Includes all land zoned R-80, R-60, R-40, R-30, R-20, R-15, RD-3, RTH, RZL, RA, RM-10, RM-16, and PUD-Residential. 
Roof sign. Any sign erected, constructed, and maintained upon or over the roof of any building and projecting above the roof line. 
Setback. The distance from the property line to the nearest part of the applicable building, structure, or sign, measured perpendicularly to the property line. 
Sidewalk, sandwich or a-frame sign. A sign which is normally in the shape of an 'A' or some variation, which is usually two-sided. 
Sign. Any identification, description, illustration or device, illuminated or non-illuminated, which is visible to the general public or placard designed to advertise, identify, or convey information. 
Sign face. The portion of a sign on which the copy is placed. 
Sign number. For the purpose of determining the number of signs, a sign shall be construed to be a single display surface or device containing elements organized, related and composed, to form a single unit. In cases where material is displayed in a random or unconnected manner or where there is reasonable doubt as to the intended relationship of such components, each component is considered to be a single sign. A projecting sign with both sign faces being less than 42 inches apart shall be construed as a single sign. 
Sign structure. Any construction used or designed to support a sign. 
Snipe sign. A sign of any material that is attached in any way to a utility pole, tree, fence, rock, or any other similar object located on public or private property. 
Street. Any public or private right-of-way for automobile use. This excludes alleyways, parking lots and driveways. 
Street frontage. The width in linear feet of a lot or parcel where it abuts the right-of-way of any public street. 
Temporary sign. A sign constructed of an impermanent material and designed or intended to be displayed for a short period of time. 
Traffic control sign. A standard sign or electronic device for the purpose of directing or regulating traffic and/or pedestrians. 
Under canopy sign. A sign that is suspended from the underside of a canopy (including awnings and marquees), is perpendicular to the wall surface of a building, and whose copy is not clearly visible from a public right-of-way. 
Unlawful sign (illegal sign). Any sign erected without a permit when a permit for the sign was otherwise required by this ordinance or previously adopted ordinance or code. Also, a permitted sign which has not been properly erected in accordance with the permit application and approved sign permit or an otherwise lawful and permitted sign that has become hazardous or a nuisance to the public due to poor maintenance, dilapidation, or abandonment and so declared by the building official. 
V-shaped sign. A structure of two signs in the shape of the letter "V" when viewed from above having their faces oriented in opposite directions at an angle not greater than 90 degrees. 
Wall face. A measurement of area equal to the height of the structure from the ground to the coping or eave of the roof multiplied by the width of the wall associated with an individual business or use. The wall face is to be measured for each wall independently. 
Wall sign. Any sign affixed or attached to a wall of a building in such a way that the wall becomes the supporting structure for the sign, extending no more than 12 inches beyond the wall and which displays only one sign surface. 
Weekend sign. A temporary sign that may be erected and maintained for a limited time as prescribed in section 11.7 of this article. 
Window sign. Any sign placed inside or upon a window, and intended to be seen from the exterior. 
(Ord. No. 2015-O-009, Exh. A, 9-15-15; Ord. No. 2016-O-001; Exh. C, 2-2-16) 
11.5 - General provisions. 
11.5-1  Permitting requirements. 
(a)  Except as specifically exempted from the provisions of this article, a person or firm may not legally post, display, enlarge, erect, move or substantially change a sign without first obtaining a sign permit from the planning director or his/her designee. A change in the copy only of a sign or advertising device does not constitute a substantial change. 
(b)  Permit application. Applications for sign permits shall be filed by the sign owner or his agent with the planning director or his/her designee upon forms furnished by the county. Applications shall describe and justify the following: 
(1)  The type of the sign as defined in this ordinance. 
(2)  The value of the sign. 
(3)  The street address and zoning designation of the property where the sign is to be located and the proposed location of the sign on the property. 
(4)  The square foot area per sign and the aggregate square foot area if there is more than one sign face. 
(5)  The name(s) and address(es) of the owner(s) of the real property upon which the subject sign is to be located. 
(6)  Written consent of the owner, or his agent, granting property upon which the subject sign is to be located. 
(7)  For freestanding signs: a site plan drawn to scale, showing the proposed location of all primary and accessory ground sign(s) on subject property. The site plan includes a closed boundary survey of the property, gross acreage, the proposed sign location, street right-of-way lines, public or private easements, driveway locations and parking spaces. 
(8)  For all signs: A sketch or print drawn to scale showing all dimensions with pertinent information such as wind pressure requirements and display materials in accordance with the International Building Code as adopted by Cherokee County. 
(9)  Name, address, phone number and business license number of the sign contractor. 
(10)  All applicants for electrical signs must obtain an electrical permit. 
(11)  A written agreement to indemnify and hold the county harmless of all damages, demands or expenses of every type which may in any manner be caused by the sign or sign structure. 
(c)  Fees. No permit shall be issued until the appropriate application has been filed with the planning director or his/her designee. Such application shall not be deemed complete until all of the information required by this section has been submitted and all permit fees have been paid as adopted by the board of commissioners and as amended from time to time. 
(d)  The planning director or his/her designee shall grant a completed application if the proposed sign meets the requirements of this article. 
(e)  The planning director or his/her designee shall provide written notice of the granting or denial of an application with 30 business days following submission of a completed application. In the event no action is taken within 30 business days, the application shall be deemed granted. 
(f)  Permit Expiration. A sign permit shall become null and void if construction of the sign has not begun within a period of two months from the date of issuance and completed within six months from the date of issuance. Issuance of a sign permit shall in no way prevent the county from later declaring the sign to be nonconforming or unlawful with further review of available information, if the sign is found not to comply with the requirements of this ordinance. 
11.5-2  Construction, maintenance requirements. 
(a)  Erecting or placing any sign that does not conform to the requirements of this ordinance is unlawful. 
(b)  All signs for which a permit is required, together with all their supports, braces, guys and anchors shall be kept in constant repair. Signs shall be kept clean, neatly painted and maintained at all times so as not to be detrimental to public health and safety. 
(c)  No trash shall be allowed to accumulate in the area around a sign and all weeds shall be kept out. 
11.5-3  Lighting requirements. 
(a)  Lighted, neon or luminous signs giving off light resulting in glare, blinding or any other such adverse effect on traffic shall not be erected or maintained. 
(b)  The light from illuminated signs shall be established in such a way that adjacent properties and roadways are not adversely affected and that no direct light is cast upon adjacent properties and roadways. Lighting shall not be directed skyward. 
(c)  No illuminated signs shall be constructed or maintained within 50 feet of any residential district or dwelling, except within the TND district. 
(d)  Signs with flashing, intermittent or animated illumination or effect shall be excluded from all districts except as defined under Section 11.5-5(I). 
(e)  No sign shall be erected which simulates or hides from view any traffic or street sign or signal. 
11.5-4  Height requirements. 
The height requirements of a sign shall be computed as the distance from the base of the sign at normal grade to the highest attached component of the sign or sign structure, whichever is higher. Normal grade shall be construed to be the lower of: 
(1)  Existing grade prior to construction; or 
(2)  The newly established grade after construction, exclusive of any filling, berming, mounding or excavating solely for the purpose of locating the sign. 
In cases in which the normal grade cannot reasonably be determined, sign height shall be computed on the assumption that the elevation of the normal grade, at the base of the sign, is equal to the elevation of the nearest point of the crown of a public road. Refer to Table 11.1 for specific height limits and requirements. 
11.5-5  Additional requirements. 
(a)  It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to remove, replace or repair an abandoned sign and/or sign structure within 30 days of written notification from the Planning Director or his/her designee. After which time, the county may cause the removal of the sign at the property owner's expense. 
(b)  No sign shall be erected or maintained which obstructs any fire escape, any means of escape or ventilation, or which prevents free passage from one part of a roof to any other part thereof; nor shall any sign be attached in any form, shape or manner to a fire escape. 
(c)  No sign shall be erected, maintained, painted, drawn or attached to any utility pole, rock, tree or any other natural feature. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful to post any signs or advertisements on any building, or other property belonging to another person without the written consent of the owner thereof. Such consent shall be included with the sign permit application. 
(e)  All signs shall be located on or over private property only, except those specifically permitted by this article. 
(f)  All signs shall be erected in such a manner as to not interfere with or obstruct the view of any authorized traffic sign, signal or device. 
(g)  All signs shall be located in such a way that they maintain horizontal and vertical clearance from all overhead utilities in accordance with International Electrical Code specification. In no case shall any sign be installed within five feet horizontally or vertically from an overhead utility line or utility guy wire. 
(h)  Corner Visibility Clearance: Freestanding signs near driveways and development entrances shall be sited in accordance with safety conditions as required by the Cherokee County Engineering Department. 
(i)  Electronic signs. Electronic signs may be used in accordance with the following provisions, provided that legal non-conforming freestanding signs shall not be converted to electronic signs except in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
1.  The following shall apply to all electronic signs: 
a.  Electronic signs shall only be used as freestanding signs and shall not be allowed as canopy, wall or awning signs as defined in this ordinance. 
b.  Electronic signs shall contain static messages only, and shall not have movement nor flashing on any part of the sign structure, design, or pictorial segment of the sign, nor shall such sign have varying light intensity during the display of any single message. Transitions between messages shall not use frame effects or other methods which result in movement of a displayed image during such transition. 
c.  Electronic signs must operate within brightness levels as established in this ordinance. 
d.  Each sign must have a light sensing device that will adjust the brightness of the display as the natural ambient light conditions change. 
e.  The owner of said electronic sign shall provide to the Development Service Director, information for a 24-hour contact able to turn off the electronic sign promptly if a malfunction occurs. If, at any time more than 50 percent of the digital display lights malfunction or are no longer working, the owner of said electronic sign shall turn off the electronic display until repairs are made. 
f.  In the course of processing a complaint, the staff of Cherokee County may request a certification of the brightness (under measurement conditions) by an independent contractor (if such has not been certified within the preceding 12 months). If this investigation and certification indicates that the electronic sign exceeds the brightness levels specified in this ordinance, the owner of the sign, within 24 hours of a request by the staff of Cherokee County, shall turn off the sign until the brightness of the sign is corrected to comply with this ordinance at owner's expense. 
g.  Any electronic sign whose face or structure is physically removed for whatever cause must alter the sign to comply with this ordinance. 
h.  No electronic sign shall utilize, house or contain any interactive features or components, or function as an interactive sign. 
i.  Electronic signs shall not be allowed in residential zones. 
2.  Electronic signs located on non-residentially zoned property: Electronic signs may be utilized for and in conjunction with any sign permitted by this ordinance on non-residentially zoned property, provided that each such electronic sign shall comply with the following requirements in addition to and in conjunction with those specified in subsection (1) hereinabove: 
a.  Must be located on a property/lot with at least 200 feet of public road frontage on one road (if abutting more than one public road, sign may only be erected along a road with more than 200 feet of frontage) and cannot be within 200 feet of another electronic sign that may be permitted on the same property/lot. For the purposes of measurement, mitered corners will not be included in road frontage calculations. 
b.  Electronic messaging portion of sign shall not exceed 32 square feet per allowable sign area and may not have more than two electronic sign areas per sign. 
c.  Each individual static message must be displayed for not less than 60 seconds. 
d.  Electronic signs located on non-residentially zoned property may not operate at brightness levels of more than 0.20 foot candles above ambient light levels (at measurement conditions) as measured at a distance of 125 feet. 
e.  If the electronic sign is located in the line of sight of a residentially occupied structure on a residentially zoned property, such electronic sign shall not operate at brightness levels of more than 0.1 foot candles above ambient light levels (at measurement conditions) as measured at the nearest portion of such residential structure. 
3.  Notwithstanding any provisions otherwise providing for variance to the terms and limitations in the zoning ordinance, the limitation on the frequency by which the image on an electronic sign may change shall not be subject to variance other than by amendment to this section. 
(Ord. No. 2015-O-009, Exh. A, 9-15-15; Ord. No. 2016-O-001; Exh. C, 2-2-16) 
11.6 - Permitted signs by type and zoning district. 
The following signs are allowed with a permit: 
(1)  Commercial and industrial lots in the 01, CP, NC, GC, LI & HI zoning districts are allowed three signs. Only one of the three can be a freestanding sign. A business within a shopping center can have a maximum of two signs. The shopping center is allowed the freestanding sign. Freestanding signs are limited to 120 square feet with a maximum height of 35 feet. 
Freestanding signs on commercial or industrial lots: 
a.  Freestanding signs on commercial or industrial lots must be built in the monument style. 
b.  All residential uses on a commercial or industrial lot must cease prior to the erection of a commercial-size freestanding sign. 
(2)  Property in agriculture and residential zoning districts of three acres or greater is allowed one freestanding sign limited to 32 square feet with a maximum height of eight feet. Agricultural and residential districts of less than three acres are allowed one freestanding sign limited to four square feet with a maximum height of eight feet. The following land uses are allowed one freestanding sign limited to 32 square feet with a maximum height of eight feet: 
a.  Permitted commercial establishments and institutions within agriculture (AG) district. 
b.  Permitted institutions within residential zoning districts. 
(3)  Development Entrances. Signs shall be constructed in a monument style with a maximum height of ten feet. The copy area shall be limited to a total of 64 square feet for two signs flanking the either side of the entrance or a maximum of 32 square feet per sign. In lieu of two flanking signs, one double-faced sign with a maximum of 50 square feet may be permitted. There are to be no signs on islands within a public ROW. 
(4)  If the parcel has two street frontages, two freestanding signs are allowed in any zoning district. Each freestanding sign must be located on a different road frontage. The freestanding signs must be separated by a minimum of 200 feet measured by a straight line drawn between the closest point of each sign. 
(Ord. No. 2015-O-009, Exh. A, 9-15-15; Ord. No. 2016-O-001; Exh. C, 2-2-16) 
11.7 - Exempt signs. 
Except as otherwise provided, the following may be erected without securing a permit. Such exempt signs shall not be considered in determining the allowable number or size of signs per zoning on a lot. However, the signs must comply with all other applicable sections of this article and applicable codes and regulations. 
(1)  One plaque for each establishment not to exceed two square feet in area. 
(2)  One separate identification sign for each establishment when affixed to a building wall or window and limited to a maximum size of four square feet. The purpose of this sign is to identify the establishment's property number (address), suite or unit number for public safety and /or law enforcement response. 
(3)  One (1) informational bulletin board affixed to a building wall. Bulletin boards may not exceed 32 square feet in area. 
(4)  Traffic, directional, warning or official notices that otherwise meet the location, size and height requirements of the ordinance. 
(5)  Flags. 
a.  Each lot shall be allowed a maximum of three flagpoles with a maximum height of 30 feet each unless a variance is obtained pursuant to the zoning ordinance. 
b.  A maximum of two flags shall be allowed per flagpole not to exceed 40 square feet in area per flag. 
c.  A vertical flagpole must be set back from the property boundaries a distance which is at least equal to the height of the flagpole. 
d.  Flags and flagpoles shall be maintained in good repair, and to the extent applicable shall be in compliance with the building code. Flagpoles with broken halyards shall not be used and flags which are torn or frayed shall not be displayed. 
(6)  Integral decorative or architectural features of buildings, except letters, trademarks, moving parts or moving lights. 
(7)  A sign per entrance/exit onto the property not exceeding two square feet. 
(8)  Temporary signs are subject to the following provisions: 
a.  General provisions: 
Zoning districts: Signs shall be allowed in all zoning districts. 
Property owner permission required: Temporary signs do not require a permit or a permit fee. Such signs shall be located not closer than one foot from any publicly maintained right-of-way or easement, shall not be located in any medians and must have the permission of the property owner(s). In any instance where permission is in doubt, proof of such permission must be presented to the director of the department of planning and land use upon such request. 
b.  Information signs: 
1.  Number: Limited to one sign per parcel of property. 
Size and height: In commercial and industrial zoning districts, the maximum area per sign face shall be 32 square feet and a maximum height of eight feet. The maximum area of the sign in all other districts shall be four square feet and the maximum height shall be eight feet. Notwithstanding the previous sentence, each parcel of three acres or greater in agriculture and residential zoning districts is allowed one freestanding sign limited to 32 square feet with a maximum height of eight feet. Such signs may be double-faced; shall not be affixed in any manner to trees, natural objects, street light poles, utility poles, other signs or other sign structures. 
Time limit: All informational signs shall be removed within 30 days of sign being erected. 
Other provisions: Brochures/information boxes may be allowed with a maximum of one brochure/information box per parcel of land. Banners may be used as information signs as long as all requirements of this subsection are met. 
2.  Notwithstanding subsection (b)(1) above, additional information signs shall be permitted as described herein: 
Number: Limited to 15 per parcel of property. 
Time allowed: Shall be allowed during the period beginning 60 days preceding: 1) the date of qualification of candidates for public office or 2) the date of legislative action calling for a referendum election or ballot question (the "commencement date") until 30 days after the date of the final determination of an election to which such commencement date applies. The responsibility to remove all such signs is on the sign placer. The description of the time period during which such additional information signs may be erected and maintained shall not be construed as a limitation on the content of such signs. 
Size, height and materials: Shall not exceed the sign area per face as described below for the property's zoning district and eight feet in height. Such signs may be double-faced; shall not be affixed in any manner to trees, natural objects, street light poles, utility poles, other signs or other sign structures; and shall be made of metal, plastic, laminated cardboard or some other durable and waterproof material. No sign shall be made of paper. 
The following sign areas per zoning district shall apply: 
a.  In commercial and industrial zoning districts: may be up to 32 square feet. 
b.  In agricultural zoning district: may be up to 32 square feet. 
c.  In any residential zoning district (including PUD and TND): may be up to 16 square feet. 
c.  Weekend signs: 
Number: Limited to one sign per parcel of property. 
Size, height & materials: Weekend signs shall not exceed four square feet and three feet in height and may be double-faced. Signs shall be mounted on an independent single or double pole device. Signs shall not be affixed in any manner to trees, natural objects, street light poles, utility poles, other signs or other sign structures. Signs shall be made of metal, plastic, laminated cardboard or some other durable and waterproof material. No sign shall be made of paper. 
Time allowed: Signs shall be allowed from 3:00 p.m. on Friday to 7:00 a.m. on Monday. The responsibility to remove all signs prior to 7:00 a.m. Monday is of the sign placer. 
(9)  Works of art. 
(10)  Historic signs. (see definition) 
(11)  Signs on public transportation vehicles. 
(12)  Signs painted on or otherwise attached to motor vehicles which are not conspicuously parked in proximity to a right-of-way, and obviously not parked in such a way as to advertise any business or service to motorists or pedestrians. 
(13)  Holiday decorations, including lights, temporary flags for decorative purposes, and other decorations. 
(Ord. No. 2015-O-009, Exh. A, 9-15-15; Ord. No. 2016-O-001; Exh. C, 2-2-16) 
11.8 - Prohibited signs. 
The following signs and advertising devices are prohibited within the unincorporated portions of Cherokee County. 
(1)  Portable signs (A-frame, curb signs, mobile, sandwich type, sidewalk or trailers). 
(2)  Rotating or animated signs involving motion or sound including those that flash, blink, change image, or show any form of movement, excluding electronic signs as allowed by this article, historic signs and those officially designated for public service. 
(3)  Signs that resemble any official traffic control device or emergency vehicle markings, or signs that make use of the words "stop," "go," "slow," "caution," "danger," "warning" or similar words, phrases, symbols or characters which may pose a threat to the safety of the public traveling on an adjacent or nearby roadway 
(4)  Roof signs. 
(5)  Wind-activated devices, streamers, tethered balloons or other inflatable signs or figures, except as authorized by this regulation. 
(6)  Courtesy benches, waste containers or other forms of street furniture on which advertising is displayed. 
(7)  Snipe signs. 
(8)  Search lights and beacons. 
(9)  Signs attached to or painted on vehicles of any type, which are conspicuously parked in proximity to a right-of-way and obviously parked in such a way as to attract the attention of passing motorists or pedestrians. 
(10)  Signs that emit visible smoke vapor particles or odor. 
(11)  Signs in the right-of-way. It shall be unlawful for any person to install a sign in any public right-of-way except for the following: 
-  Public signs, i.e., signs erected by the county or other governmental authority. 
-  County owned kiosk signs. 
The planning director or his/her designee is hereby authorized to immediately remove any illegal sign located in any public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 2015-O-009, Exh. A, 9-15-15; Ord. No. 2016-O-001; Exh. C, 2-2-16) 
11.9 - Severability and amendments. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the governing authority that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of the Sign Ordinance are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this ordinance shall be declared unconstitutional or invalid by judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, the unconstitutional or invalid phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section shall be struck and the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs, and sections shall be effective as if the unconstitutional or invalid portion had not existed. 
Table 11.1 District Requirements for Signs 

 

 
* See Article 8 - Traditional Neighborhood Development (TND) for additional sign regulations 
** See Article 16 - Overlay Districts for additional sign regulations. Temporary Information Signs are the same as commercial above. 
(Ord. No. 2015-O-009, Exh. A, 9-15-15; Ord. No. 2016-O-001; Exh. C, 2-2-16) 
ARTICLE 12. - OFF-STREET PARKING REGULATIONS 

12.1 - Off-street parking regulations by use. 
Except as otherwise provided in this resolution, when any building or structure is hereafter erected or structurally altered, or any building or structure hereafter erected is converted for the uses listed in article 12.1 adequate off-street parking shall be provided as indicated in the following tables. 

 
12.2 - Interpretation of parking requirements chart. 
1.  The use regulations for each district are not affected by arrangement of uses in the chart. 
2.  The parking requirements in the chart are in addition to space for storage of trucks or other vehicles used in connection with any use. 
3.  The parking requirements in the chart do not limit other parking requirements contained in the district regulations. 
4.  Floor area as used in the chart shall be defined in article 4. 
5.  Where fractional spaces result the parking spaces required shall be construed to be the next highest whole number. 
6.  Except as otherwise provided, the number of employees shall be compiled on the basis of the maximum number of persons employed on the premises at one time on an average day or average night, whichever is greater. Seasonal variations in employment may be recognized in determining an average day. 
7.  The parking space requirements for a use not specifically listed in the chart shall be the same as for a listed use of similar characteristics of parking demand generation. 
8.  In the case of mixed uses, or uses with different parking requirements occupying the same building or premises, or in the case of joint use of a building or premises by more than one use having the same parking requirements, the parking spaces required shall equal the sum of the requirements of the various uses computed separately. 
9.  Whenever a building or use is changed or enlarged in floor area, number of employees, number of dwelling units, seating capacity or otherwise, to create a need under the requirements of this article for an increase in parking spaces of ten percent or more than those required before the change or enlargement, such additional spaces shall be provided on the basis of change or enlargement. No additional spaces shall be required for the first change or enlargement which would result in an increase of spaces of less than ten percent of those required for the first change or enlargement which would result in an increase of spaces of less than ten percent of those required before the change or enlargement, but this exception shall not apply to a series of changes or enlargements which together result in a need for an increase in parking spaces of ten percent or more. 
12.3 - Joint use and off-site facilities. 
1.  All parking spaces required herein shall be located on the same lot with the building or use served except that where an increase in the number of spaces is required by a change or enlargement of use or where such spaces are provided collectively or used jointly by two or more building or establishments, the required spaces may be located and maintained at a distance not to exceed 300 feet from an institutional building or other nonresidential building served. 
2.  Up to 50 percent of the parking spaces required for (a) theaters, public auditoriums, bowling alleys, dance halls and night clubs, and up to 100 percent of the parking spaces required for a church auditorium, may be provided and used jointly by (b) banks, offices, retail stores, repair shops, service establishments and similar uses not normally open, used or operated during the same hours as those listed in (a), and up to 100 percent of parking spaces required for schools may be provided and used jointly by a church auditorium, provided that written agreement thereto is properly executed and recorded as specified below. 
3.  In any case where the required parking spaces are not located on the same lot with the building or use served, or where such spaces are collectively or jointly provided and used, such parking space shall be established by a recorded covenant or agreement as parking spaces to be used in conjunction with the principal use and shall be reserved as such through an encumbrance on the title of the property to be designated as required parking space such encumbrance to be valid for the total period the use or uses for which the parking is needed are in existence. A certificate of recording of the covenant or agreement shall be furnished to the zoning administrator. 
12.4 - Design standards. 
1.  Minimum area. For the purpose of these regulations, an off-street parking space is an all-weather surfaced area not in a street or alley and having an area of not less than 200 square feet, temporary a paved driveway which affords ingress and egress for an automobile without requiring another automobile to be moved. 
2.  Drainage and maintenance. Off-street parking facilities shall be drained to eliminate standing water and prevent damage to abutting property and/or public streets and alleys, and surfaced with erosion-resistant material in accordance with applicable town specifications. 
Off-street parking areas shall be maintained in a clean, orderly, and dust-free condition at the expense of the owner or lessee and not used for the sale, repair, dismantling or servicing of any vehicles, equipment, materials or supplies. 
3.  Separation from walkways and streets. Off-street parking spaces shall be separated from walkways, sidewalks, streets or alleys by a wall, fence, curbing or other approved protective device, or by distance so that vehicles cannot protrude over publicly owned areas. 
4.  Entrances and exits. Location and design of entrances and exits shall be in accord with the applicable requirements of Cherokee County regulations and standards. All entrances and exits from or to any State of Georgia highway shall be approved by the Georgia Department of Transportation prior to construction. Landscaping, curbing or approved barriers shall be provided along lot boundaries to control entrance and exit of vehicles or pedestrians. 
5.  Interior drives. Interior drives shall be of adequate width to serve the particular design arrangement of parking spaces. 
6.  Marking. Parking spaces in lots of more than ten spaces shall be marked by painted lines, curbs or other means to indicate individual spaces. Signs or markers shall be used as necessary to ensure efficient traffic operation of the lot. 
7.  Lighting. Adequate lighting shall be provided if off-street parking spaces are to be used at night. The lighting shall be arranged and installed to minimize glare on property in any residential district. 
8.  Screening. When off-street parking areas for ten or more automobiles are located closer than 50 feet to a lot in a residential district, or to any lot upon which there is a dwelling as a permitted use under these regulations, and where such parking areas are not entirely screened visually from such lot by an intervening building or structure, there shall be provided a continuous, visual screen with a minimum height of six feet. Such screen may consist of a compact evergreen hedge or foliage screening or louvered wall or fence. 
9.  Corner visibility clearance. [Reserved.] 
12.5 - Off-street loading requirements by use. 
1.  Except as otherwise provided in this resolution, when any building or structure is hereafter erected or structurally altered to the extent of increasing the floor area by 25 percent or more, or any building is hereafter converted, for the uses listed in table 12.2. 
Table 12.2. Minimum Off-Street Loading Requirements 

 
2.  Interpretation of the chart. 
a.  The loading space requirements apply to all districts but do not limit the special requirements which may be imposed in the district regulations. 
b.  Under the provisions of article 15, the board of appeals may waive or reduce the loading space requirements whenever the character of the use is such as to make unnecessary the full provisions of loading facilities, where provision is made for community loading facilities or where provision of loading space for uses which contain less than 10,000 square feet of floor area. 
3.  Mixed uses in one building. Where a building is used for more than one use or for different uses, and where the floor area used for each use for which loading spaces is required is below the minimum for required loading spaces but the aggregate floor area used is greater than such minimum, then off-street loading space shall be provided as if the entire building were used for that use in the building for which the most spaces are required. In such cases, the zoning administrator or his designee may make reasonable requirements for the location of required loading spaces. 
4.  Design standards. 
1.  Minimum size. For the purposed of these regulations, a loading space is a space within the main building or on the same lot, providing for the standing, loading or unloading of trucks, having minimum area of 608 square feet, minimum width of 35 feet, a minimum depth of 45 feet and a vertical clearance of at least 14.5 feet. 
b.  Loading space for funeral homes. Loading spaces for a funeral home may be reduced in size to 10 by 25 feet and vertical clearance reduced to eight feet for all but one space when multiple spaces are provided. 
c.  Drainage and maintenance. Off-street loading facilities shall be drained to eliminate standing water and prevent damage to abutting property and/or public streets and alleys, and surfaced with erosion-resistant material in accordance with applicable town specifications. Off-street loading areas shall be maintained in a clean, orderly and dust-free condition at the expense of the owner or lessee and not used for the sale, repair, dismantling or servicing of any vehicles, equipment, materials or supplies. 
d.  Entrances and exits. Location and design of entrances and exits shall be in accord with applicable requirements of town traffic regulations and standards. Where the entrance or exit of a building is designed for truck loading and unloading, such entrance or exit shall be designed to provide at least one off-street loading space. 
12.6 - Parking of vehicles. 
All parking of vehicles shall be in compliance with the Cherokee County Property Maintenance Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2009-O-006, § ID, 10-20-09) 
ARTICLE 13. - NONCONFORMING USES 

13.1 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to provide for the continuation and within a suitable period of time, elimination of existing uses of property that do not conform to the requirements of this ordinance or that may not conform to future amendments. The provisions of this article are designed to accomplish this intent in a way that: 
13.1-1 Minimizes the nuisance, reduction in neighboring property values, and other adverse effects of properties that do not conform to their environs. 
13.1-2 Allows the property owner or lessee to recover all or a substantial part of his investment in the nonconformity, while also minimizing the time period during which, by virtue of the nonconformity, he enjoys a special right not available to other property owners in the same zoning district. 
13.2 - Definition. 
Nonconformity is a characteristic of a building, structure, or area of land, or the use of such building, structure, or area of land, which was lawful prior to the date of enactment of this ordinance of any amendment that does not conform to the requirements applicable to the zoning district, is which it is located. 
Use of a portion of a lot shall not establish a nonconformity as to the entire lot, but only to that portion of the lot actually used at the time of the enactment or amendment of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2008-Z-002, § 4, 9-16-08) 
13.3 - Continuance of nonconforming uses. 
The lawful use of any building, structures, land or sign existing at the time of the enactment or amendment of this ordinance may be continued, even through such use does not conform with the provisions of this ordinance, except that the nonconforming use shall not be: 
13.3-1 Changed or extended so as to increase the portion of the property covered by the nonconforming building, structure, or sign on which the nonconforming use occurs. 
13.3-2 Extended to occupy a greater area of a building or structure unless such additional area of the building or structure existed at the time of the enactment or amendment of this ordinance and was clearly designed to house the same use as the nonconforming use occupying the other portion of the building or structure. 
13.3-3 Reestablished after discontinuance for two years unless otherwise approved by the board of commissioners or holds a current Cherokee County Business License. 
13.3-4 Changed to another nonconforming use. 
(Ord. No. 2008-Z-002, § 4, 9-16-08) 
13.4 - Continuance of a nonconforming building. 
A nonconforming building existing at the time of the enactment or amendment of this ordinance may be retained except as follows: 
13.4-1 No building other than a single-family detached dwelling may be enlarged, or altered except in conformance with this ordinance but it may be repaired to the extent necessary to maintain it in a safe and sanitary condition. 
13.4-2 No building other than a single-family detached dwelling shall be rebuilt, altered or repaired after damage exceeding 75 percent of its replacement cost at the time of destruction, except in conformity with this ordinance. 
13.5. - Discontinuance of nonconforming uses. 
Any nonconforming use which is discontinued for an continuous period of two years shall not be resumed, and the premises shall be occupied only by a use which conforms to the use regulations of the district in which it is located. 
13.6 - Change of nonconforming use. 
The nonconforming use of any building, structure, or portion of that which is designed or intended for a use not permitted in the district in which it is located, may not be changed to another nonconforming use. 
13.7 - Discontinuance of nonconforming building. 
When the nonconforming use of a building, structure, or portion of a structure, which is designed or intended for a use not permitted in the district in which it is located, is discontinued for a continuous period of one year, such building, structure, or portion of that shall be occupied only by a use which conforms to the use regulations of the district in which it is located. 
13.8 - Enlargement of nonconforming uses. 
There shall be no extension or enlargement of a nonconforming uses except with the approval with of the zoning board of appeals. 
13.9 - Enlargement of nonconforming buildings. 
When a building, structure, or portion of that, is designed or intended for a use not permitted in the district in which it is located, it shall not be enlarged, added to, or structurally altered in any manner except as may be required by law, unless the said building or structure and use of that shall be made to conform to the use regulations of the district in which it is located. 
13.10 - Repair and alteration. 
Repairs and alterations necessary in the ordinary course and operation of a building or structure may be made to a nonconforming building or structure, except that no structural alterations shall be permitted, unless such structural change is for the purpose of conforming with the use of a nonconforming use, or to introduce new nonconforming uses are prohibited. A nonconforming sign shall not be replaced by another sign, except within the provisions of this article. The substitution or interchange of poster panels, boards or the like on nonconforming signs shall be permitted. Minor repairs and maintenance of nonconforming signs, such as repainting, electrical repairs) and neon tubing shall be permitted. However, no structural repairs or changes in the size or shape of the sign shall be permitted except to make the sign comply with the requirements of this article. 
13.11 - Moving. 
No nonconforming building or structure shall be moved in whole or in part to any other location on the lot, except as required by law, unless every portion of such building or structure which is moved has the use if that made to conform to all the regulations of the district in which it is located. 
13.12 - [Nonconforming uses.] 
A nonconforming use of land which is accessory to the nonconforming use of a building or structure shall be discontinued on the same date the nonconforming use of the building or structure is discontinued. 
13.13 - [Sale of merchandise.] 
The sale of merchandise in the open, when not permitted by the provisions of this ordinance shall be discontinued immediately. 
13.14 - Exempted buildings, structure and uses. 
13.14-1 No lawfully established building, structure, or use shall be subject to the termination provisions solely for reason of being nonconforming with respect to the standards prescribed in this ordinance for any of the following: 
a.  Floor area ratio. 
b.  Development standards. 
c.  Permitted uses. 
d.  Buffers. 
e.  Gross floor area. 
ARTICLE 14. - ADMINISTRATION[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 98-O-8, adopted April 22, 1998, repealed the former Art. 14, §§ 14-1—14-9, and enacted a new Art. 14 as set out herein. The former Art. 14 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 94-22, adopted December 13, 1994. 

14.1 - Administration. 
Except as otherwise provided in these regulations the zoning administrator shall administer, interpret, and enforce this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 98-O-8, 4-22-98) 
14.2 - Permit procedure. 
14.2-1  Permit requirement. 
a.  Development permit. A development permit shall be required for any proposed use of land or planned development in the PUD or PID district; planned shopping, office or industrial center in any commercial or other industrial district providing shared parking, access, and service to three or more business establishments, single-family attached, cluster, or multi-family residential development; manufactured home park or subdivision before any improvements or grading of the land commences. Such development permits shall not be in lieu of building permits required for any structure within such developments. 
b.  Building permit. A building permit shall be required for any proposed use of lands or building to indicate and insure compliance with all provisions of this ordinance before any construction or building commences. 
c.  Manufactured home location permit. A manufactured home location permit is required for any person to commence the excavation for or construction of a manufactured home stand or the placement of manufactured home on an individual lot within a manufactured home park. 
d.  Temporary certificates. The building official is authorized to issue a permit for temporary occupancy in addition to a permit for erection, alteration, moving, or repair of a structure provided the permit shall not exceed six months and shall include such conditions and safeguards as will protect the safety of the occupants and the public. 
14.2-2  Permit application. 
a.  Development permit. An application for a development permit shall be made to the zoning administrator and shall be accompanied by complete plans in duplicate signed by the author with his address, drawn to scale, showing the actual shape and dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the exact sizes and locations on the lot of the buildings and accessory buildings then existing, and the lines within which the proposed building or structure shall be erected or altered, the proposed building or structure which shall be erected or altered, the existing or intended use of each building or part of a building, the number of families or housekeeping units the building is designed to accommodate, and such other information with regard to the lot and neighboring lots as may be necessary to determine and provide for the enforcement of this ordinance. One copy of such plans shall be returned to the owner when such plans have been approved. Approval of a preliminary plat in accordance with all applicable provisions of the subdivision regulations and approval of site plans as required in article 18: amendment and zoning procedures shall constitute approval of the development permit for such subdivision or development. 
b.  Building permit. A building permit shall be required for any proposed use of lands or building to indicate and insure compliance with all provisions of this ordinance. 
c.  Manufactured and mobile home location permit. Manufactured and mobile homes are subject to permitting requirements the same, as building permits. 
14.3 - Issuance. 
All permits issued shall in no case grant any permit for the use, construction or alteration of any land or building if the land or building as proposed to be used, constructed or altered would be in violation of any of the provisions of this ordinance or any other codes and laws of the county or the state. 
14.4 - Duration of Permit Validity. 
A development or building permit shall be valid for one year from its issuance subject to the following provisions: 
14.4-1  If the construction work described in the building permit has not commenced within six months from the date of issuance thereof, said permit shall be considered abandoned. 
14.4-2  If the construction work described in the development permit has not commenced within 12 months from the date of issuance thereof, said permit shall expire. 
14.4-3  If the construction or work described in the building or development permit is suspended, or abandoned for a period of one year at any time after work is commenced, said permit shall expire. 
14.4-4  Written notice of the expiration shall be given to the persons affected together with notice that further work as described in the canceled permit shall not proceed until a new development or building permit has been obtained. 
14.4-5  Where notice of an appeal to any decision is filed within the time provided in this ordinance, a permit issued pursuant to the decision shall be revoked. 
(Ord. No. 98-O-8, 4-22-98) 
14.5. - Certificate of occupancy. 
14.5-1  It shall be unlawful to use or occupy or permit the use or occupancy of any building or premises, or both, or parts thereof hereafter created, erected, changed, converted, or wholly or partly altered or enlarged in its use or structure until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued therefore by the building official. 
14.5-2  A record of all certificates of occupancy shall be kept on file in the Cherokee County Building Department and a copy shall be furnished, on request, to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the building or land involved. 
(Ord. No. 98-O-8, 4-22-98) 
14.6 - Fees. 
All fees for zoning application and permit issuance imposed by this ordinance are charges made in pursuance of the police power for the regulation and control of the development for the protection and welfare of the citizens of Cherokee County. These fees shall be established from time to time by resolution of the board of commissioners. A copy of the fee schedule shall be maintained for public inspection in the office of the Cherokee County Zoning Administrator. 
(Ord. No. 98-O-8, 4-22-98) 
14.7 - Appeals from decisions of the zoning administrator. 
It is the intention of this article that all questions arising in connection with the administration and enforcement of this ordinance shall be presented to the board of appeals only on appeal from the decision of such official. 
(Ord. No. 98-O-8, 4-22-98) 
14.8 - Zoning administration process. 
Table 14.1: permit application and appealing process indicates the process of applications for development permit and building permit; seeking variances, special exceptions or appeals to zoning board of appeals. Table 14.2: rezoning and special use permit application process indicates the process of seeking amendments of zoning ordinance and application for special use permit. 
(Ord. No. 98-O-8, 4-22-98) 
14.9 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 99-O-5, adopted Feb. 23, 1999, deleted § 14.9. Former § 14.9 pertained to minor variances and derived from 98-O-98, adopted Apr. 22, 1998. 
ARTICLE 15. - ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. N o. 2009-Z-002, adopted Oct. 6, 2009, amended Art. 15 to read as set out herein. Former Art. 15 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the 1992 Zoning Ordinance; Ord. No. 94-4, § 1, adopted Feb. 25, 1994; Ord. No. 97-11, adopted Dec. 9, 1997; Ord. No. 2004-Z-004, adopted Aug. 17, 2004; Ord. No. 2008-Z-002, § 5, adopted Sept. 16, 2008. 

15.1 - Creation. 
The Cherokee County Zoning Board of Appeals (referred to in this article as the board) was established by previous version of this ordinance, and remains authorized under this article. Existing board members shall continue in their current terms unaffected by the adoption of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2009-Z-002, 10-6-09) 
15.2 - Membership. 
The board shall consist of five members residing within the County of Cherokee and shall be appointed by the Cherokee County Board of Commissioners. Each member of the board of commissioners shall appoint one member to the board from his or her district, with the chairman appointing one at large member. 
(Ord. No. 2009-Z-002, 10-6-09) 
15.3 - Term of Office. 
Each member appointed by a member of the board of commissioners shall serve concurrently with and at the pleasure of the appointing commissioner's term of office and until a successor is appointed. 
(Ord. No. 2009-Z-002, 10-6-09) 
15.4 - Vacancy. 
Any vacancy in the membership shall be filled by the appointing commissioner in the same manner as the initial appointment. 
(Ord. No. 2009-Z-002, 10-6-09) 
15.5 - Removal of members. 
It shall constitute grounds for removal should any board member fail, without proper reason, to attend three consecutive board meetings. 
(Ord. No. 2009-Z-002, 10-6-09) 
15.6 - Members disqualified to act. 
Any member of the board shall be disqualified to act upon a matter before the board with respect to property or matters in which the board member has an interest. 
(Ord. No. 2009-Z-002, 10-6-09) 
15.7 - Compensation. 
The board members shall receive compensation for their service as determined by the Cherokee County Board of Commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 2009-Z-002, 10-6-09) 
15.8 - Election and appointment of officers. 
The board shall elect one of its members as chairman and another as vice-chairman, each serving for one year or until re-elected or a successor is elected. The vice-chairman shall have the authority to act as chairman in the chairman's absence. The board shall appoint a secretary who may be staff of Cherokee County. 
(Ord. No. 2009-Z-002, 10-6-09) 
15.9 - Rules and procedures. 
The board shall have authority to adopt rules of procedure. Meetings of the board shall be held on the first Thursday of every month, unless an alternative day is determined in advance by a majority vote of the board or by the zoning administrator. Meetings may be added or cancelled with proper notification. The chairman, or in his or her absence, the vice-chairman, the zoning administrator, and/or the county attorney may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses by subpoena. The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of said board and shall be a public record. 
(Ord. No. 2009-Z-002, 10-6-09) 
15.10 - Quorum required to act. 
A quorum of the board is required for the board to take official action. A quorum of the board shall consist of at least three of the five members of the board. The concurring vote of a majority of a quorum of the board, upon the motion of any member, shall be necessary to render a decision on any variance application, or to reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, any order, requirement, decision or determination of the zoning administrator. In the event that there is a tie vote, the application shall be considered denied. 
(Ord. No. 2009-Z-002, 10-6-09) 
15.11 - Decisions of the board. 
Each decision of the board shall contain a statement of the subject matter being considered by the board, the decision of the board, and the grounds for the decision. The decision shall be reduced to written form and shall be provided to the applicant. No appeal requesting the same relief for the same property shall be received or heard by the board for a period of 12 months following the date of the board's decision, except that this limitation shall not affect the right of the board to grant a rehearing as provided in rules of procedure as may be adopted by the board. 
(Ord. No. 2009-Z-002, 10-6-09) 
15.12 - Administrative assistance. 
The zoning administrator shall provide such technical, administrative, and clerical assistance and office space as is required by the board to carry out its function under the provisions of these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2009-Z-002, 10-6-09) 
15.13 - Public hearing. 
A.  Notice of hearing shall be given. Before making its decision on an appeal, request for a variance, or any other matter within the board's purview, the board shall hold a public hearing thereon. At least 15 days but not more than 45 days before the public hearing, notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be sent to the applicant and/or owner, as well as adjacent property owners, by U.S. mail to the address contained in the tax assessor's records. Such notice shall contain the name of the applicant or petitioner, the date, time and place set for the hearing, and a brief statement of the nature of the hearing. (See Ord. No. 2008-Z-002, 09-16-08) 
B.  Public notice in newspaper. The board shall give public notice of the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in Cherokee County at least 15 days, but not more than 45 days, prior to the date of the public hearing. 
C.  Public notice by posting. When the board is considering a request for a variance, the notice of the date, time, place and nature of the board's hearings shall also be afforded by the erection of a sign in a conspicuous place on the subject property. The sign shall be erected at least 15 days prior to the date of the board's hearing. 
D.  Who may appear. Any party may appear at the public hearing in person or by agent or attorney. 
E.  Time limit on board's decision. The board shall reach a decision following a public hearing within 31 days, unless postponement of same is agreeable to both the applicant and the board. The decision of the board shall be made by public vote and shall not be final until the minutes of the board meeting have been duly adopted and approved by the board. 
(Ord. No. 2009-Z-002, 10-6-09) 
15.14 - Powers and duties. 
A.  Appeals from actions of the zoning administrator. The board shall hear and decide upon appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the zoning administrator in the enforcement of these regulations. Notwithstanding the foregoing powers, the board shall not be entitled to review the interpretation by the zoning administrator of the provisions related to permissive uses within the zoning districts established by this article, which interpretations shall be appealed to the board of commissioners. (See Ord. No. 2008-Z-002, 09-16-08) 
(1)  Who may appeal. Appeals to the board may be taken by any person aggrieved or by an officer, department, board, or bureau of the governing authority affected by any decision of the zoning administrator. Such appeals shall be filed no later than 30 days after the date of notification of the decision appealed from by filing with the zoning administrator and with the board a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The zoning administrator shall forthwith transmit to the board all documentation constituting the record upon which the action being appealed was taken. 
Legal proceedings stayed. An appeal stays all legal proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the zoning administrator certifies to the board that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such a case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by restraining order which may be granted by the board or by a court of record on application, on notice to the zoning administrator, and on due cause shown. 
(2)  Extent of board of appeals power. The board may, in conformity with the provisions of these regulations, reverse or affirm, in whole, or in part, the requirement, decision, or determination of the zoning administrator. The board may direct the issuance or revocation of a permit. In addition, whenever the board shall find, in the case of any permit granted pursuant to the provisions of these regulations, that any of the terms, conditions, or restrictions upon which such permit was granted are not being complied with, the board may rescind or revoke such permit after giving due notice of same to all parties and an opportunity for such parties to be heard following such action. It shall be the duty of the zoning administrator to carry out the decisions of the board. 
B.  Request for a variance. The board may authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variance from the terms of these regulations as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of these regulations will, in an individual case, result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of these regulations shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done provided, however, that a variance shall not be granted for a use of land or building or structure that is prohibited by this ordinance in the district in question. A variance may be granted in an individual case upon a finding by the board that the following exists: 
(1)  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape, or topography; and 
(2)  The application of these regulations to this particular piece of property would create a practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship; and 
(3)  Such conditions are peculiar to the particular piece of property involved; and 
(4)  Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public good or impair the purposes and intent of these regulations; provided, however, no variance may be granted for a use of land or building or structure that is prohibited by this article; and 
(5)  A literal interpretation of this article would deprive the applicant of any rights that others in the same district are allowed; and 
(6)  Provided that the board may impose or require such additional restrictions and standards as may be necessary to protect the health and safety of workers and residents in the community, and to protect the value and use of property within Cherokee County. 
(Ord. No. 2009-Z-002, 10-6-09) 
15.15 - Compliance with standards. 
Where an application to the board is initiated due to an existing violation of the Cherokee County Zoning Ordinance and said application is denied, the violation shall be required to be corrected within ten days of such denial, or as specified by the board if a greater time period is necessary. The maximum extension of the time shall not exceed 90 days. 
(Ord. No. 2009-Z-002, 10-6-09) 
15.16 - Forms. 
All appeals and requests for variances shall be made on forms provided by the zoning administrator, and all information required on said forms shall be provided by the applicant. No appeal or request for variance shall be accepted by the zoning administrator unless all pertinent information is provided on the applicant's form and is accompanied by the required fee. 
(Ord. No. 2009-Z-002, 10-6-09) 
15.17 - Fees. 
To defray a portion of the costs occasioned thereby, no appeal from a decision of the zoning administrator, and no application for an exception, variance or other matter, shall be heard or ruled upon by the board until the applicant has paid the appropriate fee in accordance with the Schedule of Fees adopted by the Cherokee County Board of Commissioners and provided in Appendix "A" to this article, as such fees may be changed from time to time by resolution of the Cherokee County Board of Commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 2009-Z-002, 10-6-09) 
15.18 - Appeals. 
A.  Appeal to board of commissioners. An appeal of a decision by the zoning board of appeals shall be to the Cherokee County Board of Commissioners, effected by submission of a letter of appeal to the board of commissioners, no later than ten days after the zoning board of appeals' decision has been rendered and provided to the applicant. 
B.  Board of commissioners' discretion to review. The letter of appeal shall be placed on an agenda at the board of commissioners' next regularly scheduled meeting, and the board of commissioners shall determine at such meeting whether it will consider the appeal. If the board of commissioners decides that it will consider the appeal, the appeal shall then be placed on a future agenda of the board of commissioners with sufficient time to provide notice in accordance with state law and the Cherokee County Zoning Ordinance for the conduct of a public hearing. A denial of a review by the board of commissioners shall be an affirmation of the decision of the zoning board of appeals, and shall constitute the final decision of the Board of Commissioners of Cherokee County. 
C.  Public hearing for appeal. When hearing an appeal, the board of commissioners shall conduct a public hearing to receive oral or written evidence from the appellant, from affected property owners, and from other interested parties as determined by the board of commissioners in its discretion. The board of commissioners shall confine the evidence to matters set forth in the decision of the zoning board of appeals, the minutes of the zoning board of appeals, and the applicant's notice of appeal. The proceedings shall be recorded and shall be open to the public. 
D.  Decision of board of commissioners. Upon conclusion of the public hearing, the board of commissioners shall consider the matters under appeal and its action concerning the decision being reviewed. The board of commissioners' decision shall be announced in a public meeting, either following the hearing or at any other scheduled meeting. The decision of the board of commissioners shall be in writing and shall: (a) affirm the decision of the zoning board of appeals, or (b) return the matter to the zoning board of appeals for reconsideration, with or without direction, or (c) take such action by way of relief to the applicant as the board of commissioners deems appropriate and lawful. 
The decision of the board of commissioners shall be included in its meeting minutes and a written report thereof shall be sent to the appellant. Upon conclusion of the case or application, the record and all matters adduced at the board of commissioners' hearing shall be transmitted to the zoning administrator for retention. 
E.  Appeal to superior court. Appeal of a decision of the board of commissioners shall be to the Superior Court of Cherokee County by writ of certiorari within 30 days of the date of the decision. 
(Ord. No. 2009-Z-002, 10-6-09) 
15.19 - Administrative variances. 
The zoning administrator may grant a variance up to ten percent of the minimum required building setbacks outlined in Table 7.1 of Article 7 of the Cherokee County Zoning Ordinance upon presentation of evidence indicating that such variance is necessary and/or a practical solution without significant impact to adjoining properties, provided that the same applicant has not requested an administrative variance or an administrative variance has not been requested for the same property within the preceding six months. 
Any and all administrative variances granted pursuant to this section shall be reported to the board of commissioners on a monthly basis and to the Cherokee County Board of Appeals. 
(Ord. No. 2009-Z-002, 10-6-09) 
Appendix A - Schedule of Fees 
The following fees shall be paid to Cherokee County in accordance with subsection 15.14(B) of Article 15 of the Cherokee County Zoning Ordinance: 
1.  Appeal from action of the zoning administrator ..... $200.00; or 
2.  Application for variance (residential) ..... $200.00; or 
3.  Application for variance (commercial, industrial, building contractor) ..... $300.00 
No fee shall be required for an interpretation of the Zoning Ordinance when there is a variance between the street layout on the ground and the street layout as shown on the district zoning map. 
(Ord. No. 2009-Z-002, 10-6-09) 
ARTICLE 16. - OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 02-Z-003, adopted May 21, 2002, repealed the former Art. 16, and enacted a new Art. 16 as set out herein. The former Art. 16 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 98-O-4, adopted Feb. 27, 1998. 

16.1. - Highway 92 Village Ordinance. 
16.1-1  Legislative purpose. This ordinance shall be known as the Highway 92 Village Ordinance (hereinafter referred to as the "Highway 92 Village Ordinance"), and shall serve to encourage developing as one project, tracts of land that are sufficiently large to allow a mixed-use development consisting of uses permitted under this article, and only such permitted uses, while maintaining compatibility with the existing areas and creating an attractive, efficient and stable environment. It encourages a mixture of prominently sited office/institutional, commercial establishments, civic or community buildings and housing types to provide a balanced mix of activities and public spaces. 
16.1-2  Legislative objectives. 
(1)  The Highway 92 Village Ordinance serves as a development standard for the Highway 92 Corridor. This development standard provides for a uniform landscape and design theme along this improved road. The specific design and land use policies are a comprehensive plan for the Highway 92 Corridor of Cherokee County, Georgia. 
(2)  The Highway 92 Village Ordinance calls for a pattern of commercial and office buildings constructed in eighteenth and nineteenth century architectural styles. The regulations recognize and are intended to protect and preserve the established residential areas located to the north and south of the improved road. The incorporation of buffering techniques seeks to assist in the preservation of adjoining residential areas by providing a unique transition zone rather than the traditional descending density theory. 
(3)  The Highway 92 Village Ordinance is intended to generate quality development along the expanded Highway 92 thoroughfare while promoting economic, cultural, open space and safety features to promote the public welfare. This orderly planning system is intended to attract quality development as described in the permitted uses of this ordinance. 
16.1-3  Boundaries. There is hereby created the Highway 92 Village Ordinance, the boundaries of which shall extend 1,000 feet to the North of the centerline of Highway 92 and 1,000 feet to the south of the centerline of Highway 92 from its intersection with Interstate Highway 75 eastward to the Cobb County line. The Highway 92 Village Ordinance applies to all properties located in this corridor, with the exception of residential platted subdivisions, deed restricted residential subdivisions and residential neighborhoods established as a result of the creation of a homeowners association or a petition to the county commission. 
16-1.4  [Uses]. 
(a)  Permitted uses within the Highway 92 Village Ordinance. The following uses, and only the following uses, shall be permitted within any development permitted pursuant to this Ordinance: 
Antique shops 
Apparel and accessory stores 
Appliance sales and repair shops 
Bakeries 
Bank or financial institutions 
Bicycle shops 
Books, cards and stationary stores 
Barber shops and beauty salons 
Carpentry shops 
Churches 
Clinic (public or private) 
Community centers 
Cultural facilities 
Curio and souvenir shops 
Day care facilities (shall have at least 150 square feet of outdoor play area, and at least 35 square feet of indoor space provided for each child. The outdoor play area shall be enclosed by a fence at least four feet high) 
Drug stores, pharmacies 
Equipment supplies (medical, dental, art) 
Florist shops 
Farmer's markets 
Garden, landscaping supplies 
Government buildings 
Greenhouse and plant nurseries 
Grocery, general merchandise stores 
Hardware, paint and wallpaper stores 
Health clubs and facilities 
Hobby, toy and game stores 
Ice cream parlors 
Jewelry stores 
Laundry/dry cleaning facilities (pick-up) 
Office supplies 
Office (businesses) 
Professional offices 
Parks 
Pet shops and dog grooming shops 
Printing, publishing and engraving shops 
Restaurants 
Retail stores, common merchandise 
Schools 
Shoe repair shops 
Service stations (All buildings and appurtenances are to be located at least 400 feet from any residential property line; and that all fuel is stored underground outside of any public right-of-way.) 
Single-family detached dwellings units (Minimum lot size shall be 9,000 square feet for the area designated for this use.) 
Single-family attached dwellings units (A maximum of six dwelling units per acre for the area designated for this use.) 
(b)  Prohibited uses within the Highway 92 Village Ordinance. No use which is not specifically enumerated in section (a) above (including, without limitation, the following uses) shall be allowed within the Highway 92 overlay district: 
Automobile garages or repair shops 
Adult video shops 
Billiard parlors 
Check cash services 
Drive-in theaters 
Farm equipment sales/storage 
Mini-warehouse facilities 
Manufactured home sales 
Motels with outside entrances 
Nude/semi-clothed dancing establishments 
Itinerant merchants 
Pawn shops 
Recreational vehicle sales/service/repair facilities 
Short-term loan offices 
Truck terminals 
Used tire sales/repair shops 
New and used automobile/vehicle dealerships/salvage lots/scrap yards 
16.1-5  Minimum development standards and development regulations for the corridor. 
(a)  Basic site details. It is the express legislative intent of the governing authority to discourage strip commercial development and enhance traffic safety along Highway 92. Accordingly, the ordinance provides for: 
(1)  Consolidation of parcels for development to a minimum of seven acres. 
(2)  Minimization of curb cuts on Highway 92, by requiring a minimum frontage of 400 feet for assembled parcels. 
(3)  Individual parcels in the Highway 92 Corridor shall have a minimum of 28 feet of frontage. 
(b)  Minimum development standards table. The following minimum dimensions and requirements shall apply to all permitted uses under the Highway 92 Village Ordinance. 

 
(c)  Development regulations for the corridor. 
(1)  Streetscape theme. 
a.  Front yard areas shall contain landscaping at least 40 feet in depth along the entire property frontage except where driveways may be required. 
b.  A three-rail fence of appropriate style, white in color, shall be required within two feet of the margin of the right-of-way of Highway 92. 
c.  A major tree not less than two inches DBH as indicated in the tree ordinance shall be planted every 40 feet on center along the entire roadway frontage of the property within the landscape strip. 
d.  Landscaping shall utilize fences, berms, connecting sidewalks, trees and other plantings. 
(2)  Utilities. All site utilities shall be located underground. 
(3)  Architecture. 
a.  Buildings shall be designed to substantially resemble eighteenth and nineteenth century architectural styles with the exception of single family detached residential developments. 
b.  Building mass shall be broken up to give the appearance of individual buildings or places of business, presenting a village appearance. 
c.  Large areas of uninterrupted brickwork shall be broken up through the use of trellises, arcades, blind windows, archways, or other patterns. 
d.  Window areas shall not extend down to the floor line. A wall of not less than two feet in height shall separate the floor from the bottom of the window frame. 
(4)  Building materials. 
a.  Buildings shall have no less than 80 percent of the non-glass area of three exterior sides faced with brick of a natural color and texture that simulates historic types of brickwork. If a building has more than four planar areas, 75 percent of these areas shall be faced in brick. 
b.  Multipane windows shall be used in individual window openings, rather than large glass sheets. 
c.  Mirrored glass with a reflection greater than 20 percent and glass curtain walls are prohibited. 
d.  Paint colors shall be of traditional, historic types which are generally muted tones such as ivory, cream, beige, white, and pastel colors. Colors which are not permitted are bright or vibrant colors of orange, pink, purple, bright green, or violet, which are considered to be inconsistent with the district. The exterior color scheme shall be approved by the director of planning and zoning. 
(5)  Roof lines. 
a.  All buildings shall have a pitched roof with a minimum pitch of four and one-half inches vertical elevation per one foot of horizontal distance, except as otherwise provided herein. 
b.  Commercial building styles without a pitched roof shall have a detailed parapet and cornice, in keeping with eighteenth and nineteenth century architectural styles. 
c.  All roofing materials shall be of a consistent style and pattern. Pitched roofs shall be finished in either architectural or dimensional shingles, or standing seam metal roofs. 
(6)  Signage. 
a.  Freestanding signs. 
i.  All freestanding signs shall be of a monument style and constructed only of brick or stone materials to match or compliment the principal structure or structures located on the site. 
ii.  A monument base shall consist of: 
A.  A solid base or framework, the same width and length of the sign. Said base shall be completely covered in brick or stone facing; or, 
B.  Two columns, each not less than two inches square supporting the sign on each side. The total span of said columns shall equal the total width and length of the sign box, and shall be connected at the base by a planter or monument not less than three inches in height. 
iii.  If the sign lists multiple tenants the sign shall be of a uniform background, lettering style and color. 
b.  Wall signs. 
i.  Signs with interior illumination are prohibited. 
ii.  Illuminated wall signs shall be channel-type letters only. No internally illuminated box signs or illuminated canopies are allowed. 
iii.  Open channel letters shall be common colors such as red, yellow, green, blue, brown, white, black, or pink. Colors that are not allowed are bright or vibrant colors of purple, bright green, bright red, or violet. No sign shall give off light that glares, blinds or has any other such adverse effect on traffic. The light from an illuminated sign shall be established in such a way that adjacent properties and roadways are not adversely affected and that no direct light is cast upon adjacent properties and roadways. All signs shall be approved by the director, planning and economic development. 
iv.  Specific dimensional requirements for all signage are governed by the Sign Ordinance of Cherokee County, Georgia. 
c.  The following signs are prohibited: 
i.  Signs involving motion, rotation, or sound, other than flags or streamers which are blown by the wind. 
ii.  Flashing, blinking, varying, varying light intensity signs or animated signs, except community information signs. 
iii.  Courtesy benches, trash cans, and similar devices on which advertising is displayed. 
iv.  Signs attached to any street signs or markers, traffic control signs or devices, or attached to or painted on any pole, post, tree, rock, shrub, plant or other natural object or feature. 
(7)  Traffic access requirements. Access to Highway 92 must comply with all county and state traffic access requirements. Internal roadways or vehicular connections making developments accessible to each other shall be used whenever possible to discourage traffic congestion on Highway 92. 
(8)  Parking. Each development shall provide not less than two nor more than four parking spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross building floor area for all uses except residential development. 
(9)  Buffers and setbacks. The intent of buffers is to provide a year round visual screen such as evergreen trees between adjacent properties and the new development. All buffers and setbacks shall be as required by this Ordinance. Any application for a design plan approval submitted to the director of planning and zoning shall include a tree survey and landscape plan, with buffers, prepared by a landscape architect. 
(10)  Landscaping requirement. 
a.  A landscaped berm of no less than three feet in height or evergreen landscape planting no less than three feet in height at the time of planting shall be provided to screen vehicular parking areas, loading areas, and dumpsters from view from Highway 92. 
b.  Trees shall not be disturbed to any greater extent than absolutely necessary to construct any building or other improvement in the opinion of the county engineer, building official or the planning director of Cherokee County, Georgia. 
c.  Existing (undisturbed) landforms, trees and other elements such as berms with asymmetrical clumps of plants, trees and shrubs indigenous to the area and region of Georgia shall be provided where possible within landscape areas. 
(11)  Renovations. Renovations to preexisting nonconforming buildings which require a building permit shall include: monument signage and ivy on trellises on the exterior of buildings. 
[16.1-6].  Project filing, review and approval procedures. 
(a)  Preapplication conference. Prior to the formal submittal of a design plan, the developer shall meet with planning director for a review of the location, scope and nature of the proposed project. No preliminary plans, drawings, sketches or concept plans approved informally, in writing, or otherwise shall confer any development rights under this Ordinance. Only design plans (as defined herein) which are approved as authorized by this Ordinance shall confer development rights. 
Each design plan shall be prepared by an architect, landscape architect, engineer, or land surveyor whose state registration is current and valid, or by a professional planner holding full or associate membership with the American Planners Association. Each design plan shall contain a site plan, architectural elevations, landscape plan, and line-of-study drawn to an appropriate scale and shall include the following: 
(1)  Name: Name(s) of the proposed development. Name(s), signature(s), and address(s) of the owner(s) and the designer(s) of the site plan. 
(2)  Date: Date, approximate north arrow, and scale. 
(3)  Boundaries: The boundary line of the land tract shall be shown on a survey plat prepared sealed by a registered land surveyor. 
(4)  Location map: A map to an approximate scale showing the location of the proposed development. 
(5)  Contours: Contours with a minimum vertical interval of five feet referenced to sea level datum shall be provided for existing topography and proposed elevations. 
(6)  Site analysis: The location of existing or proposed platted property lines, streets, buildings, water courses, bridges, water mains, drain pipes, and public utility easements, the owners of record of adjoining parcels, and the zoning classification(s) of the adjoining property. 
(7)  Buffer areas: Location, dimensions, and treatment of all required buffers, landscaped or planted, including fences, walls, berms, and signage. 
(8)  Other information: Other information required by the planning director to ensure compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance. 
(9)  Tree preservation plan: A design outlining the proposed scope of tree preservation. 
(b)  Review and approval. All applications for design plan approval shall contain a design plan meeting the requirements of this Ordinance and shall be reviewed by the Cherokee County Community Development Director. No review or approval of the board of commissioners or the planning commission will be required. The community development director shall, within seven days of filing of a completed application for approval of a design plan under this ordinance, give public notice of said application in a local newspaper of general circulation in Cherokee County. The notification shall summarize the scope of the project. All completed applications meeting the requirements of this ordinance shall be approved by the community development director within 30 days of filing. 
[16.1-7].  Implementation. 
(a)  Existing conditions: It is the desire of the county, its citizens and private property owners cooperating in the creation and adoption of this ordinance to implement it as rapidly as possible and to do so in a fair manner. Existing conditions need not change immediately upon the adoption of this ordinance. 
(b)  New development plans: After the adoption by the board of commissioners, the ordinance will apply to all new development plans/new construction plans submitted after the effective date of this ordinance adoption. The exterior renovations to a building must comply with the ordinance requirements. The structural aspects of this ordinance will not be triggered by standard maintenance activities not requiring a building permit. 
[16.1-8].  Variances. The Cherokee County Zoning Board of Appeals has the authority to grant variances from the requirements of this article in cases where the strict application of this ordinance's regulations would result in unnecessary hardship. 
[16.1-9].  Severability. It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Board of Commissioners of Cherokee County that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, and phrases of this Ordinance are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, or section of this Ordinance be declared unconstitutional or invalid, it shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs, and sections of this ordinance. 
16.1-10.  Relationship to underlying zoning. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to replace or supersede underlying zoning classifications of properties within the Highway 92 Corridor. It is the intent of the governing authority that properties shall retain the permitted land uses of the respective zoning districts but shall be developed using the development standards and regulations outlined in this ordinance, found in section 16.1-5, minimum development standards and development regulations for the corridor, plus any other relevant county ordinances and development regulations. Industrial land uses on LI and HI zoned property shall be exempt from the requirements of subsections 16.1-5(C)3, architecture and 16.1-5(C)4, building materials. In addition, industrial land uses on LI and HI zoned property without any road frontage along Highway 92 shall be exempt from all requirements of section 16.1-5, minimum development standards and development regulations for the corridor. 
(Ord. No. 02-Z-003, 5-21-02; Ord. No. 2016-O-004, Exh. A, 4-19-16) 
16.2 - Bells Ferry Community Design District. 
16.2-1.  Purpose and intent. The purpose of the Bells Ferry Community Design District is to implement the community vision expressed in the Bells Ferry LCI Study Plan adopted by the Cherokee County Board of Commissioners and further enhanced in the Bells Ferry Community Design Guidelines The community envisions the redevelopment of under utilized, declining and major area properties into a community of choice offering diverse choices and activities for the whole community, with the ultimate goal of creating high quality development that offers a superior quality of life to its residents and business owners. 
Bells Ferry Community Design District is intended to: 
• Establish and define the physical boundaries of the district; 
• Establish a set of Community Design Guidelines that provide site planning, design and building regulations for the future physical development of the corridor; 
• Establish a regulating plan that serves as a framework for regulatory conditions governing the study area to insure development reflects consistent principles of good community design and creates an attractive environment inducing investment in the area; 
• Create a "sense of place" and a unique identity for the community that reflects the community's desire to be a place of diversity and choice; 
• Create a strong urban structure that reflects sound urban design principles of creating the public realm; hierarchy of streets, open spaces, creating vistas and public and civic spaces, pedestrian friendly environment, and high quality architecture; 
• Improve traffic flow and convenient vehicular circulation throughout the area for both local and regional circulation; 
• Provide transportation alternatives and modes for the residents; good street grids, transit, bike and pedestrian pathways that not only offers alternative ways but encourages walking and biking; 
• Provide safe and convenient environment for pedestrian movement and access; 
• Provide enhanced arterial access and inter-parcel connectivity that enhances vehicular circulation; 
• Create the hierarchy of streets and appropriate traffic calming that promote appropriate vehicular speeds and safety; 
• Encourage "diverse lifestyles" by promoting mixed use development that offers live/work/play environments; 
• Encourage appropriate densities that can support retail, entertainment and commercial activity which creates a successful community; 
• Provide flexibility in housing to support various product types; ie. condos, apartments, live/work units, town homes, and single-family; 
• Provide adequate open spaces and civic/public spaces. 
16.2-2.  Boundaries. 
16.2-2.1.  Boundary map. The Bells Ferry Community Design District shall apply to all properties within the geographic boundaries shown on the Bells Ferry Regulating Plan. The district is intended to supplement existing zoning regulations. The Bells Ferry Regulating Plan is attached as Exhibit A-1. 
16.2-3.  Incorporation by reference. The Bells Ferry Community Design District and Guidelines incorporates by reference the Article 8 - Traditional Neighborhood Development (TND) of the Cherokee County Zoning Ordinance for the purposes of guiding development within the district. Specifically, the following sections are incorporated by reference and shall be used to regulate future development within the Bells Ferry Community Design District and as applied herein; 

 
16.2-4.  District conditions. 
16.2-4.1.  Applicability. 
a.  The development of property within the Bells Ferry Community Design District shall comply with the minimum standards set forth herein. 
b.  Any non-residential structure that is built prior to the adoption of this ordinance will not have to adhere to the design guidelines set forth within this document. 
c.  Whenever the requirements of the district impose a more or less restrictive standard than the provisions of any other statute or covenant, the requirements of the district shall govern. Specifically, where the Hwy. 92 Village Overlay intersects the Bells Ferry Community Design District, the Bells Ferry Community Design District regulations outlined herein shall apply. 
d.  The design guidelines of this document shall not change any of the existing zoning for the land that lie within the boundaries of this overlay district. 
e.  At no time shall the district regulations preclude a property owner's ability to seek a change in zoning of their property within the district. 
16.2-4.2.  Development alternatives. 
a.  Property within the district boundaries may be developed per an approved neighborhood plan without the need to seek a change in zoning. The neighborhood plan must comply with all of the Bells Ferry Community Design Guidelines, including the minimum standards. 
b.  Alternatively, if the property owner chooses to develop the property under the existing zoning, only the minimum standards must be adhered to and compliance demonstrated through an approved development plan. 
16.2-5.  Regulating plan. The community vision, developed through a series of public workshops and meetings, and adopted in the Bells Ferry Livable Centers Initiative Study plan, has been translated into a regulating plan. The regulating plan combines land use and zoning regulations into a plan format oriented to the essential elements of quality community design. The plan communicates those elements in a user friendly format by allocating areas within the study area to discrete neighborhood zones. 
The neighborhood zones represent different human environments which contain elements forming its built condition like streets, buildings, landscaping, etc. or what is termed a "form based" code. Each zone is differentiated by the combination of elements comprising the neighborhood zone. For instance, a residential street is less urban than a boulevard. A four-story building is more urban than a single-family house with a front yard and a porch. 
The regulating plan is the basis for directing and guiding future development within the corridor. 
16.2-6.  Minimum standards. 
16.2-6.1.  Permitted and prohibited uses. Development under existing zoning shall include land uses permitted by Article 7—District Uses and Regulations of the Cherokee County Zoning Ordinance. 
16.2-6.2.  Street network. Plans for development shall include the following transportation elements of the Bells Ferry Community Design Guidelines: 
a.  Provisions for proposed primary roads and Bells Ferry Parkway. (see Street Network, page 14) 
b.  Provisions for pedestrian and bicycle facilities. (see page 16) 
c.  Interparcel access—Interparcel vehicle access points between all contiguous parcels must be provided to allow opportunities for future development to connect in and improve network connectivity. 
16.2-6.3.  Streetscape requirements. All development shall comply with streetscapes defined in the Bells Ferry Community Design Guidelines for State Route 92 (Bells Ferry Community Design Guidelines, page 27), Bells Ferry Road (Bells Ferry Community Design Guidelines, page 28), and Bells Ferry Parkway (Bells Ferry Community Design Guidelines, page 26). This includes frontage requirements also identified on the regulating plan. 
16.2-6.4.  Pedestrian facilities/frontage requirements. All development shall comply with the design requirements for pedestrian facilities/public frontages as defined in the Bells Ferry Community Design Guidelines (see page 30 and 31). 
16.2-6.5.  Building frontage/private frontage requirements. All development shall comply with the design requirements for building frontage/private frontage as defined in the Bells Ferry Community Design Guidelines (see page 32 and 33). 
16.2-6.6.  Architectural controls. All development shall comply with facade materials, doors and windows and roofs defined in the Bells Ferry Community Design Guidelines (see pages 34-36). 
16.2-6.7.  Signage. All development shall comply with signage defined in the Bells Ferry Community Design Guidelines (see page 40). 
16.2-7.  Design guidelines. 
16.2-7.1.  Permitted and prohibited uses. All development under the design guidelines shall be subject to the use limitations set forth in Article 8 Traditional Neighborhood Development, Table 10—Specific Functions. 
Table 16-2.1 

 
16.2-7.2.  Non-residential table. The percentage of building units per parcel that must be exchanged for non-residential functions will be determined by proximity to primary roads. The non-residential functions table shall govern the percentage of non-residential functions required under the Bells Ferry Design Guidelines. Parcels of land meeting both of the following requirements shall be subject to the primary road percentages: 
a.  All parcels with any part of the parcel within 400 feet of an existing or proposed primary road as shown on the street network plan. 
b.  Parcels of three acres or more in size. 
All other parcels will be subject to the non-residential functions percentages for secondary roads. 
Table 16-2.2 

 
Notes: 1) Percentages for parcels near proposed primary roads may be adjusted by warrant. 2) Residential units in SD zone must be approved by warrant. 
The percent of building units shown in Table 16-2.2 shall be exchanged for non-residential functions at the following rates: 
a)  For lodging: Two bedrooms for each unit of overall density. 
b)  For office or retail: 1,500 square feet for each unit of overall density. 
c)  The number of units exchanged shall be approved by warrant. 
16.2-7.3.  Single use on smaller tracts. Where a tract of land within the Bells Ferry Community Design District is three acres or less and is unfeasible for development as a mixed use project in accordance with this ordinance, and is not likely to be assembled into a larger plan of common development, the property owner may propose to develop such property as a single use project under the provisions outlined below: 
a.  Single use residential may be proposed at no more base building units than allowed under the guidelines for neighborhood edge (NE) as outlined herein, unless a warranted variance is issued under section 8.19 of Article 8 Traditional Neighborhood Development. A warrant may be issued only if evidence can be presented by the property owner that one or more of the following conditions exist: 
i.  The subject property cannot physically be accessed by adjacent property; 
ii.  The subject property cannot feasibly be assembled into a larger plan of common development because adjoining property(s) are already developed and the pattern of development on the adjoining property prevents development as a larger plan of common development; 
iii.  The subject property is surrounded by properties zoned for or developed above the base building units of the neighborhood edge (NE); 
iv.  Development of the subject property above the base building units of the NE would be an addition to the area and would not be a detriment to the surrounding development pattern. 
b.  Single use non-residential projects must follow the minimum standards as outlined herein. 
16.2-7.4.  Neighborhood plans. Neighborhoods shall be planned according to the provisions of the Bells Ferry Design Guidelines and Article 8—Traditional Neighborhood Development. The neighborhood plans shall consist of the neighborhood zones described on the regulating plan for the Bells Ferry LCI Study Area. Neighborhood plans may be prepared by an owner, a developer, or by the planning office. Each neighborhood plan shall contain: 
1.  Updated/site specific regulating plan: 
a.  Configuration of neighborhood zones (based on Bells Ferry Regulating Plan). 
b.  Planned street types and street configuration. 
c.  Location of civic building sites and civic spaces. 
d.  Frontage characteristics of streets. 
2.  Illustrative plan (building scale plan). 
a.  Building disposition (lots and building footprint). 
b.  Configuration (frontages and building heights). 
c.  Building function and density. 
d.  Parking standards. 
3.  Community standards. 
a.  Covenants for governance. 
b.  Architectural standards. 
c.  Environmental standards. 
d.  Landscape standards. 
— Including a tree plan meeting the requirements of Article 25 - Tree Preservation and Replacement Ordinance 
a.  Signage. 
b.  Ambient (lighting and sound). 
c.  Visibility. 
16.2-7.5.  Plans review process. Each neighborhood plan shall respond to the existing conditions of the site, adjacent developments, connecting thoroughfares, natural features, and manmade traces. 
(Ord. No. 2007-Z-002, 8-7-07) 
Editor's note— Formerly § 16.2 pertained to the glossary. Former § 16.2 was removed from this Code at the instruction of the city. 
ARTICLE 17. - INTERPRETATION, PURPOSE AND CONFLICT 
The provisions of this resolution shall be considered as the minimum requirements for the promotion of public safety, health, morals and general welfare. These regulations are not intended to interfere with, abrogate or annul any easements, covenants or other arguments between parties; provided, however, that where this resolution imposes a greater restriction upon the use of property, premises or upon the height of buildings, or requires greater space than is imposed or required by other resolutions, rules or regulations, or by easements, covenants or agreements, the provision of this resolution shall govern. 
ARTICLE 18. - AMENDMENTS AND ZONING PROCEDURES 

18.1 - Zoning decision. 
A decision his the final action by the Cherokee County Governing Authority or Zoning Board of Appeals when, in carrying out their respective duties, it results in: 
18.1-1 The adoption of a zoning ordinance. 
18.1-2 The adoption of an amendment to a zoning ordinance which changes the text of the zoning ordinance. 
18.1-3 The adoption of an amendment to a zoning ordinance which rezones property from one zone classification to another. 
18.1-4 The approval or disapproval of a special use exception, variance, or appeal to a decision by the zoning administrator. 
18.2 - Amendments. 
This ordinance, including the official zoning map, may be amended as follow: 
18.2-1 By the commission, upon its own motion, in accordance with the requirements of the state zoning procedures law (Ga. Laws 1985, page 1139; O.C.G.A. Sections 36-66-1 through 36-66-5) and this ordinance; or 
18.2-2 By the commission, upon the recommendation of the planning commission which, prior to such recommendation, shall have given public notice of the proposal and held a public hearing thereon as required by the state zoning procedures law and this ordinance. 
18.2-3 Nothing herein shall preclude the commission's submission of any proposed amendment to the ordinance to the planning commission for its review and recommendations as set out in section 18.1-2 herein and, in mere particularity, in section 18.2 of this article. 
18.3 - Zoning procedures. 
18.3-1  Initiation of amendments. 
a.  Applications to amend this ordinance may be in the form of proposals to amend the text or proposals to amend the official zoning map. No amendment shall become effective unless it shall have been initiated by either the board of commissioners, the planning commission, the property owner or an individual who has the owner's power of attorney authorizing him/her to act. 
b.  Other than as provided in Section 18.3-13, below, no amendment to this ordinance shall become effective unless it shall first have been submitted to the planning commission for review and recommendation. All proposed amendments shall be initiated by an application on forms provided by the zoning administrator. A standard fee shall be paid with the application in the amount of the advertising costs for the required public hearing. 
c.  Unless initiated by the commissioners or the planning commission, all applications for map amendments shall be submitted by the owner(s) of such property or the authorized agent of the owner(s), shall cover only contiguous property(ies), and shall be limited to one proposed zone district classification. All applications for an amendment affecting the same property shall not be submitted more often than once every 12 months; however, this provision shall not apply to those properties affected by an amendment filed by the county government authority or planning commission. Upon good cause shown, the board of commissioners may direct the consideration by the planning commission of an application for a map amendment by the owner of property within the zoning jurisdiction of the county, or the authorized agent of such owner notwithstanding that the application pertains to property for which an amendment was submitted within the 12 months next preceding that application, upon payment by the applicant of the application fee again and upon notice requirement being met again. 
18.3-2  Application for map amendments. Each application to amend the official zoning map shall be filed with the zoning administrator. Each application shall be submitted in conformance with the requirements of this section. 
a.  Application information. The application shall include the following information: 
(1)  A legal description of the tract(s) proposed to be rezoned or the request for special use. 
(2)  A site plan if required (see section 18.3-3 below) or a plat showing the dimensions acreage and location of the tract(s) prepared by an architect, engineer, landscape architect or land surveyor whose state registration is current and valid and evidenced by his seal affixed to the plat. 
(3)  The present and proposed zone district classification of the applicant property(ies), tract(s) and the existing zone district classification(s) of abutting properties. 
(4)  The name and addresses of the owner(s) of the applicant property(ies) and their agent(s). 
(5)  The names and addresses of owners of abutting properties, including properties across a public right-of-way (determined by projecting the intersecting tract boundaries of the applicant's property across the right-of-way). 
(6)  Existing site resources map. A detailed site resources map of the proposed development site identifying all special and noteworthy elements of the natural or cultural landscape is a required submittal with any zoning application. The purpose of this key submission is to familiarize county staff and officials with all existing resources on a parcel of land, and to ensure that the important site features have been adequately identified. The existing site resources map shall be provided with the submission of a request to rezone a parcel of land. 
(6.1)  Required information. To provide a full understanding of the site's potential and to facilitate the most effective exchange with the planning staff and other officials, the existing site resources map shall include the information listed below: 
(A)  Property boundaries, including: 
1.  Name and address of the professional engineer, surveyor, planner, architect, landscape architect, or the site designer responsible for preparing the plan; 
2.  Graphic scale (not greater than one inch = 200 feet, however, dimensions on plan need not be exact) and north arrow; 
3.  Approximate tract boundaries, sufficient to locate the tract on a map of the community; 
4.  Location map; 
5.  Existing streets on and adjacent to the tract. 
(B)  All streams (perennial and intermittent), rivers, lakes, wetlands and other hydrologic features, including: 
1.  The 100-year floodplain. 
2.  Streams within 200 feet of existing boundary. 
3.  Riparian zones of at least 50-foot width on either side along all perennial and intermittent streams. 
4.  Riparian zones of al least 150-foot width on either side of the Etowah River Corridor or the Little River Corridor. 
5.  Wetlands that meet the definition used by state and/or federal regulations. 
(C)  Topographic contours of no less than ten-foot intervals. 
(D)  Vegetation characteristics, including: 
1.  Existing healthy, native forests of at least one acre contiguous area. 
2.  Individual existing healthy trees greater than 14 inches caliper measured at dbh identified by type and size. 
3.  Other significant natural features and scenic viewsheds such as ridge lines, peaks and rock outcroppings, particularly those that can be seen from public roads. 
4.  Prime agricultural lands of at least five acres contiguous area. 
5.  Other features including fields, pastures, meadows, wooded areas, hedgerows and other significant vegetation, rock outcrops, ponds, ditches, drains, dumps, storage tanks, streams within 200 feet of tract. 
(E)  Groundwater recharge areas. 
(F)  Significant wildlife habitats, if known: 
1.  Populations of endangered or threatened species, or habitat for such. 
(G)  Historic, archeological and cultural features, including: 
1.  Archeaological sites, cemeteries and burial grounds subject to approval indicating that these structures are compatible with the Cherokee Zoning Regulations. 
2.  Site identified in any state or local historic site survey. 
3.  U.S. Geological Service survey control monuments. 
(H)  General soil types. 
(I)  Existing roads and structures, including: 
1.  Exising ROW. 
2.  All easements describing their purpose and depicting their location on the property. 
3.  All structures, foundations, walls, wells, trails, and abandoned roads. 
4.  Existing trails that connect the tract to neighboring areas. 
(J)  Identification of surrounding property type/land use. 
(6.2)  Review of existing resource map. The existing resources map shall be reviewed by the planning director or his/her designee. If found inadequate by the reviewer, the reviewer shall state the reasons for its inadequacy, and the existing resources map shall not be accepted until adequate changes are made. 
(6.3)  Exemptions. Zoning applications that meet the following criteria are exempt from the existing site resources map requirements above: 
• Any residential application of five acres or less. 
• Any commercial application of one acre or less. 
• Any application without new building construction. 
b.  Conformance with development standards. The property and its use proposed in the map amendment application or special use request shall conform to the applicable development standards of the district for which application is made. 
c.  Application submission. An application shall be filed with the zoning administrator no later than 4:00 p.m. on the second Friday of each month. It shall be accompanied by a fees as pertained and listed under the zoning and permit fee schedule resolution and under no condition shall said sum of money be refunded for failure of such proposed amendment to ba enacted. Such fee shall not be charged if an official governmental agency files the application. 
d.  Supporting information and data. When it is determined by the zoning administrator or the planning commission that it is necessary or appropriate to action on an individual rezoning, the applicant shall present a map showing the location of the property for which an application is submitted, and its relationship to adjoining properties and public facilities and services. He may also be required to submit applicable information concerning the service demands that will be placed on public facilities and services including, but not limited to, information on such matters as total anticipated population density; traffic volumes, effect on schools, drainage, traffic and utility facilities. Any sites plans, renderings, or other exhibits depicting construction or development which are submitted by the applicant may be recommended as a condition of rezoning by the planning commission or the zoning board. 
(e)  Application withdrawal or amendment. An application may not be postponed or amended by the applicant after the regularly scheduled Cherokee County Municipal Planning Commission Work Session. However, the Cherokee County Municipal Planning Commission may allow an application to be withdrawn prior to the conduct of the public hearing without prejudice with respect to the 12-month limitation of this section. The Cherokee County Municipal Planning Commission may recommend to amend an application prior to acting thereon, with the consent of the applicant, to reduce its size; to change the district required to a less intensive or lower density district than that requested; or to specify as part of the zone district classification the particular use or uses proposed by the applicant. 
18.3-3  Site plan requirements. In addition to the application information required in section 18.3-2a above, a site plan shall be required prior to the Cherokee County Municipal Planning Commission's consideration of rezoning requests in all the non-residential districts and major subdivisions. Such plan shall be prepared in accordance with the requirement of this section, other applicable requirements, or development standards of this ordinance, and applicable requirements of other regulations of Cherokee County and the State of Georgia. For traditional neighborhood development, neighborhood plans shall be prepared in accordance with the requirements listed on Article 8 Traditional Neighborhood Development, Section 8.4 Neighborhood Plans. 
a.  Waivers and exemptions. In those instances where the rezoning request is for the purpose of extending an existing zone district or establishing the zone district to conform to existing land use, the planning commission may waive the site plan requirement. When the rezoning is initiated by the board of commissioners or the planning commission or is for conventional one and two family residential units exclusively, the site plan requirements of this section shall be waived. 
b.  Plan submission. The site plan shall be submitted with five copies of applications. One copy shall be retained for the official records of the planning commission and two copies shall be forwarded to the board of commissioners with the planning commission's recommendation, one of which shall be returned to the applicant complete with the necessary signatures, if approved. 
c.  Site plan format. All site plans shall be prepared by design professionals such as planners, engineers, architects and landscape architects in the following formats: 
(1)  Scale. The scale of plan shall not be smaller than one inch equals 100 feet. 
(2)  Sheet size. All site plans shall be drawn on sheets no larger than 24 inches by 36 inches. If more than one sheet is necessary to cover the applicant property, an index map at a reduced scale shall be provided to key the sheets. 
(3)  Boundary survey. Shown and described by metes and bounds. 
(4)  Title block. The following information shall be provide on all site plans as applicable: 
(i)  Name and address of owner-applicant and the names, addresses and seal of the registered architect, engineer, landscape architect and/or land surveyor who prepared the plan. 
(ii)  Approval spaces for planning commission and board of commissioner's signature. 
(iii)  Date, scale and north arrow. 
d.  Site plan information. Prior to the approval of a rezoning request in all commercial and industrial districts, the following information shall be prepared: 
(1)  Location map. A general location map at a scale of one inch equals to 2,000 feet indicating existing zoning on the site, adjoining roads and the adjacent areas are required. 
(2)  Survey boundaries. Surveyed boundaries of the entire tract and their relationship to adjoining properties, public rights-of-way, and easements. 
(3)  Building locations. Location of all proposed buildings, their shape, size, and setback in appropriate scale. 
(4)  Right-of-way. Location and right-of-way of streets, roads, alleys, railroads, public crosswalks, with lengths and widths, road names, or designations. 
(5)  Buffers. Proposed buffers and landscaping. 
(6)  Topography. Existing topographic conditions with contour intervals of five feet or less; areas that have slopes greater than 15 percent shall be identified. 
(7)  Floodplain. Location of streams, lakes, swamps, and if applicable, the boundary and elevation of the 100-year flood plain as determined by the past history of flooding or the best available data. 
(8)  Drainage. Size and location of all drainage mechanisms and the applicable drainage area within the tract or within the right-of-way of streets or roads adjacent to the tract; grades and invert elevations of sewers shall be shown; all elevations shall refer to mean sea level datum where public water and/or public sewers are to be installed. Layouts of all utility and drainage easements. 
(9)  Soil erosion plan. A soil erosion plan showing the mitigation techniques that will be employed during construction may be required upon request by planning commission. 
(10)  Sketches. Representative architectural sketches or renderings of typical proposed structures, signs, landscaping, screening and/or fencing. 
(11)  Off-street parking and loading. Show the access point to the public street system, off-street parking and loading plan. 
(12)  Development report. A report setting forth the proposed development schedule, indicating sequence of development of the various sections thereof, and the approximate time period required for completion of each phase, if applicable. 
(13)  Technical data. Statistical or technical data as necessary to accurately describe the proposed development including, but not limited to, the following shall be included in the development report: 
(i)  Total land area. 
(ii)  Amount of land to be used for recreational or open space purpose. 
(iii)  Total number of dwelling units and gross density by type of land use. 
(iv)  Amount of space to be occupied by streets and parking areas. 
(v)  Amount of any submerged land within the project boundary. 
(vi)  The total ground coverage and floor area of all buildings. 
(vii)  A breakdown of the number of kinds of proposed buildings, including square footage and the number and range of lot sizes and proposed setback and yard dimensions for typical lots and/or building types. 
(viii)  Deed record names of adjoining property owner(s) or subdivisions. 
18.3-4  Site plan review and approval. Site plan review and approval shall be undertaken in accordance with provisions of section 18.5 and 18.6. 
18.3-5  Site plan effect and amendment. Site plans contained in a rezoning shall become effective upon approval for a period of five years, subject to the provisions of section 18.6 below if amendment of the site plan is desired or necessary to change the proposals represented on the site plan, the applicant shall request a review by the planning commission. The planning commission may recommend approval of minor and incidental changes by the board of commissioners or may determine the need to initiate an amendment procedure as provided in section 18.3-1 above, in the case of major changes. 
18.3-6  Study required for amendment. Upon the filing of the application for rezoning, the zoning administrator may consult with other county departments or governmental units to evaluate the impact of the proposed zoning change upon public facilities and services and may otherwise study the application with reference to appropriateness and effect on existing and proposed land use. The zoning administrator shall report any findings and recommendations to the planning commission in writing as a part of the public record or verbally at the public hearing. When zoning district boundary changes are proposed by an applicant seeking a modification, revision or amendment, the applicant shall be responsible for submitting information, or where the proposal is by the zoning administrator, the administrator shall be responsible for submitting information, as follows: 
a.  The existing land use pattern. 
b.  The possible creation of an isolated district unrelated to adjacent and nearby districts. 
c.  The population density pattern and possible increase or overtaxing of the load on public facilities, including, but not limited to, schools, utilities, and roads. 
d.  The cost to the county in providing, improving, increasing or maintaining public utilities, schools, roads,and public safety measures. 
e.  Impact on the environment, including, but not limited to, drainage, soil erosion and sedimentation, flooding, air quality, and water quality and quantity. 
f.  Whether the proposed change will be a deterrent to the value, or improve the development, of adjacent property in accordance with existing zoning regulations. 
g.  Whether there are substantial reasons why property affected cannot be used in accordance with existing zoning. 
h.  The aesthetic effect of existing and future use if the property as it relates to the surrounding area. 
i.  The extent to which the proposed changes are consistent with existing plans and studies. 
j.  Any other factors relevant to the balancing of interests in promoting the public health, safety, morality, or general welfare and in the right of the landowner to use of his property as he chooses. 
The board of commissioners or the planning commission may make such changes as they deem appropriate to the submission by the zoning administrator. 
18.3-7  Public notification. Public notification of the hearing on a proposed amendment to this ordinance shall be given as follows: 
a.  Legal notice. At least 15 but not more than 45 days prior to the date set by the planning commission for the hearing, a written notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the county by advertising the application and date, time, place and purpose of the hearing. 
b.  Notice requirements. Notice shall additionally be given as follows: 
(1)  Published notice. The published notice shall include the time and date of the hearing, the location of the property, and state the present zoning classification of the property and the proposed zoning classification of the property. Notice of hearing before the planning commission shall be prepared and presented for publication by the zoning administrator. 
(2)  Sign posted. A sign shall be placed in a conspicuous location of the property sought to be rezoned setting forth the time, date, place and purpose of the public hearing, the present zoning classification on the property at least 30 days prior to the public hearing. Acts of vandalism or natural occurrences limiting the effectiveness of notice by a sign posted on the property shall not invalidate any proceedings or action taken on the proposed amendment. 
c.  Letters to abutting property owners and the applicant. The zoning administrator shall notify by regular mail all abutting Cherokee County property owners (defined in section 18.3-2a.5 above) of the requested zoning change as shown by county tax records as the last known address available, of the application and date, time and place of the public hearing, which shall be mailed at least seven days prior to the public hearing. The zoning administrator shall notify the applicant of the date, time and place of the public hearing by maid to the address indicated on the application, which shall be mailed at least ten days prior to the public hearing. Receipt of such letter by the applicant or his agent(s) named in the application shall constitute notice to be present and present a case. 
d.  Public participation plan. 
1.  Purpose: The public participation plan is required with most applications for an amendment (rezoning) to the official zoning map of Cherokee County. For exceptions to this see section 5(c), submittal requirements. 
2.  Background: The rezoning process, by nature, often creates a contentious atmosphere for all parties involved. This is primarily because of a lack of meaningful interaction between the parties. This, therefore, creates an "information void", leading to a misunderstanding of the issues at hand among the involved parties. 
3.  Goals of the plan: In light of the above observations, the public participation plan is designed to facilitate on-going communication among the applicants and proponents of the rezoning proposals, the nearby and adjoining property owners, interested citizens, elected officials, and staff throughout the application review process. Specifically, the plan is aimed at ensuring the following: 
a.  The nearby and adjoining property owners and interested citizens have adequate opportunity to learn about applications that may affect them and to work with applicants to resolve concerns at an early stage of the process. 
b.  Applicants pursue early and effective citizen participation in conjunction with their applications, giving them the opportunity to understand and try to mitigate any real or perceived impacts the applications may have on the community. 
The proposed plan is not intended to produce complete consensus on all applications, but to encourage applicants to be good neighbors and to foster an atmosphere for informed decision-making. 
4.  Contents of the plan: At a minimum, the public participation plan shall include the following information: 
a.  Which property owners, interested parties, political jurisdictions and public agencies may be affected by the application. 
b.  How those interested in and potentially impacted by an application will be notified that an application has been made. 
c.  How those interested and potentially impacted parties will be informed of the substance of the development proposed by the applicant. 
d.  How those potentially impacted and interested parties will be afforded an opportunity to discuss the applicant's proposal with the applicant and express any concerns, issues or problems that they may have with the proposal, in advance of the public hearing. 
e.  The applicant's schedule for completion of the public participation plan process. 
f.  Minimum public notification target area. The minimum public notification target area for the public participation meeting will include: 
(1)  All properties that are within 750 feet of the legal boundary of the subject property. 
(2)  Any homeowners associations, which represent subdivisions or properties, that falls within the 750-foot boundary. 
(3)  Other interested parties who have requested that they be placed on the interested parties notification list, to be maintained by the planning and zoning office. 
These requirements will apply, in addition to the formal notification provisions typically undertaken by the county. The basis for this target area is to provide an expanded notification area beyond the legal notification required for rezoning requests (adjacent properties) to enhance public participation opportunities. 
5.  Public participation meeting and report: It is mandatory for the rezoning applicant to schedule and hold a public participation meeting. The public notification letter sent shall identify the date, time, and place of the meeting. In order to formalize the public participation plan process, the applicant shall provide a written report on the results of the public participation meeting to the planning and zoning office one week prior to the planning commission work session. This report will be attached to the planning and zoning office's technical staff report, which is prepared for each rezoning case and is sent to the planning commission and board of commissioners. At a minimum, the public participation report shall include the following information: 
a.  Details of methods the applicant used to involve the public, including: 
(1)  Date and location of the meeting held with citizens to discuss the applicant's proposal; 
(2)  Content, dates mailed and numbers of mailings, including letters, meeting notices, newsletters and other publications; 
(3)  Where property owners and interested parties receiving notices or other written materials, are located; and 
(4)  The number of people that participated in the process. 
b.  A summary of concerns, issues and problems expressed during the process, including: 
(1)  The substance of the concerns, issues and problems; 
(2)  How the applicant has addressed or intends to address concerns, issues and problems expressed during the process; and 
(3)  Concerns, issues and problems the applicant is unable or unwilling to address and why. 
c.  Submittal requirements. 
(1)  The public participation plan shall be required for all rezoning applications that require the submittal of a site plan. This includes all office, commercial, multifamily residential, industrial, and single family residential rezoning requests that consists of five or more lots. (This excludes rezone requests to R-80, R-60, R-40, R-20, and R-15 for minor subdivisions of two to four lots that do not create new public streets.) 
(2)  A site plan and public participation report will also be required for AG rezoning requests proposing any commercial agriculture activity. (e.g. Breeding of livestock, sales of produce). This would exclude an AG rezoning request that is proposed for noncommercial agricultural uses. (e.g. Livestock for personal pleasure, single family home). 
(3)  The applicant will be required to submit a certificate of mailing for those property owners within the public notification target area. 
(4)  The applicant may submit a public participation plan and begin implementation prior to formal application at his discretion; however, implementation shall not begin prior to a preapplication meeting and consultation with the staff of the planning and zoning office. 
d.  Meeting requirements and protocol: 
A.  The applicant or authorized representative shall be available to answer questions of the general public for at least 30 minutes. 
B.  The meeting location shall be held at a public facility within the community for which the applicant is seeking the re-zoning request. 
C.  The meeting shall not begin prior to 6:30 p.m. on the evening the meeting is to be held. 
D.  The applicant or authorized representative shall provide the following material for the general public to view: 
1.  Cherokee County Future Land Use Map. 
2.  Site plan proposed on application. 
3.  Contact information (name and phone number and/or e-mail address) for the applicant or authorized representative. 
4.  Procedure and contact information provided by Cherokee County Planning and Zoning Deptartment. 
E.  Notice of the actual meeting shall be submitted to the Cherokee County Planning and Zoning Department to be kept in the re-zoning file. 
6.  Conclusion: These are just minimum requirements, prepared in the hope that applicants will reach out further. This plan is not put in place to ensure that the citizens' needs or demands are met entirely. The plan does, however, envision an interactive process whereby applicants and citizens treat each other honestly, fairly and with respect and defuse the contentious nature of the rezoning process. Emerging out of the process should be a better understanding of the issues and, therefore, an atmosphere for informed decision-making. 
18.3-8  Public notification of county initiated rezoning. The planning commission, of its own motion or at the request of the board of commissioners, or the board of commissioners may hold public hearings on the proposal of the zoning administrator. 
a.  Upon the decision by the planning commission to hold public hearings, the zoning administrator shall prepare and cause to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the county for at least 15 days but not more than 45 days before the hearing date, a notice of public hearing, such notice to contain a summary of the proposals to be considered by the planning commission, and the date, time, and place of such hearing. 
b.  Copies of the proposal, zoning ordinance, and zoning maps, plus the zoning administrator's evaluation of any proposed district boundary changes, shall be available for public inspection in the planning and zoning department during normal working hours between the date of the first appearance of the notice of the public hearing and the time of such hearing. 
c.  A public hearing on any proposed amendment to this ordinance properly initiated shall be held before the Cherokee County Municipal Planning Commission, which is delegated the duty to conduct such public hearing as is required by "The Zoning Procedure Law" (title 36, chapter 66 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated). A public hearing on any proposed amendment to this ordinance properly initiated shall be conducted at the time and place specified by the planning commission and as set forth in the public notification described in section 18.3-7 of this article. The purpose of such hearing shall be to present to the public the proposed zoning amendment and to receive comments thereon from the public. The planning commission shall consider the proceedings and comments of such hearing in making its recommendation to the board of commissioners as to any zoning decision on the proposed zoning amendment. The planning commission shall prescribe the rules of order for its deliberations on matters with which it is charged to advise the commissioner under this ordinance and said rules of order shall be consistent with the general requirements and purposes set forth in this article and other general laws of the State of Georgia concerning conduct of proceedings of public commissions, bodies and governmental units. 
18.3-8A  Membership of Cherokee County Municipal Planning Commission. There is hereby established a Cherokee County Municipal Planning Commission for the purposes of providing recommendations to the Board of Commissioners of Cherokee County concerning re-zoning applications, zoning, land use and other recommendations to the Board of Commissioners of Cherokee County. 
The Cherokee County Municipal Planning Commission shall consist of nine members. The Board of Commissioners of Cherokee County shall appoint seven of the members with each Commissioner having one appointment to run concurrently with the term of the person so appointing. In addition, two members shall be appointed by the Board of Commissioners of Cherokee County as a whole to serve at the pleasure of the Commission. 
Two members of the Cherokee County Municipal Planning Commission shall consist of representatives of the City of Waleska and the City of Ball Ground. The City of Waleska and the City of Ball Ground shall appoint the respective members. 
There is hereby established a Chairman of the Cherokee County Municipal Planning Commission to be appointed annually by the members of the Cherokee County Municipal Planning Commission. In addition, a vice-chair shall be designated by the members of the Cherokee County Municipal Planning Commission. 
18.3-9  Conduct of hearings. The following policies and procedures shall govern the conduct of hearings under this article. 
a.  The chairman shall open any hearing with an explanation of the purpose of the hearing and description of the general rules for the conduct of the hearing and the authority and role of the hearing body in any zoning decision. The order of cases may be altered at the discretion of the chairman. An individual requesting to be heard on a matter germane to the purpose of the hearing must be recognized by the chairman before addressing the body. The chairman shall chair the hearing and shall determine germaneness of any comment or presentation to the planning commission in the hearing and is authorized to rule any individual or a portion of any comment or presentation out of order. However, the chairman may pre-determine the length of any hearing allotting equal time to proponents and opponents of any proposed zoning amendment. To the extent that there are both proponents and opponents of any proposed zoning amendment and the fact that equal time is not in fact utilized by either position shall not invalidate any proceedings or action taken on the proposed amendment. 
b.  The planning commission may determine that an application for zoning amendment was or was not properly filed or that the type of decision for which the application calls can or can not be heard by it. The chairman may make determinations as to whether proper public notice of the hearing was given and continue the case where it was not. 
c.  The chairman shall allow the person initiating the proposed zoning amendment request or his/her designee to present a description of the proposed zoning amendment and the reason(s) for initiating the proposed zoning amendment. Materials or evidence which could have, but were not, filed with the application may be rejected and not admitted. All materials except those which are clearly for rebuttal purposes shall be submitted by the close of the presentation of the case in order to be considered. 
d.  Speakers at the public hearing for or against the application may be required by the chairman to sign in, giving name, residential address, and telephone number, before being allowed to speak. Speakers may be allowed ten minutes for each presentation of new evidence or information. Any person requesting to address the body upon being recognized by the chairman shall state his name, residence address and telephone number before proceeding with any comment, remarks or presentation. Any person addressing the body shall respond to questions of the chairman or members. 
e.  Failure of the applicant or his agent(s) to be present at the public hearing constitutes abandonment and dismissal of the case unless the applicant shows just cause by reason of illness or health or other emergency within a reasonable time, in writing, and accompanied by new costs for readvertisement and hearing. 
f.  Evidence or documents presented for consideration become part of the public file; however, substitutions of copies may be made where approved of by the chairman. 
g.  The chairman may alternate the order of persons speaking to accommodate unusual situations. The chairman may divide presentations into blocks of time beginning with proponents and followed by opposition. The chairman may direct that proponents and opponents designate one or more spokesperson(s) for presentations of favorable and opposing views on the proposed zoning amendment. 
h.  All materials or evidence which persons in opposition wish to be considered must be submitted by the conclusion the opposition of the opposition portion of the hearing. 
i.  The chairman may poll the public assemblage at any hearing concerning their concurrence or opposition. However, upon the request of the applicant or a spokesman for the opposition, persons responding may be required to give written information as to name, residential address, and the county in which each resides. The count of those in favor and in opposition will be entered in the record of the hearing. 
j.  Any remark amounting to attack on the character or personal integrity of another individual or comment not factually supportable or comment in the form of an emotional outburst shall be nongermane to the purpose of any hearing, may be ruled out of order, and may be disregarded. 
k.  Upon conclusion of the presentation of persons opposing the proposed zoning amendment, the chairman shall afford the person initiating the petition an allotted time to address the body in rebuttal of any issue(s) raised by persons in opposition and the applicant may submit materials or evidence associated with rebuttal. The chairman may rule out of order the raising of any new issue(s) which are not clearly rebuttal unless the information was requested by a member of the hearing body. Where a new issue is allowed to be raised in rebuttal, a spokesman for persons opposing the proposed zoning amendment shall be allocated an equal amount of time to address such new issue(s). The applicant does not thereafter cave additional rebuttal time except in the discretion of the chairman. 
l.  When proponents and opponents of the proposed zoning amendment request have been heard in accordance with the foregoing procedures, the public hearing is closed and no further evidence or testimony may be presented unless either the record is left open based on a request for additional material or report, or questions are asked of the applicant or opposition, in which case both sides shall be entitled to response but there is no right of rebuttal. 
18.3-10  Planning commission action. 
a.  The planning commission may recommend approval, approval with conditions, or denial of the proposed zoning amendment. If a decision is not reached, the matter continues to be tabled for consideration until a vote carries. A report or minutes of the planning commission's recommendation accompanying a summary of the proceedings of the hearing shall be submitted to the board of commissioners. The planning commission shall include recommendations for conditions or limitation on uses appropriate to ameliorate the impact on the surrounding area. Where the applicant does not agree to such conditions or limitation on uses, the recommendation shall be interpreted as a recommendation for denial unless the conditions or limitations are accepted by the applicant. If the planning commission fails to recommend action on the application within 65 days and the applicant does not agree to a waiver of this time limit, the applicant may take it to the board of commissioners without a planning commission recommendation. 
b.  In carrying out its responsibilities in reviewing and taking action on an application, the planning commission may adopt rules and regulations for the conduct of public hearings and meetings as are consistent with state and county law and appropriate to its responsibilities. Robert's Rules of Order may be used as a procedural guide in the absence of a rule or regulation. 
c.  The planning commission shall consider any proposed zoning amendment properly initiated in light of the factors set forth in this article and in light of the purposes for the district affected or considered. In evaluating the factors, the policy and intent of the Cherokee County Land Use Plan shall be considered. It is further the policy of the Cherokee County Planning and Zoning Commission to exercise the zoning power for purposes of assuring the compatibility of use of adjacent and nearby properties and the preservation of the economic value of adjacent and nearby properties and the county's tax base while enabling a reasonable use of all property. 
d.  The decision of the planning commission is advisory only. 
18.3-11 Action by the board of commissioners. The board of commissioners, after receiving the recommendation of the Cherokee County Municipal Planning Commission, shall take appropriate official action on the application and shall notify the applicant of the action taken. If the board of commissioners has not approved, denied, approved with conditions, approved a substitute classification, or voted to postpone consideration with respect to the application within 90 days of the planning commission's recommendation, the application shall be deemed to be denied without prejudice. 
18.3-11A  Additional public hearing. The board of commissioners, after receiving the recommendation of the planning commission, may require an additional public hearing before the Board of Commissioners of Cherokee County for any rezoning application that exhibits a substantial change between the action by the Cherokee County Municipal Planning Commission and final action by the Board of Commissioners of Cherokee County. 
18.3-12  Modification, revision, or amendment of zoning ordinance by public authority. 
a.  The zoning administrator may conduct a continued study of the needs of the county and from time to time, prepare such modifications, revisions, or amendments to the zoning resolution and ordinance as may be necessary to conform to the land use plan, land use studies, major thoroughfare plans, and other governing documents. The modifications, revisions, or amendments shall include each text providing definitions, specifications, and conditions as may be appropriate to the matter considered, as well as maps delineating any geographical changes. Submission shall be made to the Board of Commissioners of Cherokee County and to the Cherokee County Municipal Planning Commission. 
18.3-13  Modification to existing conditions of zoning previously imposed by the board of commissioners. 
(a)  When the owner of property on which the board of commissioners has approved zoning conditions specific to the owner's property desires to modify or remove one or more such zoning conditions, the owner shall submit an application to the Cherokee County Zoning Administrator on such forms as required by the zoning administrator no later than 30 days prior to the scheduled meeting of the Cherokee County Board of Commissioners at which the application shall be considered. 
(b)  The application to modify existing conditions of zoning shall not be considered by the Cherokee Planning Commission unless a resolution directing such consideration by the planning commission is first approved by the board of commissioners. 
(c)  Such applications shall be accompanied by fees as adopted and approved by the board of commissioners, which may be amended from time to time by resolution of the board of commissioners. 
(d)  Such fees shall not be charged if an official governmental agency files the application. 
(e)  Applications for modification to existing conditions of zoning shall not count against the limit of rezoning applications that may be filed in any given month pursuant to subsection 18.3-2(c). 
(f)  The application for modification to existing conditions of zoning shall include, the name and address of the applicant, the name and address of the property owner, the legal description of the property, the case number of the rezoning at which the condition of zoning to be modified was adopted, the resolution number of the resolution in which the county adopted the condition of zoning to be modified, the existing use of the property, the proposed use of the property (if different from the existing use), and a detailed explanation of the reason for the proposed modification. 
(g)  The applicant shall include with the application a revised site plan from that submitted with original rezone no larger than 11 inches by 17 inches. The submitted plans must be drawn to scale by a registered engineer, architect, or land surveyor in accordance with applicable state laws and the scale must not be smaller than one inch equals 100 feet. 
(h)  The applicant shall include with the application a copy of the deed that documents the current property owner and the current legal description of the subject property. If the application consists of more than one tract, a legal description of each tract is required. No legal description shall include more property than that affected by the modification request. 
(i)  At least 15 but not more than 45 days prior to the date set for the hearing by the board of commissioners, a written notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the Cherokee County by advertising the application and date, time, place and purpose of the hearing. 
(j)  The applicant shall place a sign in a conspicuous location on the property for which the application for modification of existing conditions is sought setting forth the time, date, place and purpose of the public hearing, at least 15 days prior to the public hearing. Acts of vandalism or natural occurrences limiting the effectiveness of notice by a sign posted on the property shall not invalidate any proceedings or action taken on the proposed amendment. 
(k)  The zoning administrator shall notify by regular mail all abutting Cherokee County property owners (defined in subsection 18.3-2a.5 above), as shown by county tax records as the last known address available, of the requested modification, of and the date, time and place of the public hearing, which shall be mailed at least seven days prior to the public hearing. The zoning administrator shall notify the applicant of the date, time and place of the public hearing by mail to the address indicated on the application, which shall be mailed at least ten days prior to the public hearing. Receipt of such letter by the applicant or his agent(s) named in the application shall constitute notice to be present and present a case. 
(l)  Upon the filing of the application for modification of conditions of zoning, the zoning administrator may consult with other county departments or governmental units to evaluate the impact of the proposed modification upon public facilities and services and may otherwise study the application with reference to appropriateness and effect on existing and proposed land use. The zoning administrator shall report any findings and recommendations to the board of commissioners in writing as a part of the public record or verbally at the public hearing. 
(m)  Prior to voting on an application for modification of conditions of zoning, the board of commissioners shall conduct a public hearing in compliance with subsection 18.3-9. 
(n)  After the public hearing, the board of commissioners may approve, deny, approve conditions other than those proposed by the applicant, approve additional conditions, any combination of the foregoing, or postpone consideration of the application. 
(o)  The board of commissioners shall take appropriate official action on the application and shall notify the applicant of the action taken. If the board of commissioners has not approved, denied, approved with conditions, approved a substitute zoning condition, or voted to postpone consideration with respect to the application within 90 days of the filing of the application, the application shall be deemed to be denied without prejudice. 
(Ord. No. 94-4, §§ 2, 3, 2-25-94; Ord. No. 2002-Z-002, 3-5-02; Ord. No. 2002-Z-007, 12-17-02; Ord. No. 2003-Z-001, 4-22-03; Ord. No. 2003-Z-003, 4-22-03; Ord. No. 2005-Z-002, 6-21-05; Ord. No. 2005-Z-004, 12-6-05; Ord. No. 2007-Z-002, 8-7-07; Ord. No. 2008-Z-002, § 6, 9-16-08; Ord. No. 2010-Z-001, § 1, 2, 1-5-10) 
18.4 - Resubmission. 
If an application for rezoning is denied by the Board of Commissioners of Cherokee County, then the same property may not again be considered for rezoning until the expiration of at least 12 months immediately following the denial of the rezoning application by the board of commissioners. 
18.5 - Copies of policies and procedures. 
Copies of this ordinance and of the Zoning Resolution and Ordinance of Cherokee County, Georgia, and of the Cherokee County Municipal Planning Commission Rules of Procedure shall be available for distribution to the general public by the zoning administrator at a reasonable cost. 
18.6 - Zoning standards. 
Exercise of the zoning power of the county shall constitute an effort to balance the interest of the community in promoting the public health, safety, morality or general welfare against the right of property owners to the unrestricted use of their property. The following factors are determined to be relevant in balancing these interests: 
18.6-1  Factors determining a zoning decision. 
a.  Whether the proposed amendment would allow a use that is generally suitable for the site compared to other possible uses and the uses and zoning of adjacent and nearby properties. 
b.  Whether the proposed amendment would adversely affect the economic value or the uses of adjacent and nearby properties. 
c.  Whether the property to be affected by the proposed amendment can be used as currently zoned. 
d.  Whether the proposed amendment, if adopted, would result in a use which should or could cause an excessive or burdensome use of existing streets, schools, sewers, water resources, police and fire protection, or other utilities. 
e.  Whether the proposed amendment, if adopted, is in conformity with the policy and intent of the Cherokee County Land Use Plan. 
f.  Whether there are other conditions or transitional patterns affecting the use and development of the property sought to be rezoned, which give ground for either approval or disapproval of the proposed amendment. 
18.6-2  Evaluation criteria for amendments. 
a.  Land development plans, including projected densities in plan and zoning change applications. 
b.  Suitability of subject property for zoned purposes. 
(1)  Development efforts by landowners. 
(2)  Needs for special construction. 
(3)  Cost of development within present classification. 
(4)  Cost of marketing and market considerations in use as zoned. 
(5)  Present use by landowner. 
(6)  Ownership by applicant for adjacent lands. 
(7)  Other land development in vicinity. 
c.  Existing uses and zoning of nearby property. 
(1)  Public support or opposition evidencing these criteria. 
(2)  Use and classifications of other property. 
(3)  Effect upon residents of adjoining property. 
d.  Land values. 
(1)  Value in present classification. 
(2)  Value in requested classification. 
(3)  Relative values of residential and commercial or other use. 
(4)  Impact of change on values of adjacent and nearby properties. 
(5)  Expenditures made by owner. 
(6)  Opinions as to highest and best use or most advantageous use. 
(7)  Loss of tax revenue to the county. 
e.  Roads and traffic. 
(1)  Character of adjacent and boundary roads. 
(2)  Intersections. 
(3)  Planned development by public offices. 
(4)  Planned private developments. 
(5)  Effect of increased traffic on existing roads. 
(6)  Effect of increased traffic on safety. 
f.  Rivers, streams and drainage. 
(1)  Floodplains. 
(2)  Soil erosion and sedimentation. 
(3)  Protected areas. 
(4)  Pollution of surface and subsurface water. 
g.  Utilities. 
(1)  Septic tanks or sewerage treatment. 
(2)  Water supply. 
h.  Other special considerations. 
(1)  Buffer zones. 
(2)  Noise. 
(3)  Odor. 
(4)  Fire protection. 
(5)  Terrain or topography. 
(6)  Schools. 
(7)  Animals. 
(8)  Visual intrusions on neighbors. 
(9)  Esthetics. 
(10)  Site plans and plats. 
ARTICLE 19. - REMEDIES AND ENFORCEMENT 

19.1 - Violation. 
(a)  Any person, firm or corporation, whether as principal, agent employee, or otherwise, who violates or causes the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter has committed an infraction, and upon conviction or plea of guilty thereof is punishable as prescribed in section 1-12 of the Code of Ordinances of Cherokee County, Georgia, which shall be in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20 by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 or 60 days imprisonment, or both, except as otherwise provided for by general law. The fines imposed therefor may be collected by execution. However, in no event shall the maximum penalties and punishment exceed a fine of $1,000.00 and an imprisonment in the county jail for 60 days for any single offense. 
(b)  Any violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement adopted pursuant to the Federal Clean Water Act may be fined up to $1,000.00 per day for each violation by an industrial user. 
(c)  Each day any violation of any provision of this Code or any ordinance, rule, regulation, or order of the county shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(d)  The imposition of a fine or penalty does not prevent revocation or suspension of a license, permit, or franchise. 
(e)  Violations of this Code or any ordinance that are continuous with respect to time are a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of a penalty does not prevent injunctive relief. 
(f)  In addition to said county ordinance section 1-12, the county commissioners, and the penalties provided above, the county commissioners, zoning administrator, or other appropriate authority of the county, are authorized to institute civil action to seek relief for violation of any part of the Zoning Resolution and Ordinance of Cherokee County, Georgia as may be otherwise authorized by law. 
(Ord. No. 96-08, § 4, 4-9-96; Ord. No. 2017-O-008, § 2, 11-7-17) 
19.2 - Remedies. 
In case any building or structure is or is proposed to be erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, converted or maintained, or any building, structure or land is or is proposed to be used in violation of any provision of this resolution, the zoning administrator, county attorney or other appropriate authority of the county or any adjacent or neighboring property owner who would be especially damaged by such violation may, in addition to other remedy, institute injunction mandamus or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent such unlawful erection, construction reconstruction, alteration, conversion, maintenance or use or to correct or abate such violation, or to prevent the occupancy of such building, structure or land. 
The Administrator of Cherokee County Planning and Zoning and Building Department is hereby authorized to issue written "stop work" and "cease and desist" orders on any project when the applicant, applicant's business or agent fails to comply with the Cherokee County Planning and Zoning Resolution and Ordinance. Such "stop work" and "cease and desist" orders may be lifted at such time as the administrator is satisfied that a good faith effort to comply is being made. Nothing shall prevent the zoning administrator from reissuing "stop work" and "cease and desist" orders. 
The Administrator of Cherokee County Planning and Zoning and Building Department, or his agent is hereby authorized and directed to deny and withhold permits on any new project or application pursuant to the zoning resolution and ordinance where the applicants applicant's business or agent has failed or refused to comply with county requirements or regulations under the Cherokee County Zoning Resolution and Ordinance, provided that there is no pending civil litigation against or by the applicant, applicant's business or agent pertaining to the subject matter. 
Any permit issued pursuant to the Cherokee County Planning and Zoning Resolution and Ordinance may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the Administrator of the Cherokee County Planning and Zoning and Building Department as to the project for which it was issued, upon the administrator's finding that the holder is in violation of the said Cherokee County Ordinance, or the specific terms set out in the permit. Review of such suspension shall be appealable before the zoning board of appeals. 
In any case where the zoning administrator or his agent is unable to safely carry out inspections pursuant to the requirements of this ordinance, an inspection warrant or other order as may be provided by law or ordinance may be obtained for such purpose. 
19.3 - Cumulative remedy. 
The remedies herein provided shall not be deemed to be exclusive but shall be cumulative of all other remedies provide by law. 
ARTICLE 20. - SEVERABILITY 
Should any article, section or provision of this regulation be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such action shall not affect the validity of the resolution as a whole or any part thereof other than the part so declared to be invalid, each article, clause and provision hereof being declared severable. 
ARTICLE 21. - CONFLICTING ORDINANCES 
This is intended to be the comprehensive zoning resolution for the entire unincorporated area of Cherokee County and all other Zoning Ordinances and Cherokee County Rules and Regulations in conflict herewith are hereby repealed, provided that nothing herein shall be construed as repealing or modifying the conditions of operation, conditions of site development accompanying those zoning approvals or use permits issued under previous zoning approvals or use permits issued under previous zoning resolutions; however, modification or repeal of these pact conditions of approval may be accomplished through application to the planning commission. 
ARTICLE 22. - EFFECTIVE DATE 
The effective date if this resolution shall be the date of passage of the County Commission of Cherokee County, Georgia. 
ARTICLE 23. - CONSERVATION DESIGN COMMUNITY[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2009-Z-001, adopted Sept. 15, 2009, amended Art. 23, in effect deleting Art. 23 and enacting a new Art. 23 to read as set out herein. Former Art. 23 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2005-Z-001, adopted Apr. 19, 2005. 

23.1 - Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this ordinance to provide flexibility in ensuring preservation of greenspace within a master-planned residential development. A conservation design community design preserves greenspace while maintaining the prorated density of residential units for the overall site area. Neutral density is achieved by allowing smaller individual-owned residential lots in neighborhoods that include or are adjacent to aesthetically and ecologically important areas. The goal of the design process is to identify and set aside conservation areas prior to the delineation of transportation and residential pod layouts. Greenspace areas include wetlands, stream buffer zones, woodlands, playing fields, and meadows, depending on the resources of the land. 
The intent of the conservation design community regulations is to: 
1.  Preserve significant areas of land for ecological, recreational, and agricultural purposes in perpetuity; 
2.  Encourage more efficient development of land consistent with public health, safety, and general welfare; 
3.  Afford greater flexibility of design and placement of buildings and structures; 
4.  Preserve and protect exceptional terrain, natural beauty, and sites of historic interest from inconsequential placement of homes, roadways, utilities, and appurtenances; 
5.  Preserve the Etowah River and its streams and tributaries as natural resources; 
6.  Prevent flooding, erosion, and water pollution, and protect the quality and quantity of drinking water; 
7.  Preserve wetlands, aquifers, topographical, or soil features, marine and wildlife habitat; and other features having conservation values, including views, vistas, and indigenous vegetation; and 
8.  Promote a less sprawling form of development (within the site of development). 
(Ord. No. 009-Z-001, 9-15-09) 
23.2 - General regulations. 
A.  Applicability of regulations. In order to achieve the purposes described in section 23.1, the conservation design community is available as a use by right in the single-family residential (R-60, R-40, R-30, R-20, R-15) zoning districts. Applicants utilizing the conservation design community regulations shall comply with all other provisions of the Cherokee County Zoning Ordinance and all other applicable laws, except those that are incompatible with the provisions contained herein. 
1.  Conservation design community in AG and R-80: The AG Agricultural zoning district permits a wide array of uses, some of which may conflict with the enjoyment of ones property as a residential use. The R-80 Estate Residential district is most often found in areas in transition from agricultural to residential development and are considered appropriate for low density residential development. The board of commissioners shall approve a site plan for a conservation design community on property zoned AG or R-80 upon finding the proposed subdivision is compatible or consistent with development surrounding the proposed subdivision. The regulations in this chapter shall be applicable upon approval of the site plan by the board of commissioners. The following shall outline the process of consideration of a conservation design community in AG or R-80: 
i.  Upon submitting an application for a conservation design community in an AG or R-80 zoning district, the applicant shall post a notice on the subject property announcing an application for a conservation design community has been received by the county for consideration. 
ii.  The applicant shall host a public participation meeting as outlined in chapter 18 of the Cherokee County Zoning Ordinance, and a list of participants to such meeting shall be submitted to the county. 
iii.  A 30-day "public comment" period shall be required after receipt by the county of the application for a conservation design community on AG or R-80 zoned property. The public comment period shall begin upon the determination by the county that the applicant has submitted all documents required by this article for a conservation design community. All parties wishing to comment shall submit their comments via US mail or e-mail to the county. 
iv.  Upon the expiration of the public comment period, the county shall place the application for a conservation design community on AG or R-80 property on the next available agenda of the board of commissioners. At their meeting, the board of commissioners shall consider the application for approval where the plan meets the criteria for a conservation design community per this article. 
B.  Ownership of development site. The tract of land to be designed as a conservation design community may be held in single ownership or in multiple ownership. However when a tract is held in multiple ownership, it shall be planned as a single development, and developed according to a single plan. 
1.  Phased development: Unless approved under a concept/preliminary plan as outlined herein, each phase of a conservation design community must meet the density criteria established herein and may not exceed the density for the zoning district. 
2.  Proof of ownership: The developer of a conservation design community must provide documentation of ownership of all land to be developed as a conservation design community prior to approval of a land disturbance permit for the development. Only lands that may be considered for development as a conservation design community are those lands owned by the applicant for the land disturbance permit. 
C.  Site suitability. As evidenced by the existing resources/site analysis map, the conservation design community concept/preliminary plan, and the final plat, the tract incorporating the conservation design community shall be suitable for supporting development in terms of environmental conditions, size, and configuration as determined herein. 
D.  Sensitive area disturbance. The proposed design shall minimize disturbance of environmentally sensitive areas, as shown on the existing resources/site analysis map. Lands within the 100-year floodplain, designated as wetlands, having slopes in excess of 35 percent, and riparian buffers adjacent to streams constitute such environmentally sensitive areas. Demonstration by the applicant that these features shall be protected by the proposed application shall be prerequisite to consideration and approval of the conservation design community concept/preliminary plan and subsequent final plat. 
E.  Minor subdivisions prohibited. Minor subdivisions, whereby an original tract of land may be divided into not more than five individual tracts, are not eligible to be developed per the conservation regulations contained herein. Only major subdivisions, those subdivisions of land resulting in the creation of six or more lots, are permissible to be developed according to the conservation design community regulations outlined in this article. 
F.  Effect of concept/preliminary plan. Approval of the concept/preliminary plan shall bind all land within the plan to the requirements and conditions of the conservation design community regulations. Should the developer or land owner subsequently sell or otherwise transfer their interest in the property, all heirs and assigns shall be bound to the approved concept/preliminary plan, unless amended by and/or approved by the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 2009-Z-001, 9-15-09) 
23.3 - Use regulations. 
Land planned as a conservation design community may be used for the following purposes: 
A.  Single-family detached dwellings; 
B.  Conservation areas as specified herein; 
C.  The following non-residential uses in accordance with standards specified in this article: 
1.  Agricultural uses, including horticultural, wholesale nurseries, and the raising of crops, and accessory structures; 
2.  Woodlots, arboreta, and other sivicultural uses; 
3.  Woodland preserve, game preserve, wildlife sanctuary, or other similar conservation use; 
4.  Municipal or public uses; public park or recreation area owned and operated by a public or private non-profit agency; governmental or public utility building or use, not to include business facilities, storage of materials, trucking or repair facilities, the housing of repair crews, private or municipal sanitary landfills. 
D.  Accessory uses shall be permitted on the same lot with and customarily incidental to any permitted use and not conducted as an independent principal use. 
(Ord. No. 2009-Z-001, 9-15-09) 
23.4 - Dimensional standards and determination of allowed lots. 
23.4-1. Maximum allowed lots. The number of lots allowed shall be density neutral. "Density neutral" is defined as follows. 
The number of lots in a conservation design community will not exceed the number of lots that can be reasonably created within a conventional subdivision at the same site location. 
1.  One method to determine the number of lots is to establish a plan for a conventional subdivision at that site. The conventional plan does not have to meet formal requirements for a site design plan, but must be capable of being constructed given the site features and all applicable regulations. The conventional subdivision plan is required to be reviewed by county staff, prior to submitting a preliminary conservation design community to verify such plan is a viable representation of the development potential as a conventional design. 
2.  The second method to determine the number of lots is to deduct the value of constrained lands (section 23.4-2) from the gross tract acreage. The resulting net tract acreage is then multiplied by the zoning district DUA. 
3.  The greater of (1) or (2) is the "maximum allowed lots " in the conservation design community. 
23.4-2. Conservation design community allowed lots. The number of lots allowed in a conservation design community shall be determined as follows. 
1.  Determine constrained lands. 
Constrained lands = Total area of land in items a—d multiplied by 50 percent, plus 100 percemt of area of land in e—f. 
a.  Slopes over 35 percent of at least 5,000 square feet contiguous area. 
b.  The 100-year floodplain. 
c.  Wetlands that meet the definition of the Army Corps of Engineers pursuant to the Clean Water Act. 
d.  Area of land in stream buffers as required by federal, state or local regulations. 
e.  Area of land designated for construction of roads and associated ROW. 
f.  Area of all impervious surfaces associated with amenities, including but not limited to parking areas, tennis courts, swimming pools, clubhouses and other impervious surfaces. 
2.  Net tract acreage: Once the area of constrained lands has been calculated, the net tract acreage is calculated by subtracting the area of constrained lands from the gross tract acreage of the property to be developed as a conservation design community. 
3.  Allowed lots by conservation design community: The number of allowed lots is determined by multiplying net tract acreage times dwelling units acre. The resulting allowed lots cannot exceed the maximum allowed lots in subsection 23.4-1(3). 
4.  Lot sizes: Once the number of allowed lots is determined, up to 20 percent of the total number of lots to be built in AG, R-80, R-60, R-40, R-30 and ten percent of the lots to be built in R-20 and R-15 may be platted as small as 25 percent of the standard district lot size. All other lots must be as large or larger than the average lot size for the zoning district found in table 23-1. The smallest allowable lot size is 5,000 square feet, or 25 percent of the zoning district minimum lot size whichever is greater. There is no maximum lot size. 
Table 23-1: Conservation Design Community Density and Lot Size Requirements 

 
23.4-3 Area and yard requirements; locations and structures. 
23.4-3.1 Placement. The placement of all principal buildings shall provide for safe, quiet, and harmonious grouping as well as adequate privacy by providing adequate front, side, and rear yards as shown in table 23-2. 
a.  There shall be a minimum building separation requirement of 15 feet between structures. At no time shall any building be constructed where the setback from a side or rear property line is less than the width of the eaves of the structure or three feet whichever is greater. 
b.  The final plat for a conservation design community shall display on each and every lot a building envelope that meets or exceeds the area sufficient to contain the minimum building footprint to be constructed on the lot. 
Table 23-2: Conservation Design Community Setback Requirements 

 
(Ord. No. 2009-Z-001, 9-15-2009; Ord. No. 2014-O-001, Exh. A, 8-19-14) 
23.5 Conservation - community design standards. 
A.  House lots shall not encroach upon primary conservation areas, and their layout shall respect secondary conservation areas, as described herein. 
B.  All new dwellings shall meet the following building setback requirements: 
1.  From all external road rights-of-way: ..... 100 feet 
2.  From all tract boundaries: ..... 75 feet 
3.  From all cropland or pasture land: ..... 75 feet 
a.  Cropland shall be defined as tracts of land of five acres or greater, which is used for growing cultivated plants or agricultural produce, such as grain, vegetables, or fruit; or which could be fallow, if such inactivity is a part of the agricultural production process being exercised on the land and such inactivity has not existed for more than two years. Such use of land must be present and active. Potential use of land as cropland does not qualify under this definition 
b.  Pasture land shall be defined as tracts of land of five acres or greater, on which grass or other vegetation is grown and eaten as food, and is set aside for use by domestic grazing animals. Such use of land must be present and active. Potential use of land as pasture does not qualify under this definition 
4.  From buildings or barnyards housing livestock: 75 feet. 
5.  Views of house lots from exterior road and abutting properties shall be minimized by the use of changes in topography, existing vegetation, or additional landscaping that meets landscaping requirements of the Zoning Ordinance or Development Regulations of Cherokee County. 
6.  House lots shall generally be accessed from interior streets rather than from roads bordering the tract. 
7.  At least three-quarters (¾ or 75 percent) of the lots should directly face, abut or be across the street from primary or secondary conservation areas. 
(Ord. No. 2009-Z-001, 9-15-09; Ord. No. 2014-O-001, Exh. A, 8-19-14) 
23.6 - Greenspace. 
"Greenspace" is defined as the undeveloped land resulting from reductions in the minimum size of lots set aside as permanently protected land which may be used as described herein. 
23.6-1. Standards to determine greenspace. 
A.  The minimum greenspace shall comprise at least 40 percent of the gross tract area. 
B.  At least ten percent of the greenspace shall consist of land that is suitable for building, as defined herein. 
C.  To the extent practicable, greenspace shall be preserved in larger, contiguous, and connected tracts so as to provide uninterrupted habitat. The greenspace should adjoin any neighboring areas of greenspace, other protected areas, and non-protected natural areas that would be candidates for inclusion as part of a future area of protected greenspace. 
23.6-2. Primary conservation areas. 
A.  Primary conservation areas are lands that serve important ecological purposes and possess beneficial environmental qualities contributing to the health of the local community. All land identified as primary conservation areas shall be undisturbed, except as provided herein. Primary conservation areas include: 
1.  The 100-year floodplain. 
2.  Riparian zones of at least 50-foot width on either side along all perennial and intermittent streams. 
3.  Riparian zones of at least 150-foot width on either side of the Etowah River Corridor or the Little River Corridor. 
4.  Slopes above 35 percent of at least 5,000 square feet contiguous area. 
5.  Wetlands as defined by state and/or federal regulations. 
6.  Populations of endangered or threatened species, or habitat for such species. 
B.  Value of primary conservation areas. Primary conservation areas form the core of the greenspace to be protected. Because primary conservation areas are sensitive environmental areas, Cherokee County requires such areas be permanently protected through the thoughtful design and protection instruments outlined herein. The total area of land identified as primary conservation areas shall be conserved and protected to the maximum amount and extent physically possible. 
23.6-3 Secondary conservation areas. 
A.  The following are considered secondary conservation areas and should be protected to the maximum extent feasible. 
1.  Important historic sites subject to approval indicating that these structures are compatible with the Cherokee Zoning Regulations. 
2.  Existing healthy, native forests of at least one acre contiguous area. 
3.  Individual existing healthy trees greater than 14 inches caliper measured at dbh. 
4.  Other significant natural features and scenic viewsheds such as ridge lines, peaks, and rock outcroppings, in particular those that can be seen from public roads. 
5.  Prime agricultural lands, as defined by the natural resource conservation service, of at least five acres contiguous area. 
6.  Existing trails that connect the tract to neighboring areas. 
7.  Archaeological sites, cemeteries, and burial grounds subject to the requirements of Article 24 Cemetery Preservation ordinance. 
8.  Buffers as outlined in Table 23-3 Minimum Exterior Boundary Buffer. 
B.  Value of secondary conservation areas. Secondary conservation areas are those areas within a property which contain other intrinsic qualities of value to the community. Secondary conservation areas are valued as supplemental area to the total conservation area of a conservation design community. To that end, Cherokee County requires secondary conservation areas to be protected to the maximum extent possible after all identified primary conservation areas have been protected. 
23.6-4 Reserved. 
23.6-5 Permitted uses of greenspace. Uses of greenspace may include the following: 
1.  Conservation of natural, archeological, or historical resources; 
2.  Meadows, woodlands, wetlands, wildlife corridors, game preserves, or similar conservation-oriented areas; 
3.  Walking or bicycle trails, provided they are constructed of permeable materials; 
4.  Passive recreation areas, such as open fields; 
5.  Landscaped stormwater management facilities, community wastewater disposal systems, provided that such facilities shall be located outside of primary conservation areas; 
6.  Other conservation-oriented uses compatible with the purposes of this article; 
7.  Community gardens. 
23.6-6 Prohibited uses of greenspace. Uses of greenspace may not include the following: 
1.  Roads, parking lots, and impervious surfaces, except as specifically authorized in this article; 
2.  Agricultural and forestry activities not conducted according to accepted best management practices; 
3.  Other activities as prohibited pursuant to a recorded legal instrument providing for permanent protection of the greenspace; and. 
4.  Golf courses. 
23.6-7 Septic systems, wells, and stormwater management systems. Easements will allow designated greenspace to be used for community sewer system drip lines, wells, and storm water management structures designed to promote on-site infiltration and/or treatment of runoff. Such intrusions shall not be allowed to encroach into an exterior buffer as outlined herein. 
23.6-8 Ownership, preservation, and maintenance of greenspace. Greenspace land shall be preserved and maintained solely for the purposes specified in section 23.1. The method for effectuating such preservation and maintenance shall be one of the following: 
A.  Establishment of a home owners association (HOA), to own and maintain the land in common for the greenspace purposes intended according to the following provisions: 
a.  With their application for a permit to develop a conservation design community, developers will create and submit documentation detailing the minimum requirements and structure for the HOA. 
b.  The HOA will maintain, pay taxes, and own the greenspace. 
c.  Membership in the HOA is mandatory for all homeowners, and dues are uniform. 
d.  The HOA will execute legally enforceable permanent conservation easement as described in section 23.6-9. 
e.  It is recommended that at least one member of the HOA should receive training in or be conversant in, wildlife habitat conservation, enhancement, and maintenance. 
f.  Each homeowner should be given site-specific information about indigenous habitat and diversity of species. 
g.  The HOA shall develop a long-term conservation plan for maintenance of common areas. This plan should include examples of environmentally friendly landscaping techniques for homeowners. 
B.  Dedication of legally described and platted "greenspace" to the Cherokee County Board of Commissioners at the discretion of and approval by the Cherokee County Board of Commissioners. 
C.  Dedication of legally described and platted "greenspace" to a land trust established in compliance with the requirements of Georgia law and shall be for conservation purposes. 
23.6-9 Legal instrument for permanent protection. The greenspace shall be protected in perpetuity by a binding legal instrument which shall be one of the following: 
A.  A permanent conservation easement in a form provided by the county, in favor of either: 
1.  A land trust or similar conservation-oriented non-profit organization with legal authority to accept such easements. The organization shall be bona fide and in perpetual existence and the conveyance instruments shall contain an appropriate provision for re-transfer in the event the organization becomes unable to carry out its functions; subject to the approval of the board of commissioners, or 
2.  A governmental entity with an interest in pursuing goals compatible with the purposes of this ordinance, subject to the approval of the board of commissioners. 
B.  All legal instruments used to permanently protect conservation areas platted within the conservation design community shall be executed by the owner developer and approved by the county attorney prior to approval of the final plat for the development. Upon approval of the final plat and the legal instruments for permanent protection of the conservation areas, the county will record said documents with the clerk of the superior court's office. All fees associated with the recordation of plats and legal instruments will be furnished by the developer of the conservation design community or their agent. 
(Ord. No. 2009-Z-001, 9-15-09) 
23.7 - Procedure. 
23.7-1  Pre-application meeting. A pre-application meeting is required between the applicant, the site designer and the planning staff where the site designer has not submitted a conservation design community designed under these regulations prior to the effective date. Subsequent pre-application meetings are recommended but are at the discretion of the site designer. The purpose of the pre-application meeting is to introduce the applicant to the county's zoning and subdivision regulations and procedures, to discuss the applicant's objectives and to schedule site inspections, additional meetings, and plan submissions. Applicants must present the existing resources/site analysis map at this meeting. 
23.7-2  Existing resource/site analysis map. The purpose of the existing resources/site analysis map is to familiarize county staff and officials with existing site conditions. This map shall be provided prior to any site inspection and shall form the basis for the development design as shown on the conceptual preliminary plan. The applicant shall prepare the existing resource/site analysis map, the purpose of which is to ensure that the important site features have been adequately identified prior to the creation of the site design, and that the proposed greenspace will meet the requirements of this article. The existing resource/site analysis map shall include the following features: 
• Property boundaries 
• All streams (perennial and intermittent), rivers, lakes, wetlands and other hydrologic features 
• Topographic contours of no less than ten-foot intervals 
• All primary and secondary conservation areas labeled by type, as described in this article 
• Vegetation characteristics 
• Groundwater recharge areas 
• Significant wildlife habitats, if known 
• Historic, archeological, and cultural features 
• General soil types 
• The planned location of protected greenspace 
• Existing roads and structures 
• Potential connections with existing greenspace and trails 
• Identification of surrounding property characteristics and land use 
23.7-2.1  Review of existing resource map. The existing resources map shall be reviewed by the planning director or his/her designee. If found inadequate by the reviewer, the reviewer shall provide in writing the reasons for its inadequacy, and the existing resources map shall not be accepted until adequate changes are made. 
23.7-3  Site inspection. After preparing the existing resources map, applicants must arrange for a site inspection of the property by the planning staff and other county officials and shall distribute copies of such site analysis plan at this on-site meeting. The purpose of the site visit is to familiarize local officials with the property's existing conditions and special features, to identify potential site design issues, and to provide an informal opportunity to discuss site design concepts, including the general layout of the designated greenspace lands and potential locations for proposed buildings and street alignments. Comments made by local officials or staff and consultants shall be interpreted as being only suggestive. It shall be understood by all parties that no formal recommendations can be offered, and no official decisions can be made at the site inspection. 
23.7-4  Sketch plan submission. 
A.  Purpose. It is strongly recommended that a sketch plan be submitted as a diagrammatic basis for informal discussion with the local officials regarding the design of a proposed subdivision or land development. The purpose of a sketch plan submission is to provide a mechanism to help applicants and local officials develop a better understanding of the property and to help establish an overall design approach that respects its special or noteworthy features while providing for the density permitted under the zoning ordinance. 
B.  Suggested information. To provide a full understanding of the site's potential and to facilitate the most effective exchange with the planning staff and other officials, the sketch plan should include the information listed below. Many of these items can be taken from the existing resources/site analysis map and in fact the diagrammatic sketch plan may be prepared as a simple overlay sheet placed on top of the existing resources/site analysis map. 
1.  Name and address of the legal owner, the equitable owner, and/or the applicant; 
2.  Name and address of the professional engineer, surveyor, planner, architect, landscape architect, or the site designer responsible for preparing the plan; 
3.  Graphic scale (not greater than one inch = 200 feet, however, dimensions on plan need not be exact) and north arrow; 
4.  Approximate tract boundaries, sufficient to locate the tract on a map of the community; 
5.  Location map; 
6.  Zoning district; 
7.  Streets on and adjacent to the tract (both existing and proposed); 
8.  100-year floodplain limits, and approximate location of wetlands, if any; 
9.  Topographic, physical and cultural features including fields, pastures, meadows, wooded areas, trees with a diameter of 15 inches or more, hedgerows and other significant vegetation, steep slopes (greater than 35 percent), rock outcrops, soil types, ponds, ditches, drains, dumps, storage tanks, streams within 200 feet of tract, existing ROW and easements, and cultural features such as all structures, foundations, walls, wells, trails, and abandoned roads; 
10.  Schematic layout indicating a general concept for land conservation and development ("bubble" format is acceptable for this delineation); 
11.  Proposed general street and lot layout; 
12.  In the case of land development plans, proposed location of buildings and major structures, parking areas and other improvements; and 
13.  General description of proposed method of water supply, sewage disposal, and stormwater management. 
23.7-5  Concept/preliminary plan. Preparation and submission of the concept/preliminary plan shall follow the process and procedure outlined in article 5.5-3 of the Cherokee County Zoning Ordinance adopted January 15, 2002 and amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 2009-Z-001, 9-15-09) 
23.8 - Four step design process. 
All concept/preliminary plans for conservation design communities shall include documentation of a four step design process in determining the layout of proposed greenspace lands, house sites, streets, and lot lines as described below. 
A.  Step 1: Delineation of greenspace lands. 
1.  The minimum percentage and acreage of required greenspace lands shall be calculated by the applicant and submitted as part of the sketch plan or concept/preliminary plan in accordance with this article. Greenspace lands shall include all primary conservation areas and those parts of the secondary conservation areas, as defined herein, to meet the terms of this article. 
2.  Proposed greenspace lands shall be designated using the existing resource/site analysis map as a base map. 
3.  In delineating secondary conservation areas, the applicant shall consult with planning staff on the prioritization of natural and cultural resources on the tract in terms of their highest to least suitability for inclusion in the proposed greenspace. 
4.  Using the priorities and practical considerations given to the tract's configuration by planning staff, its context in relation to resource areas on adjoining and neighboring properties, and the applicants subdivision objectives, secondary conservation areas shall be delineated to meet at least the minimum area percentage requirements for greenspace lands and in a manner clearly indicating their boundaries as well as the types of resources included within them. 
B.  Step 2: Location of house sites. 
1.  Potential house sites shall be tentatively located using the proposed greenspace lands as a base map as well as other relevant data on the existing resources map such as topography and soils. House sites should be located not closer than 100 feet from primary conservation areas and 50 feet from secondary conservation areas, taking into consideration the potential negative impacts of residential development on such areas as well as the potential positive benefits of such locations to provide attractive views and visual settings for residences. 
C.  Step 3: Alignment of streets and trails. 
1.  Upon designating the house sites, a street plan shall be designed to provide vehicular access to each house, complying with the standards for road design in the Cherokee County Development Regulations and bearing a logical relationship to topographic conditions. 
D.  Step 4: Drawing in the lot lines. 
1.  Upon completion of the preceding three steps, lot lines are drawn as required to delineate the boundaries of individual residential lots. Lot lines are drawn as the last step. 
(Ord. No. 2009-Z-001, 9-15-09) 
23.9 - Road specification. 
Roads for the conservation design community shall follow road construction guidelines consistent with those set forth in the Cherokee County Development Regulations, chapter 1, Development Ordinance, section 4.05. The design of streets, within the conservation design community, and where possible and with the approval of the county engineer,: 
1.  Minimize the number of cul-de-sac streets by providing more than one entrance to the development and interconnect streets as much as possible. 
2.  For cul-de-sac streets, minimize the amount of impervious surface by limiting the internal turning radius to 35 feet (Center for watershed protection, cited in ARC document) and the width of the paved lane to 16 feet. Use grass and vegetation for the inner circle of turn-arounds, rather than paving the entire area. Declare the HOA responsible for the maintenance of the grassy area in the neighborhood bylaws. 
3.  Omit curbs wherever appropriate. 
4.  As an alternative to curbs and gutters, allow runoff from roofs and pavements to pass immediately through grass swales or infiltration basins. Use plant material that will absorb rainwater and act as a natural filter for oil and pollution. 
5.  Provide marked, paved paths for non-vehicular traffic within the development and connecting to neighboring residential and commercial areas. 
(Ord. No. 2009-Z-001, 9-15-09) 
23.10 - Buffer requirement. 
Where property to be developed as a conservation design community abuts property not a part of the conservation design community, the conservation design community shall have a buffer along the exterior property boundary. The buffer shall be undisturbed except as specifically allowed herein, and of sufficient volume to provide a year round opaque screening. Where no vegetation exists within the required buffer area, or where existing vegetation does not provide a sufficient screen, and where planting of native vegetation will provide a screening meeting the requirements of this section, the buffer will be planted with such vegetation to meet the intent of this section. 
A.  Mandatory stormwater structures. Not withstanding other provisions to the contrary ,and where the only practical place upon the tract of land being developed as a conservation design community to locate a stormwater facility serving to contain and control the stormwater generated from the conservation design community is within the required buffer, the county engineer shall permit such a structure to be built within the required buffer. The area devoted to the installation of the stormwater structure may not be used to satisfy the greenspace requirement for the development. 
Where stormwater structures are allowed within the buffer, the developer shall plant sufficient vegetative material to effectively screen the location of such structure and obscure such structure from view. All walls or other hard surfaces of such structure shall be painted a muted earth-tone color or shall be faced with other materials to further conceal such structure from view. 
B.  Trails. Where trails are planned to be provided, such trails may be constructed within the buffer area. The path through the buffer area containing such trail may be no wider than eight feet. All clearing associated with the construction of such path shall be contained within the eight feet. If such trails are planned as a part of the development, the trails must be located within the first 25 percent of the buffer furthest from the exterior boundary line for the subdivision but in no event shall be within 30 feet of said exterior boundary line. 
23.10-1 Size of buffer. The size of the exterior buffer is determined by the size of the lot proposed adjacent to the exterior boundary for the conservation design community. (see Table 23-3 Minimum Exterior Boundary Buffer) 
23.10-2 Buffer counts toward greenspace requirement. The area of land designated to the exterior boundary buffer may be used to satisfy the minimum required greenspace for the development. The buffer area shall not be included as a part of any platted residential lot within the subdivision. This buffer shall be considered a secondary conservation area unless a feature of the buffer qualifies as primary conservation area as defined herein. Such buffer shall be designated as part of the greenspace for the subdivision and be permanently protected in accordance with the requirements contained herein. 
Table 23-3 Minimum Exterior Boundary Buffer 

 
Note: District Avg. Lot Size is found in Table 23-1 Conservation Design Community Density and Lot Size Requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2014-O-001, Exh. A, 8-19-14) 
APPENDIX A: - Conservation Design Community Process Flow Chart 

(Ord. No. 2009-Z-001, 9-15-2009) 
ARTICLE 24. - CEMETERY ESTABLISHMENT AND PRESERVATION[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2012-Z-002, adopted July 24, 2012, repealed the former Art. 24, §§ 24.1—24.16, and enacted a new Art. 24 as set out herein. The former Art. 24 pertained to cemetery preservation and derived from Ord. No. 99-O-30, adopted Sept. 28, 1999; and Ord. No. 2001-O-007, adopted Mar. 13, 2001. 

24.1 - Purpose and intent. 
Considering the fact that this county has been richly blessed with the heritage and history of its people who are now deceased; that many of these people, in their time, were native pioneers of the county who have played an integral part in making this county what it is today; that many of those who have passed on have been memorialized with resting places in cemeteries, graveyards, and burial grounds that have been abandoned, desecrated, neglected, unmarked, and are threatened by unknowing development; and that such abandoned, desecrated, neglected, and unmarked cemeteries, graveyards, and burial grounds are not a befitting tribute to such honorable citizens of the past, therefore, it is the desire of the board of commissioners of Cherokee County to provide for the preservation, protection, and maintenance of all such family and community cemeteries, graveyards, and burial grounds. 
(Ord. No. 2012-Z-002, Att., 7-24-12) 
24.2 - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this article, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandoned cemetery. A cemetery which shows signs of neglect, including, without limitation, the unchecked growth of vegetation, repeated and unchecked acts of vandalism, or the disintegration of grave markers or boundaries and for which no person can be found who is legally responsible and financially capable of the upkeep of such cemetery. 
Archaeologist. Any person who is a member of or meets the criteria for membership in the Society of Professional Archaeologists and can demonstrate experience in the excavation and interpretation of human graves. 
Burial ground. An area dedicated to and used for interment of human remains. The fact that the area was used for burial purposes shall be evidence that it was set aside for burial purposes. 
Burial object. Any item reasonably believed to have been intentionally placed with the human remains at the time of burial or interment or any memorial, tombstone, grave marker or shrine which may have been added subsequent to interment. Such terms also mean any inscribed or uninscribed marker, coping, curbing, enclosure, fencing, pavement, shelter, well, stoneware, pottery, or other grave object erected or deposited incident to or subsequent to interment. 
CCCPC. The Cherokee County Cemetery Preservation Committee. 
Cemetery. A place dedicated to and used, or intended to be used, for permanent interment of human remains. A cemetery may contain land or earth interments; mausoleum, a vault, crypt interments; a columbarium or other structure or place used or intended to be used for the inurnment of cremated human remains; or any combination of one or more of such structures or places. 
County coroner. A person elected pursuant to law as county coroner. 
Descendant. A person or group of persons related to a deceased human by blood or adoption in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 19-1-1 et seq., as amended. 
Family burial ground. A defined plot of land upon which are located not more than approximately 20 graves. 
Genealogist. A person who traces or studies the descent of persons or families and prepares a probative record of such descent. 
Human remains. The bodies of deceased human beings in any stage of decomposition, including cremated remains. 
Marker. A small individual memorial placed at either the head or foot of a grave. This is sometimes referred to as a headstone or footstone. 
Notifying. To develop and implement a plan pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-72-5, as amended. 
Preserve and protect. To keep safe from destruction, peril, or other adversity and may include the placement, of signs, markers, fencing, or other such appropriate features so as to identify the site as a cemetery or burial ground and so as to aid in the preservation and protection of such cemetery or burial ground. 
Private cemetery. A cemetery used only by a small segment of a community or by a family, where burials or interments of human remains are made, in which sales or transfers of interment rights or burial plots are not made to the public and in which not more than 20 interments or burials occur annually. Generally, the private cemetery will not exceed ten acres in area. 
Public cemetery. A cemetery open for use by the community at large, where burials or interments of human remains are made, in which sales or transfers of interment rights or burial plots are made available to the public and in which there is no limit on the internments or burials annually. Cemeteries established after the effective date of this ordinance will donate seven percent of the total available burial sites to the county for indigent burials. 
(Ord. No. 2012-Z-002, Att., 7-24-12) 
24.3 - Authority and delegation. 
Cherokee County Cemetery Preservation Committee (CCCPC). The CCCPC shall maintain a record and inventory of the locations of all cemeteries established and permitted pursuant to this article, this includes maintaining original plat of surveys of each new cemetery approved under this code. The committee is also responsible for helping to set policy in the county concerning cemeteries and engaging in public education concerning the importance of cemetery preservation. 
County coroner. The county coroner is responsible for determining the boundaries of cemeteries discovered during the course of land disturbance. 
Planning director. The director of planning and land use or designee shall be responsible for reviewing and approving permits for new cemeteries and making recommendations to the board of commissioners on cemetery preservation applications. 
(Ord. No. 2012-Z-002, Att., 7-24-12) 
24.4 - Enforcement officers. 
All law enforcement agencies, officers, certified peace officers, and/or officials of the state, or any county code enforcement officer, are hereby authorized, empowered, and directed to enforce compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 2012-Z-002, Att., 7-24-12) 
24.5 - Penalties for violations. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a cemetery in the unincorporated area of the county unless done so in compliance with the provisions of this section. 
(1)  Violators of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to the penalties set forth in article 19 - remedies and enforcement of this code. 
(2)  Any violation of the provisions of this article by any person is hereby deemed to be a violation of a county ordinance and punishable in the magistrate court of Cherokee County. The zoning administrator, the county's code enforcement personnel, or any law enforcement officer of the county is hereby authorized and directed, upon discovery of any violation of any provision of this article, to issue a citation for the violator to appear before the appropriate court on a day and time certain to answer to the misdemeanor charges. 
(3)  In addition to any other remedy provided in this article, the county may seek injunctive relief to cease and remove any violations of this article in the appropriate court against the appropriate person or entity. 
(4)  Any violation of this article is hereby deemed to be a continuing nuisance and may be abated by an application for injunction or other proceedings allowed by law in the appropriate court. 
(Ord. No. 2012-Z-002, Att., 7-24-12) 
24.6 - Burials. 
It shall be unlawful for any undertaker or any other person to bury or cause to be buried, or to in any manner aid or assist in the burial of the dead body of any human being in any cemetery or location in the unincorporated area of the county other than an authorized public cemetery or a private cemetery established and approved pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2012-Z-002, Att., 7-24-12) 
24.7 - Operation. 
It shall be the sole responsibility and duty of the owner, creator, trust or other legal entity which shall own, supervise or have control of a cemetery to ensure that the same shall not at any time constitute a health hazard or be or constitute a nuisance. The owner, creator, trust or other legal entity, which shall own, supervise or have control of a cemetery shall have the right and responsibility of creating rules and regulations necessary to or appropriate for the operation of such cemetery. 
(Ord. No. 2012-Z-002, Att., 7-24-12) 
24.8 - Creation of nuisances. 
No owner, creator, trust or other legal entity which shall own, supervise or have control of a cemetery shall allow such cemetery to accumulate weeds, trash, junk, filth, or other unsanitary or unsafe conditions so as to create a public health hazard or a general nuisance to those persons residing in the vicinity. 
(Ord. No. 2012-Z-002, Att., 7-24-12) 
24.9 - Cemetery creation requirements. 
(a)  Permits. No cemetery shall be allowed in the unincorporated area of Cherokee County without the owner, creator, trust or other legal entity having first applied for and obtained from the planning and land use department, a permit approving the operation thereof. In addition to any other requirements set forth in this chapter, no permit will be granted without compliance with the following: 
(1)  Survey. A plat of survey of the cemetery prepared by a state-registered land surveyor shall be submitted to the planning and land use department along with the application. Upon approval of the survey by planning and land use, the applicant shall file, or cause to have filed, two signed original copies of the survey with the superior court clerk for recording. 
(2)  Minimum area. No cemetery shall be approved unless the survey provided for in this chapter indicates that the cemetery contains not less than two acres, the entire area of which shall be dedicated to and used only for cemetery purposes. 
(3)  Land use compatibility. The location of the proposed cemetery is to be compatible with adjacent land uses, existing or proposed highways and any other elements or factors deemed by the county to affect the public health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the area surrounding the proposed location, including but not limited to the effect on aquifers, wells and ground water, the potential for pollution of nearby streams, lakes and other waters and the suitability of the soil composition for such use. Under no circumstances shall a cemetery be allowed within 250 feet from any known well, aquifer, lake or stream which in the determination of EPD requires a stream buffer. 
(4)  Buffer area. The proposed location must contain a buffer area that is landscaped with trees and/or shrubbery on all sides of the site that is identified on the survey and is not less than ten feet in width. 
(5)  Flood prevention. No cemetery shall lie in whole or in part within a floodplain and certification of the same must be provided upon the survey shown on the latest FEMA flood maps. 
(6)  Identification of boundaries. The boundaries of the proposed cemetery must be clearly marked and delineated by concrete or metal pins or other permanent means of identification. No burials shall be permitted within 50 feet of adjacent property lines. 
(7)  Ingress and egress. Adequate access, ingress and egress to and from the cemetery must be available by public road or private drive. 
(b)  Additional requirements. 
(1)  Fencing shall be installed around the perimeter of the cemetery of sufficient height and strength to keep dogs and wild animals from accessing the cemetery. 
(2)  Any land disturbances in the construction of a cemetery must be subject to all sediment erosion and ground water run-off requirements applicable to other development projects as set forth in the ordinances and regulations of Cherokee County, Georgia. 
(3)  All graves must be marked with an appropriate marker as defined herein that will allow law enforcement authorities to locate graves if necessary for any lawful purposes after interment. 
(4)  All cemeteries shall be subject to the requirements of state law and regulations in effect or as they may exist in the future with regard to perpetual care, re-interment of remains and any such other conditions as may require remediation. 
(5)  All human remains shall be buried in receptacles meeting state standards to protect against contamination of ground water, wells, and aquifers. 
(6)  No human remains shall be buried less than the depth that is customarily used in the funeral industry in Georgia and in accordance with minimum standards for interment as may be adopted by the Secretary of State. 
(7)  Remains of persons who die from communicable diseases must be buried by and under the supervision of a licensed funeral director in accordance with the rules and regulations of the State Funeral Service Board. 
(8)  Human remains must be buried before they begin to decompose as evidenced by odor, or create a danger to the health, safety and welfare of others. 
(c)  Health department approval. The approval of the proposed cemetery must be obtained from the Cherokee County Health Department and submitted with the application. 
(d)  Appeal from denial. Appeals from the denial of a permit authorized by this section shall be to the board of commissioners of Cherokee County. 
(e)  Exemption. Any cemetery which as of the effective date of this ordinance has received all necessary state, local and federal permits, has otherwise met all legal requirements to operate, is fully operational and is lawfully receiving human remains for burial, shall be exempt from the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2012-Z-002, Att., 7-24-12) 
24.10 - Cemetery discovery and preservation. 
(a)  Exemption for identification of burial grounds. The county coroner is exempt from the requirements of this article for the purposes of identification of burial grounds by probing, magnetometer, or such other processes recognized by the archaeological community. 
(b)  Notification of disturbed burial ground. 
(1)  Any person who knows or has reason to know that a human burial is being disturbed, destroyed, defaced, mutilated, removed, excavated, or exposed shall immediately notify the local law enforcement agency with jurisdiction in the area where the burial ground is located. 
(2)  Any law enforcement agency, county department, or other source which finds evidence or receives a report that a burial ground has been located or disturbed shall notify the county coroner and the CCCPC. 
(3)  When human remains are discovered, all land disturbing activities that may affect a burial ground shall immediately cease and the discovering party shall notify the local law enforcement agency and the medical examiner of the discovery. Within 48 hours, the medical examiner and local law enforcement shall determine whether or not the grave is part of a cemetery. If it is determined that the grave is part of a cemetery, then the county coroner shall undertake efforts to identify and preserve the burial ground. The property owner shall also be required to run an ad in the legal section of the Cherokee County legal organ to notify any interested parties of the cemetery discovery. If it is determined that it is not a cemetery site, then the local law enforcement agency, in conjunction with the medical examiner, shall be responsible for proper disposition of the remains. Once the county coroner has established the approximate boundaries of the burial ground, there shall be established a protective buffer not less than 50 feet and a six-foot high chain link fence with proper access from the development to the cemetery provided. An appeal of this determination may be made to the zoning board of appeals. No land disturbing activity shall resume without the express written authorization from the county coroner or his designee. 
(4)  When the buffer requirement shall apply to a cemetery developed in connection with a church; the buffer requirement shall extend from the property line of the church property. 
(5)  The above requirement shall not apply for those residential lots established for legacy purposes. 
(c)  Prohibited acts. 
(1)  It shall be a violation of this article to willfully disturb, destroy, deface, mutilate, remove, excavate or expose a burial place without first obtaining a permit pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-72-1 et seq., or as it may be amended from time to time, and following the requirements of this article. 
(2)  It shall be a violation of this article to fail to report the discovery of human remains or to notify the local authority of the disturbance of a burial ground. 
(3)  It shall be a violation of this article should any person or entity seeking a permit to disturb a burial place pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-72-1 et seq., as may be amended from time to time, and not follow the provisions of this article. 
(4)  It shall be a violation of this article for any person or entity to fail to comply with the provisions of an approved permit. 
(d)  Cemetery preservation application. Any person or entity seeking a permit to develop land on which a cemetery is located pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-72-4 shall first comply with the following: 
(1)  An application shall be filed with the planning and land use department including the following information: 
a.  Evidence of ownership of the land on which the cemetery or burial ground is located in the form of a legal opinion based upon a title search. 
b.  A report prepared by an archaeologist stating the number of graves believed to be present and their locations such as can be determined from the use of minimally invasive investigation techniques, including remote sensing methods and the use of metal probes, which activities shall not require a permit. 
c.  A survey prepared by or under the direction of a registered surveyor showing the location and boundaries of the cemetery or burial ground based on an archaeologist's report. 
d.  A plan prepared by a genealogist for identifying and notifying the descendants of those buried or believed to be buried in such cemetery. 
e.  A proposal for mitigation or avoidance of the effects of the planned activity on the cemetery or burial ground. If the proposal includes relocation of any human remains or burial objects, the proposal shall specify: 
1.  The method of disinterment; 
2.  The location and method of disposition of the remains; 
3.  The approximate cost of the process; and 
4.  The approximate number of graves affected. 
(e)  Cemetery preservation process. 
(1)  The application shall be submitted to the planning director for review and recommendations. The planning director shall be charged with making recommendations regarding the sufficiency of the application submitted as to the following: 
a.  Notice of descendants. 
b.  The plan for mitigation and avoidance. 
c.  The disturbance and adverse effects on the cemetery or burial ground. 
d.  The survey of the cemetery. 
e.  The plans for disinterment and reinterment. 
The planning director may consult with any county staff, committees or individuals that might have an interest in the application in order to prepare the recommendations. 
(2)  The planning director shall make a written recommendation within 30 days to the board of commissioners or the superior court of the county, whichever may have jurisdiction. 
(3)  Within 15 days after the board of commissioners is satisfied that all reasonable efforts has been made to notify descendants, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 36-72-6, the board of commissioners shall schedule a public hearing at which any interested party or citizen may appear and be given an opportunity to be heard. In addition to the notice required by O.C.G.A. § 36-72-6, notice of the public hearing shall be advertised in the legal organ of the county once a week for two consecutive weeks immediately preceding the week in which the hearing is held. The applicant shall be required to post notice signs at the nearest public road and the burial ground not less than 60 days prior to a public hearing to be conducted by the board of commissioners. 
(4)  Within 30 days after the conclusion of the public hearing, the board of commissioners of Cherokee County shall notify the applicant in writing of its decision. The board of commissioners shall have the authority to deny the application, with written reasons therefore, to issue a permit adopting the application in whole or in part, or to issue a permit, which may include additional requirements to mitigate the proposed activity's adverse effects on the cemetery or burial ground, including, but not limited to, relocation of the proposed project, reservation of the cemetery or burial ground as an undeveloped area within the proposed development or use of land, and respectful disinterment and proper disposition of the human remains. The board of commissioners may adopt the applicant's proposal for mitigation. 
(5)  The board of commissioners shall consider the following in making its determination: 
— The presumption in favor of leaving the cemetery or burial ground undisturbed. 
— The concerns and comments of any descendants of those buried in the burial ground or cemetery and any other interested parties. 
— The economic and other costs of mitigation. 
— The adequacy of the applicant's plans for disinterment and proper disposition of any human remains or burial objects. 
— The balancing of the applicant's plans for disinterment with the public's and any descendant's interest in the value of the undisturbed cultural and natural environment. 
— Any other compelling factors which the governing authority deems relevant. 
(6)  Should any applicant or descendant be dissatisfied with a decision of the board of commissioners, he may file an appeal, within 30 days of such decision, in the county superior court. Until the expiration of time for appeal as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 36-72-11, the applicant shall not begin or resume activities which comply with the permit issued by the board of commissioners. If an appeal is filed, the applicant may begin or resume activities which comply with the permit only upon consent of the board of commissioners and the party seeking judicial review or upon the order of the reviewing court for good cause shown. 
(7)  The county coroner shall be responsible for inspecting and determining whether the provisions of the permit have been properly completed. 
(8)  Notwithstanding any provisions of this article to the contrary, when any agency, authority, or political subdivision of the state seeks to file an application for a permit under this article, the county superior court shall have exclusive jurisdiction over the permit application. The superior court shall conduct its investigation and determination of the permit in accordance with O.C.G.A. §§ 36-72-6 through 36-72-8, as may be amended from time to time. 
(f)  Same fees. The fee for filing an application for a permit under this article shall be established by the board of commissioners pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-72-10, as may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 2012-Z-002, Att., 7-24-12) 
24.11 - Cemetery preservation committee. 
(a)  Purpose. The board of commissioners hereby declare it to be the purpose and intent of this division to establish a committee for the purpose of providing a uniform procedure for the identification, preservation, protection, and maintenance of cemeteries, graveyards, and burying grounds, in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Created; appointment of members; general powers. The title of the committee established by this article shall be the Cherokee County Cemetery Preservation Committee. The board of commissioners, one appointment per commissioner shall appoint committee members, and shall have the powers and authority as designated by this article or as directed by the board of commissioners. All committee members shall be subject to any and all codes of ethics which may apply to the board of commissioners. 
(c)  Position within county government. The CCCPC shall be considered a part of the planning and land use function of the county. 
(d)  Composition; terms and compensation of members. The CCCPC shall consist of five members appointed by the board of commissioners, who shall be residents of the county who have demonstrated special interest in the identification, preservation, and maintenance of county cemeteries and graveyards. Each member of the board of commissioners shall be entitled to appoint one member to the committee. The term of each member shall run concurrently with and at the pleasure of the appointing commissioner's term of office and until a successor is appointed and qualified. If an appointing commissioner is no longer in office due to a general election or a special election in which more than one year remains in that commissioner's term, any member appointed by that commissioner shall be subject to removal with or without cause and without regard to any unexpired term of the newly elected commissioner filling such seat. The newly elected commissioner shall have the right to appoint a new member to the committee under the same requirements as his/her predecessor as set forth in this section. Members do not receive a salary, although they may be reimbursed for expenses if such expenses are approved by the board of commissioners. 
(e)  Powers enumerated. 
(1)  The cemetery preservation committee shall be authorized to: 
a.  Formulate a countywide cemetery preservation plan that shall include but not be limited to: 
1.  Determine the identification and location of all known cemeteries in the county. 
2.  Determine the status and needs of each cemetery and prioritize rehabilitation. 
3.  Establish and publish guidelines regarding cemetery preservation, maintenance, landscaping, security, development, and other information. 
4.  Establish procedures within the county planning and zoning department and with the county coroner regarding the review of zoning and variance applications involving cemeteries or property immediately adjacent to cemeteries; provide recommendations to the planning commission, Cherokee County Cemetery Preservation Committee, and board of commissioners on all zoning and variance applications within the purview of this article; and assist the development and inspections department regarding the enforcement of all such stipulations and conditions. 
(2)  Recommend to the board of commissioners specific cemeteries and graveyards that have been determined to be abandoned or not maintained and should be acquired by the county under O.C.G.A. § 36-1-23. 
(3)  Provide for the preservation and maintenance of those cemeteries that have been placed under jurisdiction of the county and; on an as needed basis, private or family cemeteries that do not have the financial ability to properly maintain a cemetery if such funds are approved by the board of commissioners. 
(4)  Conduct educational program regarding cemetery preservation as a means of increasing public awareness and support. 
(5)  Assist in legal research and legal action, as required, regarding cemetery relocation, maintenance, and security measures as defined by state statute or county ordinance. 
(6)  Establish appropriate and necessary liaisons and contacts with other appropriate boards, commissions, departments, organizations, and municipalities within the county. 
(7)  Provide guidance and suggestions to the board of commissioners relative to ordinances dealing with cemeteries. 
(8)  Provide guidance and suggestions to the state legislature regarding changes and updates to the state code relative to cemetery preservation. 
(9)  The cemetery preservation committee shall not financially obligate the county in any manner without the prior approval of the board of commissioners. 
(f)  Rules of procedure. The cemetery preservation committee shall adopt rules for the transaction of its business, officers and their election and duties, provisions for the time and place for regular meetings, and for the calling of special meetings. The committee shall have the flexibility to adopt rules of procedure without amendments to this article. A quorum shall consist of a majority of its members. Robert's Rules of Order shall determine the order of business at all times. 
(g)  Funding. The cemetery preservation committee shall have the authority to accept donations in addition to county appropriated funds if the board of commissioners approves such funds. 
(h)  Records; meetings. A public record shall be kept of the cemetery preservation committee's resolutions, proceedings and actions. All meetings of the committee shall be open to the public. 
(Ord. No. 2012-Z-002, Att., 7-24-12) 
ARTICLE 25. - OUTDOOR LIGHTING AND ROAD GLARE[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 2001-009, adopted July 10, 2001, adopted provisions intended for use as a new article 24, outdoor lighting and road glare. Inasmuch as there are already provisions so designated, the provisions of Ord. No. 2001-009 have been included herein as article 25, §§ 25.1—25.16, at the discretion of the editor. 

25.1. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose and intent of this ordinance are as follows: 
A.  To encourage systematic practices in the use of outdoor electrically powered luminaires, consistent with conserving energy and maximizing the benefits to the citizenry; 
B.  To increase nighttime utility, safety, security, and productivity; to foster the nighttime use of property; and to protect the privacy of residents; 
C.  To reduce light trespass, obtrusive light, and sky glow, and to reduce roadway glare and extreme variations of illumination, to which elderly drivers are particularly sensitive; 
D.  To preserve and enhance the natural nighttime visual environment of the county; 
E.  To preserve the views of the starry sky, encouraging the enjoyment of their aesthetics, the education of the public in the sciences, and the astronomical study of celestial bodies; and 
F.  To accomplish these purposes by limiting illuminance levels; by directing the luminaire emissions away from roadways, other properties, and the sky; and by reducing illumination levels during later hours of the night. 
(Ord. No. 2001-009, § 1, 7-10-01) 
25.2. - Definitions. 
Beacon. A light with one or more beams directed into the atmosphere or directed at one or more points not on the same property as the light source; also any light system with one or more beams that rotate or move. 
Cutoff. A luminaire light distribution where the emission does not exceed 2.5 percent of the lamp lumens at an angle of 90 degrees above nadir, and does not exceed ten percent at a vertical angle of 80 degrees above nadir. These emission values apply to all lateral angles around the installed luminaire. 
Footcandle. A unit of measure for illuminance on a surface that is everywhere one foot from a point source of light of one candle, and equal to one lumen per square foot of area. 
Full cutoff. A luminaire light distribution where zero emission occurs at all angles of 90 degrees or greater above nadir, and the emission does not exceed ten percent of total lamp lumens at a vertical angle or 80 degrees above nadir. These emission values apply to all lateral angles around the installed luminaire. 
Glare. The sensation produced within the visual field by luminance that is sufficiently greater than the luminance to which the eyes are adapted, causing annoyance, discomfort, or loss in visual performance and visibility. 
Illuminance. The quantity of light arriving at a surface divided by the area of the illuminated surface, measured in footcandles. Horizontal illuminance applies to a horizontal surface; vertical illuminance applies to a vertical surface. Average illuminance is the level of illuminance over an entire illuminated target area. Maximum illuminance is the highest level of illuminance on any point within the entire area; minimum illuminance is the lowest level of illuminance on any point within the entire area. 
Illuminance levels. All illuminance levels and foot candles noted in this ordinance mean the maintained illuminance levels: the illuminance levels occurring just prior to lamp replacement and luminaire cleaning. The average illuminance level applies to an entire illuminated target area. Minimum and maximum illuminance levels apply to small areas within the entire illuminated target area. Unless otherwise noted, illuminance levels refer to horizontal illuminance levels. 
Lamp. The component of an outdoor luminaire that produces light. 
Light trespass. Unwanted light emitted beyond the boundaries of the property on which the luminaire is located, detrimentally affecting residents, vehicle operators and pedestrians, the natural environment, and astronomical observations. 
Luminaire (light fixture). A complete fixed or movable lighting unit consisting of a lamp or lamps and ballasting (when applicable) together with the parts designed to distribute the light, to position and protect the lamps, and to connect the lamps to the power supply. 
Person. Any individual, tenant, lessee, owner, or any commercial entity, including, but not limited to, a firm, business, partnership, association, joint venture, corporation, or organization, whether commercial, religious, fraternal, social or otherwise, or any agent thereof. 
Roadway lighting. Lighting that is specifically intended to illuminate roadways for automobiles, excluding the lighting intended to illuminate roadways only for pedestrians. 
Security lighting. Continuous illumination of nonroadway territory when there is no minimal nighttime activity by authorized individuals. 
Semi-cutoff. A luminaire light distribution where the emission does not numerically exceed five percent of the total at an angle of 90 degrees above nadir, and 20 percent at a vertical angle of 80 degrees above nadir. These values apply to all lateral angles around the installed luminaire. 
Shielded. provided with internal and/or external shields, top and side visors, hoods, and internal louvers to limit glare, sky glow, and light trespass caused by emission from luminaires. 
Sky glow. The brightening of the nighttime atmosphere by light emitted above the horizontal plane and by light reflected upward from illuminated surfaces, which reduces the visibility of astronomical objects. 
Uniformity ratio. A higher level of illumination in relation to a lower level of illumination within a given target area. A value for either the maximum-to-minimum ratio or the average-to-minimum ratio may be required. For example, if the average-to-minimum uniformity ratio is 4:1 for the given target area, the lowest level of illuminance is no less than one divided by four (25 percent) of the average level of illuminance. 
(Ord. No. 2001-009, § 2, 7-10-01) 
25.3. - Light trespass. 
A.  All luminaires, except street lighting and those used on one-or two-family dwellings, shall be located, designed, fitted, aimed, shielded, installed, and maintained to limit illumination only to the target and to minimize light trespass. The designed illuminance for pavement or ground shall be provided by a luminaire installed closer than four times the luminaire height. Directional luminaires such as floodlights, wall pack lights, and spotlights shall be aimed so that the center of the beam is not more than 62 degrees above nadir. Directional luminaires shall be shielded as needed for minimizing misdirected light. 
B.  Vertical illumination from luminaires on any single property shall not exceed 0.1 footcandles at a height of three feet at a property line of a residential zoning district or a nature-preserve type park; and shall not exceed 0.5 footcandles at a property line of other types of property, except where a greater illumination at the property line is due to luminaires on that property. 
(Ord. No. 2001-009, § 3, 7-10-01) 
25.4. - Glare control on roadways. 
A.  Glare from luminaires. It shall be unlawful to place or maintain on private property any luminaire of such intensity or brilliance within the field of view of a driver so as to impair his/her vision upon the public roadway, or to interfere otherwise with the operation of a motor vehicle. Every reasonable effort shall be made to ensure that the brilliance of any luminaire less than ten degrees from a passenger car driver's line of sight; either along the roadway ahead or toward each traffic control device, sign, or signal; does not exceed the brilliance of a headlight on an oncoming passenger car whose extended center line lies ten feet to the driver's left, when the car is between 60 and 100 feet from the driver, and when the lowermost distribution of light from the headlight is in use. 
B.  Reflected solar glare. No building of more than one story, on which glass constitutes more than one quarter of a side, shall be constructed, until the orientations for the glass have been selected which will avoid sunlight reflections within ten degrees of the driver's field of view upon any public roadway. The orientations for the glass shall account for the bearing and altitude angles of the sun at all times of day on all days of the year. 
(Ord. No. 2001-009, § 4, 7-10-01) 
25.5. - Luminaire source types regulated. 
A.  All following luminaire source types and wattages shall be subject to this ordinance: 
1.  All metal halide, fluorescent, and mercury vapor. 
2.  High pressure sodium: exceeding 35 watts. 
3.  Low pressure sodium: exceeding 18 watts. 
4.  Incandescent and quartz-halogen: exceeding 100 watts. 
B.  Filtering of source types. Mercury vapor, fluorescent, and metal halide lamps shall be installed in luminaires enclosed by acrylic, translucent material, or glass which filters out ultraviolet light; quartz glass does not qualify. 
(Ord. No. 2001-009, § 5, 7-10-01) 
25.6. - Restrictions of various outdoor lighting applications. 
A.  Parking areas. 
1.  All luminaires shall be the full cutoff type, except for large areas, such as those used primarily for the parking of trucks or buses, where luminaire supports inside the areas would restrict the function or compromise safety. Shielded floodlights shall be used for these areas. The height of the luminaires shall be not greater than 35 feet, except for large areas in outdoor recreational facilities. 
2.  Examples of levels of activity for outdoor parking uses are described as follows: 
a.  High level of activity. 
Regional shopping centers containing retail space of 300,000 square feet or greater 
Fast food facilities with customer seating of 40 or greater 
Entertainment theaters, assembly, sports arenas 
Major cultural or civic events 
Major league athletic events 
Truck or bus parking 
Automatic teller machines 
Fueling stations, except drive-under canopies and pump islands 
Automotive dealerships 
b.  Medium level of activity. 
Community shopping centers containing retail space of 5,000 to 299,999 square feet 
Cultural, civic or recreational events 
Office parks 
Hotels and motels 
Hospital parking 
Transportation parking (airports, commuter lots, etc.) 
Residential complex parking 
c.  Low level of activity. 
Neighborhood shopping centers containing retail space of less than 5,000 square feet 
Industrial employee parking 
Restaurants other than fast food 
Educational facility parking 
Parking at houses of religious assembly 
All other levels of activity than high and medium 
3.  The maximum allowable maintained horizontal illuminance values on pavement are indicated for the applicable level of activity. The maximum allowable uniformity ratios are indicated. 
a.  Level of activity: general parking, bikeways and pedestrian traffic. 

 
b.  Level of activity: vehicle use area only. 

 
B.  Outdoor advertising signs and other signs. 
1.  Any externally illuminated outdoor advertising sign erected subsequent to the effective date of this ordinance shall be illuminated from the top. Vertical illuminance shall not exceed 55 footcandles. 
2.  In the event that any sign is rendered nonfunctional by damage, the lighting shall be made to conform to this ordinance when the function of the sign is restored. 
3.  The source of light for signs shall be effectively shielded from adjacent residential properties and streets. Illumination shall not exceed 0.5 footcandles measured in a vertical plane above a height of five feet at a residential property line or right-of-way. 
4.  Flashing, blinking, rotating, or moving objects on signs, caused by either electrically powered illumination or solar reflection, within a distance of 150 feet of a street, are prohibited. 
C.  Roadway lighting and street lights. 
1.  Illumination levels shall comply with the county street light ordinance. 
2.  All luminaires except those within residential areas shall be the full cutoff type. 
3.  For period or historical type luminaires, only the cutoff and semi-cutoff types are allowed. 
D.  Drive-under canopies and pump islands at fueling stations. In order to limit adaptation problems of the eyes of drivers while leaving a bright area and entering a dark area, the average horizontal illuminance on the pavement shall not exceed five footcandles under a canopy where all adjacent roadways have no street lights, and shall not exceed ten footcandles under a canopy where an adjacent roadway has street lights. The luminaire shall be recessed into the canopy ceiling so that the bottom of the luminaire does not extend below the ceiling. 
E.  Outdoor recreational facilities. Illumination shall be provided by full cutoff luminaires, except for large areas, where luminaire supports inside the areas would restrict the function or compromise safety. Examples of such large areas include, but are not limited to, baseball, softball, soccer, football, and golf driving ranges. Shielded floodlights shall be used for these areas. Smaller areas, including tennis, volleyball, racquetball and handball courts, and swimming pools shall utilize full cutoff luminaires and shall conform to the requirements of this ordinance regarding light trespass. The average illuminance on ground shall not exceed 50 footcandles. 
F.  Construction, manufacturing, repair, loading and unloading platforms, and active storage yards. Illumination for these facilities shall be provided by full cutoff luminaires, except for particularly large areas, such as a trucking terminal for which luminaire supports would restrict the function or compromise safety. Shielded floodlights shall be used in these areas. The average illuminance on pavement or ground shall not exceed ten footcandles. 
G.  Outdoor display lots and car dealerships. Any light source permitted by this ordinance may be used for lighting of outdoor display lots such as, but not limited to, automobile sales or rental, recreational vehicle sales, or building material sales. Illumination shall be provided by full cutoff luminaires. The maximum allowable illuminance values on pavement for car dealerships are listed in the following table. 
Table of Illuminance Levels and Uniformities for Car Dealerships 

 
H.  Landscape, decorative, and architectural lighting. 
1.  Luminaires used to illuminate flags, statues, steeples, monuments, and other tall narrow objects shall be illuminated with the type of luminaire that directs the narrowest beam capable of illuminating the object. Illuminance at the level of the illuminated object shall not exceed ten footcandles. 
2.  Lighting on buildings for aesthetic purposes shall be directed downward from the top. Exception: selected portions of a building may be illuminated from below, if the portions illuminated total less than half of the vertical face. The average illuminance shall not exceed ten footcandles. 
3.  All outside illumination of any building and/or surrounding landscape, public or private, for esthetic, architectural, or decorative purposes is prohibited after 11:00 p.m. or when the business closes, whichever is later. 
I.  Security lighting and time restrictions. 
1.  Full cutoff luminaires shall be used for all security lighting and dusk-to-dawn area lighting. 
2.  The maximum level of illumination on areas used for outdoor sales and display, eating, parking, assembly, service, storage of equipment and freight, loading and unloading, repair, maintenance, commercial activities, and industrial activities shall not continue after 11:00 p.m., nor more than one hour after active use of the area ceases, if later. 
3.  The number of luminaires remaining on for security lighting shall not exceed one fourth the total number of each type of luminaire used for the maximum level of illumination; after dividing the total number by four, any remainder is counted as a whole number. 
4.  No outdoor recreational facility shall be illuminated after 11:00 p.m. except to conclude a scheduled recreational or sporting event in progress prior to 11:00 p.m. The luminaires shall be extinguished after outdoor recreational events are completed and the site has been vacated. 
5.  Automatic timing devices that control the hours of illumination may remain on eastern standard time throughout the year. 
K.  Tower lighting. White strobe lights shall not be operated on towers later than one hour after sunset nor prior to one hour before sunrise, except in conditions required by the Federal Aviation Administration. Red lights shall be used on towers only where required by the Federal Aviation Administration. 
(Ord. No. 2001-009, § 6, 7-10-01) 
25.7. - Prohibited lights. 
A.  Promotional beacons, search lights, laser source lights, strobe light, or any similar high-intensity light, when projected above the horizontal. 
B.  Series, lines, or rows of lights, whether supported by cables or other physical means, within a distance of 150 feet of a roadway. 
C.  Lighting used for causing sky glow to attract attention, in excess of the lighting used to provide safety, security, and utility. 
(Ord. No. 2001-009, § 7, 7-10-01) 
25.8. - Approved materials and methods. 
A.  The provisions of this ordinance are not intended to prevent the use of any design, material or method of installation or operation not specifically prohibited herein, provided any such alternate has been approved by the community development director. The community development director may approve any such proposed alternate provided he/she finds that it: 
1.  Provides approximate equivalence to the applicable specific requirements of this ordinance; and 
2.  Is otherwise satisfactory and complies with the intent of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2001-009, § 8, 7-10-01) 
25.9. - Permits and development plan reviews. 
A.  This ordinance section shall be implemented as a condition of approving development projects. 
B.  Whenever a person is required to obtain a building or electrical permit for outdoor lighting or signage, subdivision approval, or approval of any residential, commercial, industrial, mixed use subdivision plan, or any land development plan approval by the county, including all county projects, the applicant shall, as a part of said application, submit sufficient information to enable the community development director to determine whether the proposed outdoor lighting will comply with this ordinance. Submission of plans and evidence of compliance shall include the following: 
1.  A site plan indicating the layout of proposed luminaire locations. 
2.  An impact statement demonstrating that the proper steps have been taken to ensure no negative impact upon the community and its residents. This statement shall include a plan showing the location and use of adjacent properties. 
3.  Manufacturer's catalog cuts that provide a description of the luminaires, including wattage, lumen output, glare reduction/control devices, lamps, on-off cycle control devices, and mounting devices. 
4.  Mounting heights and aiming angles with photometric data showing the angle of cut-off of light emissions for the proposed luminaires. 
5.  Maintained horizontal illuminance shown as footcandles, after depreciation. 
a.  Maximum. 
b.  Minimum. 
c.  Average, during operating and nonoperating hours. 
d.  Maximum to minimum uniformity ratio. 
e.  Average to minimum uniformity ratio. 
6.  In areas where more than half of the maximum allowable illumination footcandle values listed in this ordinance are applied for: a photometric grid, showing footcandle readings every ten feet and the average footcandles, that demonstrates adequate illumination intensity and uniformity at ground level; and footcandle values measured three feet above ground level along the boundaries of the site where adjacent to a residential zoning district and a nature-preserve type park. 
7.  Supporting documentation when using recommendations by the Illuminating Engineering Society of North America, a professional engineer, a professional architect, or other authority on outdoor lighting. 
8.  Such other information as the community development director may determine is necessary to ensure compliance with this ordinance. 
C.  If the community development director determines that the proposed lighting does not comply with this ordinance, the permit shall not be issued or the plan approved. 
D.  For the approval of any multi-story building having over 25 percent exterior glass, submit documents showing that reflected sunlight at all times of the day and on all days of the year will be minimized in the directions that will cause glare on public roads. 
(Ord. No. 2001-009, § 9, 7-10-01) 
25.10. - Petitions for street lighting in subdivisions containing lots which are 1.1 acres in size or larger. 
A.  The residents of a subdivision containing lots which are 1.1 acres in size or larger may request street lighting by submitting a petition to the Planning and Zoning Department of Cherokee County. This petition shall show a 75 percent support for the request by all residents whose properties are located, in whole or in part, within 250 feet of a proposed street light. 
B.  The request shall include a location sketch indicating the individual siting of street lights within the subdivision, along with the residential location of each signatory to the petition. 
C.  It shall be the responsibility of the petitioners and homeowners within the subdivision to pay the initial, installation, and maintenance costs, including the standards/poles. 
(Ord. No. 2001-009, § 10, 7-10-01) 
25.11. - Temporary lighting permits. 
A.  The community development director may grant a permit for temporary lighting, which does not conform to the provisions of this ordinance, if he/she finds the following: 
1.  The purpose for which the lighting is proposed is not intended to extend beyond 30 days, except that the permit for a major construction project may extend to completion. 
2.  The proposed lighting is designed in such a manner as to minimize light trespass, glare, and sky glow. 
3.  The proposed lighting will comply with the general intent of this ordinance. 
4.  The permit will be in the public interest, such as circus, fair, carnival, or civic uses. 
B.  The application for the temporary lighting permit shall include the following information: 
1.  Name and address of applicant and property owner; 
2.  Location of proposed luminaire(s); 
3.  Type, wattage and lumen output of lamp(s); 
4.  Type and shielding of proposed luminaires; 
5.  Intended use of the lighting; 
6.  Duration of time for requested exemption; 
7.  The nature of the exemption; 
8.  Other information that the planning director may request; 
9.  Means to minimize light trespass, sky glow, and glare. 
C.  The community development director will endeavor to rule on the application within five business days from the date of submission of the request and notify the applicant in writing of his/her decision. The community development director may grant one renewal of the permit for an additional 30 days if he/she finds that, because of an unanticipated change in circumstances, a renewal would be in the public interest. The community development director is not authorized to grant more than one temporary permit and one renewal for a 30-day period for the same property within one calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 2001-009, § 11, 7-10-01) 
25.12. - Variances. 
A.  Any person may submit an application to the zoning board of appeals for a variance from particular regulations. The application should include evidence about the following items: 
1.  How the proposed design and appearance of the luminaire are superior. 
2.  How sky glow, light trespass, and glare will be limited. 
3.  How the proposed solution will provide a benefit without negative impact on the health, safety, or welfare of the community. 
B.  The application may include the recommended practices of the Illuminating Engineering Society of North America, a professional engineer, a professional architect, or other authority on outdoor lighting. 
C.  The existence of a particular luminaire system in the county or in another jurisdiction prior to the effective date of this ordinance shall not constitute justification for a variance. 
D.  The county, at its discretion, may waive or grant a variance from specific requirements of this lighting ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2001-009, § 12, 7-10-01) 
25.13. - Nonconforming uses. 
A.  Any construction permit that invokes certificate of occupancy requirements shall specify and require that any nonconforming lighting, located within the boundaries of the development site authorized by said permit, shall be brought into conformance with the provisions of this ordinance within five years of the effective date of the ordinance. 
B.  Any change in zoning classification on which a nonconforming luminaire exists will require that the luminaire shall be made to conform to the provisions of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2001-009, § 13, 7-10-01) 
25.14. - Exceptions. 
The following outdoor lights are exempt from all requirements of this ordinance: 
A.  Federal laws, state laws, rules and regulations, which shall prevail over the conflicting provision, so that the remaining portion of this ordinance shall be deemed to be of full force and effect. 
B.  Outdoor luminaires existing and legally installed prior to the effective date of this ordinance, provided, however, that no change in use, replacement, structural alteration, or restoration of such luminaires, except for bulb replacement, shall be made unless it thereafter conforms to the provisions of this ordinance. 
C.  Airport lighting that is required for the safe and efficient movement of aircraft during flight, takeoff, landing, and taxing. All other outdoor lighting at airport facilities shall comply with the provisions of this ordinance. 
D.  Emergency lighting by police, fire, ambulance, and rescue authorities. 
E.  Lighting for meteorological data gathering purposes. 
F.  Lamps producing light directly by the combustion of natural gas, kerosene, or other fossil fuels. 
G.  Glass tubes filled with neon, argon, and krypton. 
H.  Fluorescent tubes that are filtered to show a specific color: violet, blue, green, or yellow. 
I.  Luminaires installed on, in, and connection with those facilities on land owned or operated by the federal government or the state of Georgia, or any department, division, agency or instrumentality thereof. 
J.  Low-wattage fluorescent, quartz-halogen, and incandescent light sources used for holiday decorations. 
K.  For nonresidential properties, a total of luminaires not exceeding four per acre, or per lot that is smaller than one acre, of any combination of the following luminaire source types and wattages: 
1.  Fluorescent, 48-inch maximum length tube: not greater than 60 watts. 
2.  High pressure sodium: 50 watts. 
3.  Low pressure sodium: 35 watts. 
4.  Incandescent: not greater than 200 watts. 
5.  Quartz-halogen: 150 watts. 
(Ord. No. 2001-009, § 14, 7-10-01) 
25.15. - Violations and enforcement. 
A.  It shall be unlawful to install, erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, convert, or operate an outdoor luminaire in violation of this ordinance. 
B.  The county may require corrective action for any lighting installation that becomes nonconforming, due to damage or lack of maintenance. 
C.  The county is authorized to order the modification of any luminaire that it finds to be a definite hazard or gross nuisance to the public, particularly a brilliant luminaire that causes objectionable glare to the users of a roadway. 
(Ord. No. 2001-009, § 15, 7-10-01) 
25.16. - Luminaires funded by county. 
All outdoor lights funded by the county shall be installed in accordance with this ordinance. Funds include any bond revenues or any money appropriated or allocated by the county board of commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 2001-009, § 16, 7-10-01) 
ARTICLE 26. - PART V DNR ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION MEASURES 

26.1 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to provide standards for the protection of mountain corridors; the Etowah/Little River Corridor; groundwater recharge areas; water supply watersheds and wetlands within the boundaries of unincorporated Cherokee County. 
The intent of the Part V DNR Protection measures is to: 
• Preserve the environmental sensitive areas within the delineated boundaries of each measure in perpetuity; 
• Preserve the natural terrain and viewsheds of significant mountain corridors above established elevation thresholds to deter erosion and sedimentation build-up in the Etowah River Corridor and its tributaries; 
• Preserve the Etowah River Corridor and its tributaries as a natural resource in order to establish buffers to protect the quality and quantity of drinking water supply as well as deter flooding and erosion; 
• Preserve aquifers; topographical or soil features; water intake zones and wetlands in order to provide a natural filtering for water supply resources. 
Reference maps, parcel specific, for Protected Mountain Corridor (PMC); Etowah/Little River Protection Corridor (ELRPC); Groundwater recharge areas (GRA); Water Supply Watersheds (WSW) and Wetlands (WL) are on file in the planning and zoning department to assist in review of the information contained herein. 
(Ord. No. 99-O-12, 4-20-90) 
26.2 - Definitions. 
Hazardous material: Any substance defined as "hazard material" by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-8-60 et seq. 
Hazardous waste: Includes those solid and liquid wastes or combinations thereof that may cause or contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious, irreversible or incapacitating reversible illness, or which pose a substantial threat to human health when improperly handled. 
Local governing authority or local government: Cherokee County Board of Commissioner. 
Land disturbing activity: Any operation that involves excavation or filling of land; clearing of vegetation; and construction, rebuilding or alteration of an existing structure. Land disturbing activity does not include ordinary maintenance and landscaping activities; yard and grounds maintenance; individual home gardens; repairs or minor modifications to a single-family residence; or the cutting of firewood for personal use. 
Natural vegetated area: An undeveloped area largely free from human disturbance where naturally occurring vegetation is allowed to remain undisturbed or is enhanced and maintained by human intervention. Activities specifically allowed in such an area include: 
• Conservation or preservation of soil, water, vegetation, fish, shellfish and other wildlife; 
• Outdoor recreational activities including hunting, fishing, trapping, bird watching, hiking, boating, horseback riding, swimming, canoeing, skeet and trap shooting, education, scientific research and nature trails; 
• Maintenance or repair of lawfully located roads, structures, and utilities used in the service of the public, provided the work is conducted using best management practices to ensure that negative effects on the previous nature of the land shall be minimized; 
• Limited excavating, filling, and land disturbance necessary for the repair and maintenance of structures necessary to the uses permissible in the area as above. 
Nonconforming use: A land activity, building, or structure legally established prior to adoption of this ordinance, or subsequent amendment that would not otherwise be permissible under the provisions of this ordinance and as indicated in article 13. 
Overlay district: A district that applies supplementary regulations to land previously classified as belonging to a specific zoning district or land-use category. 
Perennial river: A river or section of a river that flows continuously throughout the year (12 months). 
Person: Any individual, partnership, corporation, trust, entity or authority that shall include the State of Georgia and its entities (i.e. departments; boards; bureaus and commissions, etc.). 
Plan: General reference to a plan or comprehensive plan prepared by the county covering such county prepared pursuant to the minimum planning standards and procedures for preparation of comprehensive plans and for implementation of comprehensive plans, established by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs. 
Plat map: The large scale map that shows the location of tracts of land within a jurisdiction, and the tax status of such tracts. 
Protected river: Any perennial river or watercourse with an average annual flow of at least 400 cubic feet per second as determined by appropriate U.S. Geological Survey documents. 
Protected mountain area: All land area 2,200 feet or more above mean sea level, that has a percentage slope of 25 percent or greater for at least 500 feet horizontally and shall include the crests, summits and ridge tops which lie at elevations higher. 
Quadrangle map: The U.S. Geological Survey 7.5 minute topographic map prepared at a scale of 1:24,000. 
Reforestation plan: A plan prepared by a registered forester to calculate the trees required for replanting or by natural regenerative processes (i.e. coppicing, seedlings, etc.). 
River bank: The rising ground, bordering a river, which serves to confine the water to the natural channel during the normal course of flow. 
River corridor: All land, inclusive of islands, in areas of a protected river, which serves to confine the water to the natural channel during the normal course of flow. Because stream channels move due to natural processes, the river corridor may shift with time. For the purpose of these standards, the river corridor shall be considered to be fixed at its position at the time of adoption of the river corridor plan. Any shift in the location after that time will require a revision of the boundaries of the river corridor at the time of comprehensive plan review by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs. 
River corridor protection plan: The part of the local comprehensive plan that deals with the river corridor protection requirements specified herein. 
Sensitive natural areas: Any area, as identified now or hereafter by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, which contains one or more of the following: 
• Habitat, including nesting sites, occupied by rare or endangered species; 
• Rare or exemplary natural communities; 
• Significant landforms, hydroforms or geological features; or 
• Other areas so designated by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources; and which are sensitive or vulnerable to physical or biological alteration. 
Setback measurement: The measurement for buffer area, which shall be measured horizontally from the uppermost part of the riverbank, usually marked by a break in the slope. 
Single-family dwelling: A dwelling structure that is designated for the use of one family. 
Utility: Public or private water or sewer piping systems, water or sewer pumping stations, electric power lines, fuel pipelines, telephone lines, roads, driveways, bridges, river/lake access facilities, stormwater systems, and railroads. 
(Ord. No. 99-O-12, 4-20-90) 
26.3 - Protected mountain corridor (PMC). 
26.3-1  PMC applicability. The PMC shall apply to all applicable, public or private, mountain areas within the unincorporated boundaries of Cherokee County that: 
• Are above 2,200 feet or greater above mean sea level; 
• Have a percentage slope of 25 percent or greater for at least 500 feet along a horizontal plane; 
• Shall be inclusive of crests, summits, and ridge tops that lie in any area above the beginning elevation threshold. Flanks of crests, summits and ridge tops with less than 25 percent slope shall be included within the PMC. 
26.3-2  Protected mountain corridor districts. Cherokee County has defined and mapped two protected mountain corridors that are located in the northwest section of the county. The two corridors lie within a conservation area interior to Lake Arrowhead, a planned unit development constructed in the 1970's, and are recognized as follows: 
• Pine Log Mountain at an elevation of 2,350 feet above sea level 
• Bear Mountain at an elevation of 2,302 feet above sea level 
26.3-3  Determination thresholds. 
(1)  Determination of elevation. 
a.  Parcels of land that are located at and lie above 2,200 foot elevation, as shown on a U.S. Geological Survey quadrangle map as the 2,200 contour line, shall be recognized as protected mountain corridors. 
(2)  Determination of slope. Parcels of land that have a 25 percent or greater slope for at least 500 feet in a horizontal plane shall be recognized as protected mountain corridors. Calculation of slope shall be derived from one of the three methods herein: 
a.  Measuring the proximity of contour lines on a quadrangle map; 
b.  Computer algorithms based on U.S. geological Survey Digital Elevation Models; 
c.  Standard survey practice by registered surveyor. 
26.3-4  Protected mountain corridor standards. Herein are the protected mountain corridor standards that shall apply to the unincorporated boundaries of Cherokee County: 
(1)  Land disturbance activity. 
a.  Any proposed land disturbing activity shall meet the applicable requirements defined in the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, as amended, and the applicable regulations of local ordinances pertaining to soil erosion and sedimentation control. 
b.  Any proposed land disturbing activity shall meet the applicable requirements of the local governing authority when one or more septic tanks are to be used for individual sewage disposal. 
c.  Any proposed land disturbing activity shall meet the applicable requirements of the Water Well Standards Act of 1985, the Department of Human Resources regulations on individual and nonpublic wells and any other applicable requirements of the local governing authority, considered more stringent, when one or more wells are to be used for individual water supply. 
d.  Any proposed land disturbing activity shall not remove more than 50 percent of the existing trees that are greater than eight inches in diameter at the DBH unless an application of reforestation, in accordance with Article 25, has been submitted. 
(2)  Sewage. Sewage treatment shall meet all applicable requirements of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act when the sewage treatment is to be provided by alternate measures consisting of one or more individual septic tanks. 
(3)  Water supply. Water supply shall meet all applicable requirements of the Georgia Safe Drinking Water Act of 1977 when public water is supplied. 
(4)  Single-family dwelling(s). Single-family dwelling density shall not exceed more than one DUA and not be less than 100 feet at building setback. Exemptions to the density restrictions are: 
a.  Any lot of less than one acre recorded in the Deed and Records of the Cherokee County Clerk of Superior Court with title of owner(s) and recognized as real property on survey plat as such as of (implementation date). 
b.  Any lot or parcels of land that was part of a master plan for a planned unit development or special approved development approved for development by issuance of a land disturbance permit prior to (implementation date) and was pursuant to the applicable regulations of the zoning ordinance effective on said date. 
(5)  Multi-family dwelling(s). 
a.  Multi-family dwelling density shall not exceed more than four DUA in the absence of a public water supply and sewerage system. 
b.  Multi family dwelling density shall not exceed more than six DUA if a water supply and sewerage system is available. Parcel shall not be less than 100 feet wide at the building site. 
(6)  Height restrictions. No structure shall extend more than 40 feet beyond the uppermost point of the crest, summit or ridge top of the protected mountain. The measurement shall be from the highest point at the intersection of the structure and ground level. Exemptions to the height restrictions are: 
a.  Water, radio and television towers; 
b.  Equipment for the transmission of electricity 
c.  Minor vertical projections of a primary structure such as: 
• Antennas 
• Spires; Steeples; Belfries 
• Chimneys; Flues 
• Cupolas 
• Flagpoles 
• Poles 
(7)  Tree survey plan. A detailed tree survey plan, in accordance with Article 27: Tree Preservation and Replanting Standards, shall be submitted and approved prior to submittal of an application for development. A topographical survey of the project site with an assessment of the impact on the longevity for survivability of the natural environment after completion shall be required in addition to the tree survey plan. 
26.3-5  Protected mountain corridor plan(s) Plans for a protected mountain corridor shall be mapped and identified. Considerations that shall be addressed pertaining to the protected mountain corridor are: 
(1)  The effect of activities within protected mountain areas to the public health; safety; welfare and private property rights; 
(2)  The effect of activities on ground water or surface-water quality within delineated area of protection; 
(3)  The effect of activities on the visual aesthetics of the delineated area of protection; 
(4)  The effect of activities on adjacent environmental sensitive areas to the delineated area of protection; 
(5)  The effects of activities and whether they are temporary or permanent. Temporary activities shall specify the duration of time for the impact. 
(6)  Conservation of unique or significant flora and fauna species (i.e. threatened, rare and/or endangered species); 
(7)  Preservation of significant state historical and archaeological resources recognized by the National Register of Historic Places or listed as eligible. 
26.3-6  Protected mountain corridor permitted uses. Herein are the permitted uses that are allowed in the PMC districts, provided that conditions are met: 
(1)  Agricultural and forestry. 
a.  Agriculture and forestry shall be consistent with the best management practices established by the Georgia Forestry Commission or the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission; 
b.  Agriculture and forestry shall be consistent with all state and federal laws, and all regulations promulgated by the Georgia Department of Agriculture. 
(2)  Roadways. Road constructed within a protected mountain corridor provided that they are designed to deter the threat of landslides, erosion and run-off. 
(3)  Mining. Local governing authority shall allow mining activity that is permitted by the department of natural resources. 
26.3-7.  Protected mountain corridor prohibited uses. Herein are the prohibited uses in the PMC districts: 
(1)  Hazardous waste. 
a.  Receiving and storage areas that involve handling of hazardous waste; 
b.  Disposal facilities for hazardous or solid waste. Exemption shall be granted for those disposal facilities permitted by the environmental protection division prior to the establishment of the PMC. 
26.3-7(2)  All uses shall be deemed unacceptable that are unapproved by the local governing authority. 
(Ord. No. 00-O-12, 4-20-90) 
26.4 - Etowah/Little River protection corridor (ELRPC). 
26.4-1.  Applicability. The ELRPC shall apply to all applicable, public and private land, within the 150 feet boundaries (measured horizontally) on each side of the Etowah and Little River. This corridor is established to provide protection against pollutants to the Etowah, a significant drinking water resource, and Little River. However the entire Etowah River Corridor, having an average flow greater than 400 cubic feet per second (cfs), qualifies as a protected river under O.C.G.A. 12-2-8. The ERPC will be an overlay district and the specific land uses permitted are outlined in subsection 26.3-4. 
26.4-2  Underlying zoning districts. The regulations pertaining to the underlying zoning districts defined in the Cherokee County Zoning Ordinance shall be maintained and not affected, unless otherwise noted herein. 
26.4-3  Etowah/Little River Protection corridor criteria. 
(1)  All development within the ELRPC shall maintain a natural vegetative buffer except as otherwise noted herein. 
(2)  Restoration of the buffer shall immediately begin after any land disturbing activity within the delineated corridor by the planting of grass followed by the installation of landscaping within 12 months. 
(3)  Construction of all types shall be prohibited except otherwise noted herein. 
26.4-4  Etowah/Little River Protection Corridor exemptions. Provided herein are the permitted exemptions for the Etowah/Little River Protection Corridor: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings, including the usual appurtenances, that meet the following conditions: 
a.  Dwelling is in compliance with all zoning regulations. 
b.  Dwellings shall be located on a minimum two-acre parcel of land. Any area that is located within the river between the banks and is part of the protected river shall not be counted toward the total acreage requirement. 
c.  Each two-acre or greater parcel of land shall have only one dwelling. 
d.  A septic tank(s) that serves the dwelling unit shall be allowed to locate within the buffer area; however, the drain fields shall be prohibited from the corridor buffer area. 
(2)  All construction for road crossings and utility crossings across the river corridor that meet the requirements of the Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act of 1975 and/or other applicable local ordinances on soil erosion and sedimentation control. 
(3)  Land use that was existing prior to the implementation of this ordinance and meets the following conditions: 
a.  Industrial and commercial uses located along river corridor shall not impair the drinking quality of the river water; and 
b.  Industrial and commercial uses located within the river corridor shall meet all state and federal environmental rules and regulations. 
(4)  Mining activities that have been permitted by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources pursuant to the Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968, as amended. 
(5)  All utilities other than listed in subsection 28.3-5(2) that cannot feasibly be located outside the buffer area, provided that: 
a.  All utilities shall be located as far from the riverbank in a horizontal plane as reasonably possible; 
b.  All utility installation and maintenance shall be carried out in a manner as to protect the vitality of the buffer area as reasonably possible; and 
c.  All utilities shall not impair the quality of water that is drawn from the river for the purpose of drinking. 
(6)  Timber production and harvesting that meet the following conditions: 
a.  Forestry activity that is consistent with best management practices established by the Georgia Forestry Commission; and 
b.  Forestry activity shall not impair the drinking water quality of the river water as defined by the Federal Clean Water Act, as amended. 
(7)  Agricultural production and management that meet the following conditions: 
a.  Agricultural activity is consistent with best management practices established by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission; 
b.  Agricultural activity shall not impair the drinking quality of the river as defined by the Federal Clean Water Act, as amended; and 
c.  Agricultural activity shall be consistent with all state and federal laws, and all regulations promulgated by the Georgia Department of Agriculture. 
(8)  Wildlife and fisheries management activities consistent with the purposes of O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8. 
(9)  Waste-water treatment facilities. 
(10)  Natural water quality treatment or purification facilities. 
(11)  Recreational usage consistent either with the maintenance of a natural vegetative buffer or with river-dependent recreation. 
(12)  Other uses permitted by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources or under Section 404 of the Clean Water Act. 
26.4-5  Prohibited uses. The following limitations on permissible uses shall apply within the ELRPC in addition to the regulations of the underlying zoning district: 
(1)  Septic tanks and septic drain fields are prohibited within river corridor except the systems indicated in subsection 26.3-4(1)d. 
(2)  Hazardous waste receiving and storage areas are prohibited within river corridor. 
(3)  Hazardous waste or solid waste landfills are prohibited within river corridor. 
(4)  All uses that have not been issued approval by Cherokee County shall not be acceptable within the river corridor. 
(Ord. No. 00-O-12, 4-20-90) 
26.5 - Groundwater recharge areas (GRA). 
26.5-1  Finding of fact. Groundwater is contained in underground geologic formations called aquifers. Water in aquifers is released to the surface through wells and springs or by seepage into lakes, streams, and wetlands. Some lakes, streams, and wetlands depend upon ground water springs or seepage for supplemental water during drought periods. Aquifers store ground water used for public and private drinking water supply and irrigation. 
Aquifer recharge is the process by which precipitation infiltrates soil and rock to add to the volume of water stored in pores and other openings within them. While recharge takes place throughout practically all of Georgia's land area, the rate or amount of recharge reaching underground aquifers varies from place to place depending on geological conditions. In Cherokee County, the primary bedrock is composed of crystalline granite, gneiss, schist and quartzite. These rocks contain very little pore space and have a very low permeability. This low storage capacity is the reason much of Georgia north of the fall line receives its water from surface streams, rivers, lakes and reservoirs. Nearly all bedrock of this type, however, is broken by water-bearing cracks, fractures, and faults which become enlarged over time. When intercepted by a well, these cracks often yield usable quantities of water. 
Groundwater quality is particularly important in Cherokee County because a portion of the county is still dependent on well water for domestic use. Centralized sewer systems currently cover only a small fraction of the county's land area, leaving many aquifer recharge areas vulnerable to infiltration from septic tank drainage fields. 
Therefore is essential that the quality of drinking water be assured in order to provide for the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Cherokee County. 
26.5-2.  Groundwater recharge area district. As defined and mapped by the Department of Natural Resources and Georgia Geologic Survey, there are three areas in Cherokee County that are significant recharge areas. These are relatively flat areas with thick soils and may be favored sites for commercial or industrial development. Mapping of these areas by the Geologic survey was done at a 1:500,000 scale, meaning that only the larger recharge areas could be included. The state's intent is that these areas are where ground water protection efforts should be directed. Listed herein are the three areas: 
• S.R. 20/Johnson Brady Road — Consists of 240 parcels 
• Exit 7: Holly Springs — Consists of 1067 parcels 
• S.R. 92/Kellogg Creek — Consists of 352 parcels 
26.5-3  Pollution susceptibility thresholds. Each recharge area shall be designated with a pollution susceptibility threshold of high, medium or low based on the Georgia Pollution Susceptibility Map prepared by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
26.5-4  Groundwater protection standards. Provided herein are the Groundwater Protection Standards that shall apply to the unincorporated boundaries of Cherokee County: 
(1)  All pollution susceptibility areas, new waste disposal facilities must have synthetic liners and leachate collection systems. 
(2)  All new agricultural impoundments shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  Areas with high susceptibility, a liner shall be provided that is approved by the U.S. Soil Conservation Service (SCS); 
b.  Areas with medium susceptibility and that are greater than 15 acres in size shall require an SCS approved liner. 
c.  Areas with low susceptibility and that are greater than 50 acres in size shall require an SCS approved liner. 
(3)  No land disposal of hazardous waste shall be permitted within any significant groundwater recharge area. (GRA). 
(4)  Within all significant groundwater recharge areas (GRA), the handling, storage and disposal of hazardous materials shall be confined to an area with an impermeable surface having spill and leak protection approved by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, Environmental Protection Division (EPD). 
(5)  Within all significant groundwater recharge areas (GRA), new above ground chemical or petroleum storage tanks larger than 650 gallons shall have a secondary containment for 110 percent of tank volume or 110 percent of the largest tanks in a cluster of tanks. 
(6)  New wastewater treatment basins shall have an impermeable liner approved by EPD within areas with high pollution susceptibility. 
(7)  No new storm water infiltration basins shall be constructed within areas with high pollution susceptibility. 
(8)  Wastewater spray irrigation systems or the land spreading of wastewater sludge shall be practiced in accordance with department of natural resources criteria for slow rate land treatment within areas with high pollution susceptibility. Applicants who submit development plans for activities involving wastewater spray irrigation or land spreading of wastewater sludge shall submit with plans proof that he/she has received a land application system permit from EPD. 
(9)  No new mobile home parks shall be allowed on septic systems. 
(10)  All septic system shall be subject to review and approval by the Cherokee County Environmental Health Department prior to the issuance of building permit for a building or mobile home. 
26.5-5.  Minimum lot sizes with septic systems. New residential dwellings to be served by septic tank/drain systems that encompass the periphery of the groundwater recharge area shall not have a lot area less than 43,560 square feet even if the zoning classification dictates otherwise. 
Table 1 — Minimum Lot Size Requirements 

 
Source: DHR Manual for On-Site Sewerage Management Systems. 
(Ord. No. 99-O-12, 4-20-90) 
26.6 - Water supply watersheds (WSW). 
26.6-1  Findings of fact. Water supply watersheds are defined by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR) as the areas of land upstream of publicly owned drinking water intakes or water supply reservoirs. The volume of water in a stream is usually determined by the amount of precipitation and the moisture absorption capacity and the speed of absorption of water in surrounding soils. Land cover, slope, soil type and the intensity and duration of rainfall all affect the rate of water absorption or infiltration. The water that is not absorbed by the soil runs off the land as overflow, or surface runoff. Water released through soil adds to the overflow to form total runoff. As runoff flows into lower elevations, it collects in drainage basins, the boundaries of which form watersheds. The runoff from a watershed accumulates in streams which serve to move water out of the watershed to lower elevations. 
Land development within the water supply watersheds may affect the quantity and quality of raw water which flows into the reservoir or water intake. The potential problems in water supply watershed include point sources and non-point sources of pollution or problems caused by increases in impervious surfaces such as buildings, roads, and parking lots. Point sources of pollution include municipal sewage discharges, industrial wastewater, septic tanks, accidental spills of hazardous material and leachates from landfills or chemical waste dumps. Non-point pollution consists of contaminates which are generated over large areas such as runoff from cropland, managed forests, paved surfaces, construction activities, motor vehicles or runoff following spills of hazardous materials. Increased development increases loading of non-point pollutants into the streams. Removing vegetation from stream channels and paving over the soil also increases the volume and rate of surface water runoff which, in turn, increases the potential for erosion, flooding and sedimentation (pollution) of the stream. 
Therefore is essential that the quality of drinking water be assured in order to provide for the health, safety and welfare of Cherokee County citizens. 
(Ord. No. 99-O-12, 4-20-90) 
26.6-2  Water supply watershed districts. The protected water supply watershed district overlay are hereby designated and shall consist of the land areas that drain to the central core of the respective watersheds stated herein: 
• Cleghorne-Spring (Northwest sector) — Consisting of 38 parcels 
• Yellow Creek (Northeast sector) — Consisting of 78 parcels 
• Big Creek (Southeast sector) — Consisting of 115 parcels 
The boundaries of the three overlays are defined by the ridge lines encompassing the central core and a radius of seven miles upstream of the water supply water intakes. 
Only a small amount of surface water in Cherokee County is subject to stream buffer requirements under the Part V watershed requirements. This area is found in the southeastern part of the county and is associated with a public water intake located in Fulton County. The two public water intakes in Cherokee that are directly on the Etowah River (Canton and Cherokee County Water Authority) are a part of watersheds that are over 100 square miles in size and therefore are exempt from any DNR protective criteria. 
26.6-3  Exemptions. Herein are the exemptions for the WSW districts, provided that the conditions are met: 
(1)  Utilities. 
a.  All utilities shall be located a minimum of 150 feet from the stream bank and not impair the quality of drinking water in the stream. 
b.  All utility installation and maintenance shall be carried out in a manner as to protect the vitality of the buffer area as reasonably possible. 
(2)  Forestry and agricultural. 
a.  Agricultural activities that involve the planting and harvesting of crops and conform to the best management practices established by the Georgia Department of Agriculture. 
b.  Silviculture activities shall conform to the best management practices established by the Georgia Forestry Commission. 
26.6-4.  Permitted uses. Herein are the permitted uses (inclusive of the underlying zoning district uses) that are allowed in the WSW districts, provided that the conditions are met: 
(1)  Natural buffer requirements. 
a.  A natural, undisturbed buffer of 100 feet wide shall be maintained on each side of the stream and shall be measured horizontally from stream bank. 
b.  A natural, undisturbed buffer shall be maintained for a minimum distance of 150 feet from the periphery of existing or future water supply. 
(2)  Impervious surface thresholds. 
a.  No more than 25 percent of the land area of any new development may be covered by an impervious surface within the delineated water supply watershed overlay district. 
b.  No impervious surface shall be constructed within 150 feet on each side of the stream within the seven-mile radius upstream of all public water intakes. 
c.  No impervious surface shall be constructed within 75 feet on each side of the stream outside the periphery of the seven-mile radius upstream of all public water intakes. 
d.  Septic tanks and septic drain fields are prohibited in the setback areas defined in subsection (1)b. 
(3)  Stormwater management control requirements. All new streets constructed within the overlay shall employ alternative stormwater management elements in lieu of the standard curb and gutter. New streets crossing perennial streams within the overlay district shall be designed in such a way as to direct runoff away from pavement to each side of crossing while not impairing the stream below. Primary saturation shall occur away from the stream bank whereby the soils would filter any pollutants. Design(s) shall be reflected on site plan(s) submitted by developer. 
26.6-5  Prohibited uses. Herein are the prohibited uses in the WSW districts: 
(1)  All sanitary landfills with or without synthetic liners and leachate collection systems. 
(2)  All facilities using hazardous materials. 
(Ord. No. 99-O-12, 4-20-90) 
26.7 - Wetlands (WL). 
26.7-1  Findings of fact. Freshwater wetlands may be defined as those areas covered or saturated by water all or part of the time. Wetlands include marshes, bogs, swamps and other inundated areas. They are normally found in flood plains, along stream banks and adjacent to ponds and lakes. Vegetation adapted for life in saturated soil is prevalent, although standing water may not always be seen. Wetlands are valuable to mankind in many ways. They protect and improve water quality by trapping and filtering pollutants and sediments and by recharging groundwater supplies. During floods, wetlands minimize the damage to human life and property by serving as water containment areas. This has the effect of reducing the volume, velocity and duration of the flood itself. Wetlands are significant biological habitats that are essential breeding, nesting and feeding areas for many species. The abundance of wildlife provides ample opportunities for outdoor recreation, including hunting and fishing. 
In an effort to protect and manage the nation's fresh water wetlands, the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (COE) have adopted the Section 404K program of the Clean Water Act. EPA and COE share the primary responsibility for enforcement. 
Therefore is essential that the wetlands be protected for natural water filtration and in order to provide for the health, safety and welfare of Cherokee County citizens. 
26.7-2.  Wetland protection district. The WL district(s) shall consist of all applicable lands within wetlands lying within the unincorporated boundaries of Cherokee County. All individual(s) who propose development activity shall reference the National Wetlands Inventory Map prepared by the U.S. Department of the Interior. 
26.7-3.  Permitted uses. Herein are the permitted uses allowed in the WL districts, provided that they are not prohibited by any other ordinance of law and do not require structures, grading, fill, draining or dredging except unless stated otherwise: 
(1)  Conservation or preservation of soil, water, vegetation, fish, and other wildlife, provided they do not affect waters of Georgia or the United States in such a way that would require an individual 404 Permit. 
(2)  Outdoor passive recreational activities, including fishing, bird watching, hiking, boating, horseback riding and canoeing. 
(3)  Forestry practices applied in accordance with best management practices approved by the Georgia Forestry Commission. 
(4)  The cultivation of agricultural crops. All agricultural activities shall be subject to the best management practices (BMP) approved by the Georgia Department of Agriculture. 
(5)  The pasturing of livestock. 
(6)  Education, scientific research and nature trails. 
26.7-4  Development permits. 
(1)  Local development permit requirements. No regulated activity will be allowed within the WL district without written permission from Cherokee County in the form of a local development permit. Issuance of a local development permit is contingent on full compliance with the terms of this ordinance and other applicable regulations. All activities that are not identified below or by other local development ordinances shall be prohibited without prior issuance of a local development permit. If the area proposed for development is located within 100 feet of the Wetland Protection District boundary, as determined from the National Wetlands Inventory Map (U.S. Department of the Interior), a U.S. Army Corp of Engineers determination shall be required. If the Corps determines that wetlands are present on the proposed site and that Section 404 Permit or Letter of permission is required; a local development permit will be issued only following issuance of the Section 404 Permit or Letter of Permission. 
(2)  Temporary emergency permit. Cherokee County EMA Director may issue a temporary emergency permit given the following conditions/reasons indicated herein: 
a.  Replacement of lawfully located roads or structures and of facilities used in the service of the public to provide transportation, electricity, gas, water, telephone, telegraph, telecommunication or other services due to destruction by natural disaster situations shall be exempt from permit issuance process. 
b.  Maintenance or repair of lawfully located roads or structures and of facilities used in the service of the public to provide transportation, electricity, gas, water, telephone, telegraph, telecommunication or other services, provided that such roads, structures or facilities are not materially changed or enlarged and written notice prior to the commencement of work has been given to Cherokee County and provided that the work is conducted using best management practices to ensure that flow and circulation patterns and chemical and biological characteristics of the wetland are not impaired and that any adverse effect on the aquatic environment will be minimized. 
c.  Temporary water-level stabilization measures associated with ongoing silvicultural operations. 
d.  Limited ditching, tilling, dredging, excavating or filling done solely for the purpose of maintaining or repairing existing drainage systems necessary for the cultivation of agricultural crops, provided that the maintenance or repair activity does not result in the impairment, alteration or loss of wetlands not previously subject to agricultural and silvicultural use under the terms and provisions. 
e.  Limited excavating and filling necessary for the repair and maintenance of a pier, walkways, nature trails, observation decks, wildlife management shelters, boathouses or other similar water-related structures, provided that they are built on pilings to allow unobstructed flow of water and preserve the natural contour of the wetland. 
f.  In addition to other fees assessed, the applicant may be held liable for costs incurred by Cherokee County during evaluation of the performance standards evaluation. 
(Ord. No. 99-O-12, 4-20-90) 
26.8 - Permit requirements and enforcement. 
Cherokee County shall not issue any building permit, rezoning request or subdivision plat, unless the permit, request or plat is in compliance with all of the criteria elements pertaining to the Part V DNR Environmental Criteria described herein. 
26.8-1  Enforcement. Cherokee County Planning and Zoning Department professional staff shall have the authority to enter upon privately owned land for the sole purpose of performing the duties under this article and may conduct or cause to occur examinations, surveys or sampling administrator deems necessary. Herein are other items relating to enforcement: 
(1)  The administrator or his/her designee shall oversee enforcement of this article. 
(2)  The administrator shall have the authority to enforce this article; issue permits hereunder; and address violations or threatened violations hereof by issuance of violation notices, administrative orders and civil and criminal actions. All costs, fees and expenses in connection with such actions may be recovered as civil damages against the violator. 
(3)  Any person who commits, takes part in or assists in any violation of any provisions of this article shall be fined and/or imprisoned up to the maximum sanction authorized by Cherokee County Board of Commissioners. 
(4)  When removal of vegetative cover, excavation or fill has take place in violation of this ordinance, the violator shall be required to restore the affected land to its original contours and to restore vegetation, as far as practical. 
26.8-2  Development review requirements. All applicants who seek to build/construct a structure shall be required to submit plans in accordance with the provisions herein in addition to the development plan review process. 
(Ord. No. 99-O-12, 4-20-90) 
26.9 - Separability and abrogation. 
All sections and subsections of this article are considered separate and distinct. Should any section, subsection, paragraph or part of this ordinance be declared by a court of jurisdiction to be invalid for any reason, it shall not invalidate any other section, paragraph, or part of this article and/or ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 99-O-12, 4-20-90) 
26.10 - Effective date. 
This ordinance shall become effective upon adoption by the Cherokee County Board of Commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 99-O-12, 4-20-90) 
ARTICLE 27. - TREE PRESERVATION AND REPLACEMENT ORDINANCE 

27.1 - Title. 
This ordinance shall be known as the "Cherokee County Tree Preservation and Replacement Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 2008-Z-001, § 1, 1-15-08) 
27.2 - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this ordinance is to provide standards for the protection and replacement of trees as part of the land development and building process, and to enrich the quality of life for the citizens of Cherokee County through education about and preservation of its tree resources. This is accomplished through the preservation, protection and planting of trees and other landscape material, particularly those trees recognized herein as "specimen", "heritage", "overstory" and "understory" trees, and the provision of natural and/or planted buffers between dissimilar uses as part of the land development process. The ordinance is intended to further the county's policy of preserving trees as a natural resource as well as to provide clear direction for those instances where trees are either removed or where land is to be developed where no trees exist. 
(Ord. No. 2008-Z-001, § 2, 1-15-08) 
27.3 - Definitions. 
In construing the provisions hereof and the meaning of each and every word, term, phrase, or part thereof, where the context will permit, the definitions of words as contained in the adopted Zoning Ordinance of Cherokee County, supplemented by the following, shall apply: 
Agriculture: The science or art of cultivating the soil, harvesting crops, and raising livestock. 
Boundary tree: A tree located on adjacent property in proximity to a boundary line of subject project. Requirements set forth herein covering critical root zone shall be adhered to. 
Buffer: A natural and/or landscaped area for buffering incompatible land uses for the purpose of visibly separating one use from another. This is accomplished through screening and distance to shield or block noise, light, glare, or visual or other nuisances, and/or for protecting natural features such as streams and wetlands. 
Caliper: A standard of trunk measurement for replacement trees. Caliper inches are measured at the height of six inches above the ground for trees up to and including four-inch caliper and 12 inches above the ground for trees larger than four inches caliper. 
Certified county arborist ("arborist"): The county official responsible for enforcing the ordinance, reviewing tree preservation and replacement plans, etc., to include developing arboricultural standards relative to tree care, protection, construction impacts and administrative guidelines for ordinance compliance as well as the determination of tree removal in public places. Said individual shall also be responsible for coordinating the county's Arbor Day programs, grants and other similar programs. 
Critical root zone: The area beneath a tree which must be left undisturbed in order to preserve a sufficient root mass to give a tree a reasonable chance of survival. The critical root zone of a tree is established on the basis of the trunk diameter at DBH. Trees are to be represented on plans by a concentric circle centered on the trunk location with a diameter equal in feet to twice the number of inches of the tree's trunk diameter at DBH. The critical root zone shall be used by plan reviewers to determine compliance with design standards and construction specifications. A circle is graphically efficient to produce and represents the most likely configuration of a trees root pattern, even when the crown is skewed or one-sided. The ratio of circle diameter to trunk diameter is based on typical dripline distances noted on open grown trees with full crowns. 
Density factor: A unit of measure used to prescribe the calculated tree coverage on a site. 
Diameter breast-height (DBH): The standard measure of size for overstory and understory trees existing on a site. The tree trunk is measured at a height of four and one-half feet above the ground. If a tree splits into multiple trunks below four and one-half feet, measure the trunk at its most narrow point beneath the split. 
Drip line: The line enclosing the area directly beneath the tree's crown from which rainfall would drip from the outermost branch tips of the tree or group of trees collectively. 
Heritage tree: Any tree which is determined by Cherokee County to be of unique and intrinsic value to the general public because of its size, age, historic association, unique species to the region, ecological value or any tree designated a Georgia State Champion, United States Champion or World Champion by the American Forestry Association (Refer to Appendix B). This ordinance calls for the arborist to maintain a list of trees that are of special interest to the county. Upon recommendation by the arborist, the board of commissioners may designate a tree as a heritage tree, provided the tree's health, aerial space, and open ground area for the root system have been certified by the arborist as sufficient. The arborist shall maintain a registry of heritage trees. 
Land disturbance permit: The authorization granted by Cherokee County necessary to begin a land disturbing activity. 
Land disturbing activity: Any alteration of the natural environment that shall require a Land disturbance permit for removal of trees incidental to the development of land or to the marketing of land for development and includes, but it is not limited to, soil erosion permit, clearing and grubbing permit, land disturbance permit or building permit. 
Overstory tree: Those tree species that compose the top layer or canopy of vegetation and will generally reach a mature height of greater than 40 feet. Replacement trees must be chosen from the list in Appendix D. 
Parking lot: Two or more parking spaces. 
Parking space, single: The clear space containing one row of parking spaces. 
Parking space, double: The clear space containing two rows of opposing parking spaces. 
Pasture land: Land cleared of trees and used for livestock grazing or crop production for the past five years as depicted on aerial photos from Cherokee County or other sources. 
Permanent damage: Permanent damage is defined as injury to a tree which will likely lead to decline or death of the tree or shortening the tree's expected lifespan. 
Replacement planting: The planting of trees on a site that before development had more trees, and after development shall have fewer trees per acre. 
Site: Any plot or parcel of land, or a combination of contiguous lots or parcels of land, where grading, building, construction, or alteration is performed or permitted. 
Site density factor: The minimum number of tree density units per acre which must be achieved on a property at completion of development. Reference appendix C. 
Soil compaction: A change in the physical properties of soil which include an increase in soil weight per unit volume, and decreases in soil pore space. Soil compaction is caused by repeated vibrations, frequent traffic and weight. As related to tree roots, compacted soil can cause physical root damage, a decrease in soil oxygen levels with an increase in toxic gases, and can create an impervious condition to new root development. 
Specimen tree: Any tree that qualifies for special consideration for preservation due to its size, type, and condition (Refer to Appendix A). Individual trees may be considered important county resources because of unique or noteworthy characteristics or values. 
Stop work order: An official order from the county for work to cease on a development site until such time as specific issues are resolved. 
Timber harvest: Under Georgia law all timber harvests or sales must be reported on department of revenue form PT-283T. The official code of Georgia Annotated defines timber harvest. 
Tree: Any self-supporting woody perennial plant, usually having a main stem or trunk and many branches, and at maturity normally attaining a trunk diameter greater than three inches at any point and a height of over ten feet. 
Tree diameter: The widest cross-sectional dimension of a tree trunk measured at diameter breast height (DBH) or at a point below DBH for new trees or multi-trunked species, but in no case less than six inches from the ground. 
Tree preservation and replacement plan: A plan that identifies tree protection areas where existing trees are to be preserved and where proposed replacement trees are to be planted on a property to meet the requirements of this ordinance, as well as methods of tree protection to be undertaken on the site and other pertinent information. 
Tree planting list: The recommended species of trees listed in appendix D. 
Tree protection area: Any portion of a site wherein are located existing trees which are proposed to be preserved in order to comply with the requirements of this ordinance. The tree protection area shall include at a minimum all area as defined by CRZ. 
Tree save area: An area designated for the purpose of meeting tree density requirements, saving existing trees, and/or preserving natural buffers. 
Understory tree: A species that, under normal forest conditions, grows to maturity beneath overstory trees and will generally reach a mature height of at least ten feet but less than 40 feet. Replacement trees must be chosen from the list in appendix D. 
Zoning ordinance: The Zoning Ordinance of Cherokee County, Georgia, as amended from time-to-time by the Cherokee County Board of Commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 2008-Z-001, § 3, 1-15-08; Ord. No. 2015-O-11, Exh. A, 12-15-15) 
27.4 - Violation and penalties. 
4.1  Violation of any section of this ordinance shall cause imposition of penalties as set forth in this Section. Such penalties may be imposed against the property owner, applicant, developer, contractor performing the work that constitutes the violation or any other individual or entity that can be established as a responsible party in the discretion of the county (collectively the "Offending Party"). Any offending party may be issued a citation and summons to appear before a court of competent jurisdiction, and may be deemed guilty of violating a county ordinance, and may generally be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, in addition to the more stringent and specific penalties provided for in this section, nothing shall limit the county from pursuing any other available legal remedy, including, but not limited to, the pursuit of injunctive relief and the denial, revocation, or suspension of any county permits. 
4.1.1  Activities under a land disturbance permit. 
4.1.1.1.  Unauthorized removal or permanent damage of each overstory or understory tree in a tree save area, zoning buffer and stream bank buffer: Immediate stop-work order, plus a fine of not less than $500.00 for each occurrence, plus $1.00 per square foot of disturbed area; not to collectively exceed $1,000.00 for any single occurrence; plus re-vegetation as directed in the discretion of the arborist. 
4.1.1.2.  Unauthorized removal or permanent damage of each specimen tree: Immediate stop-work order, plus a fine of not less than $1,000.00, plus replacement planting at three times the density unit value of the removed or damaged specimen tree as shown in appendix C—Table A. 
4.1.1.3.  Unauthorized removal or permanent damage to any heritage tree: Immediate stop-work order, plus a fine of not less than $1,000.00, plus replacement planting at eight times the density unit value of the removed or damaged heritage tree as shown in appendix C—Table A. 
4.1.1.4. Failure to meet site density factor requirements (see appendix C): Immediate stop-work order, plus withholding of certificate of occupancy or final plat approval. 
4.2  If the exact DBH or type of tree(s) removed or damaged is not readily apparent then, the amount of replacement shall be determined based on the arborist's estimate of the removed or damaged tree or trees based on information from the site development plans and/or site conditions. The location, species and planting specifications of replacement trees shall be approved by the arborist prior to replanting, in accordance with the requirements of this ordinance. 
4.3  All violations that are of a continuing nature shall constitute a separate offense for each occurrence. 
4.4  The arborist is hereby charged with the responsibility for the enforcement of this ordinance. The county marshall's office will serve notice to any person in violation thereof or institute legal proceedings as may be required. 
(Ord. No. 2008-Z-001, § 4, 1-15-08) 
27.5 - Applicability. 
This ordinance shall apply to all properties or portions thereof located within the unincorporated areas of Cherokee County, Georgia, to the extent of the provisions contained herein. The terms and provisions of this ordinance shall apply to any activity on real property which requires the issuance of a land disturbance permit except as exempted in subsection 27.6.1 below. 
(Ord. No. 2008-Z-001, § 5, 1-15-08) 
27.6 - Exemptions. 
6.1  General. The following activities are specifically exempted from this ordinance: 
6.1.1  The construction of single-family detached and/or two-family residential dwelling that is not part of a major subdivision (a subdivision of land which results in the creation of five or more lots). 
6.1.2  Any addition, alteration, improvement or remodeling of an existing residence or the construction of structures accessory to an existing residence. 
6.1.3  Tree removal by existing individual single-family detached and duplex homeowners; unless such tree(s) is/are noted as a heritage tree. 
6.1.4  All plant or tree nurseries and botanical gardens and arboretums shall be exempt from the terms and provisions of this ordinance in relation to those trees which are being grown for relocation and continued growth in the ordinary course of business, or for some public purpose. 
6.1.5  All orchards of trees in active commercial operation shall be exempt for bona fide agricultural purposes only. 
6.1.6  Land clearing and grubbing activities for strictly agricultural purposes. 
6.1.7  Timber harvesting operations as described in O.C.G.A. § 12-6-24(e)(3) and (4), meaning timber cutting that: 1) qualifies as a "forest land management practice" or "agricultural operation" under O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17; 2) is not incidental to development; and 3) is located on tracts zoned for or used for forestry, silvicultural, or agricultural purposes. However, such timber harvesting operations shall remain subject to the notice and guarantee requirements of subsection 27.6.4, when applicable. 
6.1.8  The installation of on-site sewage management systems (OSSMS), initial or repair, providing the disruption of the trees is kept to a minimum and heritage tree guidelines are followed. If the OSSMS initial or repair is in a tree protection area, a plan of the OSSMS shall be submitted to the arborist prior to installation. 
6.2  Removal of disease or insect infestation. Arborist approval is not required to remove dead and diseased trees by individual homeowners. There are situations where large areas of tree removal is appropriate and would not fall under the exemptions listed in subsection 6.1 including southern pine beetle infestation. Upon the written advice of the county extension service or the Georgia Forestry Commission or an ISA certified arborist in accordance with commonly accepted forestry practices and a finding of disease or insect infestation, thearborist may authorize the removal of trees to prevent the danger of these trees falling, prevent potential injury to life or property and prevent fuel build up for forest fires. The owner/developer, prior to the removal of these trees, shall notify the arborist, identifying the location of the infested property, and shall submit to the arborist the written finding of an independent certified arborist, county extension service or the Georgia Forestry Commission. 
6.3  Removal of structurally declining trees. Trees that are identified as posing a risk of failure (whole tree falling or large tree parts breaking off) and documented in writing by a professional landscape forester or I.S.A. certified arborist, in accordance with commonly accepted "hazard evaluation" techniques and practices, and not caused by development activities, may be authorized by the arborist for removal without penalty. Site density units must still be met; removal requests shall be accompanied with an amendment to the replanting plan. These trees, because of poor structural attributes, shall not be counted as heritage or specimen trees. 
6-4.  Timber harvesting operations. 
6-4.1  Notice. Pursuant to and in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 12-6-24, all persons or firms harvesting standing timber in any unincorporated area of the County for delivery as pulpwood, logs, poles, posts, or wood chips to any wood yard or processing plant shall provide notice of such harvesting operations to the County Arborist prior to entering onto the property if possible, but in no event later than 24 hours after entering onto the property. Further, such persons shall give notice of cessation of cutting within 24 hours after the job is completed. Such notice shall be provided for each separate tract to be harvested and shall be on and comply with the form provided by the Georgia Forestry Commission at Section 224-2-.01 of the Rules of the Georgia Forestry Commission. Such notice shall be accompanied by a guarantee as required by Subsection 6.4.2 below. Such notice may be provided to the County Arborist in person, by mail, by facsimile transmission, or by email transmission. Any subsequent change in the facts provided in the notice shall be reported to the County Arborist within three (3) business days after such change. 
6-4.2  Guarantee. Pursuant to and in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 12-6-24(b)(3), the notice required by Section 6.4.1 above shall be accompanied by a bond or letter of credit, protecting the County against any damage caused by the timber harvesting operations, in the amount of $5,000.00 or such lesser amount as the County Arborist may authorize in writing. All such bonds and letters of credit shall be on the forms provided by the County and shall be submitted to the Cherokee County Engineering Department. No more than one bond is required from each person or firm harvesting timber regardless of the number of tracts harvested, so long as the bond remains in effect. Otherwise, a valid replacement bond must be obtained and delivered to the County Arborist no later than the close of business on the fifth business day following the day that the County filed a claim to recover damages against the then-existing bond. Upon filing such claim, the County shall provide immediate notice thereof, including the date the claim was filed, to the person or firm causing the damage. Such notice may be given in person, by facsimile transmission or by email transmission. 
6-4.3  Procedure for Timber Harvesting of Conservation Use Value Covenant Parcels . Timber harvesting shall be permitted on parcels under Conservation Use Value Covenant (CUVA) subject to the following requirements: 
(a)  The property shall be a minimum of ten (10) acres in size. 
(b)  There shall be a fifty (50) foot exterior timber harvesting setback around the entire perimeter of the property, which shall remain undisturbed with the exception of approved access to the property from the road; and 
(c)  All state and county minimum stream buffers shall remain undisturbed except for haul road and skid trail crossings. 
(d)  All activity on the site shall be in compliance with the Cherokee County Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Ordinance, all Best Management Practices as described in the Georgia Forestry Commission document "Recommended Best Management Practices for Forestry in Georgia" and the U.S. Clean Water Act, Section 404, EPA, 40 CFR, Part 232.3(c)(6). 
(e)  The County Arborist may approve exceptions to address disease or insect infestations documented by a registered forester or certified arborist. 
(f)  A copy of all timber harvest permits and/or notices shall be provided to the Cherokee County Tax Assessor and the Cherokee County Tax Commissioner. 
6-4.4  Fees. There is no fee required for submitting a notice of timber harvest 
6-4.5  Penalty. Violation of the notice requirements of this Subsection 27.6-4 shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $500.00. 
(Ord. No. 2008-Z-001, § 6, 1-15-08; Ord. No. 2015-O-11, Exh. A, 12-15-15; Ord. No. 2018-O-009, § 1, 9-18-18) 
27.7 - Permitting applications. 
7.1  Land disturbance permit. Land disturbance activities shall not commence until such activities have been authorized by issuance of an appropriate land disturbance permit (LDP) under the provisions of the development regulations, latest edition. No land disturbance permit shall be issued for development without it being determined by the arborist that the proposed development is in compliance with the provisions of this ordinance. 
7.2  Permit procedures. 
7.2.1  Prior to submission of any plans associated with the LDP application, applicants are required to conduct a pre-planning meeting with the arborist. This meeting is intended to provide an opportunity for the applicant to present their conceptual plans as well as to ensure that applicant is aware of all provisions of this ordinance that might potentially impact said plans. Resulting information from this conference, that are specific to items of which the arborist has latitude, should be recorded by the applicant, and submitted to the arborist for inclusion in the plans submitted for the LDP application. 
7.2.2  All tree preservation and replacement plans and related documents shall be reviewed by the arborist for conformance to the provisions of this ordinance. The permit will require approval and sign-off by the arborist. 
7.2.3  Arborist sign-off shall constitute an approval of the required tree preservation and replacement plan and conformance to the provisions of these regulations. 
7.2.4  The arborist, at any time, may at his/her discretion, require an "as built" tree plan, which graphically communicates the size, location, and name of all trees and landscape material existing on site. The plan must be to scale and prepared by a certified arborist or registered landscape architect. 
(Ord. No. 2008-Z-001, § 7, 1-15-08) 
27.8 - Density requirements. 
The quantity of total existing and replacement trees on a site must be sufficient so as to produce a total site density factor as follows: Trees should be distributed throughout the development and not located in only one area. Subsequent tree replacements are provided in appendix C. 
The required Site Density for each site shall be calculated by multiplying the total acreage of the site by the required site density factor for the appropriate zoning district (see article 7). 

 
Example: SDF for a wooded site zoned R-40 is calculated by multiplying the total acres by 20 units per acre. A ten-acre site × 20 units per acre = 200 units. 
(Ord. No. 2008-Z-001, § 8, 1-15-08) 
27.9 - Mitigation measures. 
9.1  General. It shall be the policy of the county to maximize the preservation and maintenance of existing trees and where necessary the planting of replacement trees. An approved tree protection and replacement plan must be included as a condition for issuance of a land disturbance permit. The arborist shall have the authority to reject and/or approve appropriate measures (including a combination of measures) based on the requirements of this ordinance and the particular circumstances of each project. It shall also be the policy of the county to provide guidelines for new tree plantings in those instances where no trees currently exist, e.g., former pasture land. The provisions of this section are intended for the protection of either individual trees or stands of trees as a condition for approving of destruction, or damage to, tree or woodland/forest resources. 
This is driven with the following objectives in mind: 
1.  Protect existing trees or woodland/forest resources; 
2.  Provide additional protection for specimen and heritage trees; 
3.  Planning for and identifying tree save areas at the earliest stages of development process. 
9.2  Preservation and protection of existing trees. 
9.2.1  The required site density factor shall first be met with existing trees when possible (see section 27.8). Special emphasis shall be afforded to the preservation of heritage and specimen trees (see appendix A and B). When a choice is available as to which existing trees to save, heritage trees and specimen trees, even isolated individual trees, shall be given preference over other trees. As provided for in appendix B, heritage trees shall be afforded special protection and may be removed in accordance with appendix B. 
9.2.2  Protection of existing individual trees and/or stands shall be incorporated as a required portion of initial design and project layout through project build out to include the following: 
1.  Planning for and identifying tree save areas at the earliest stages of development process; 
2.  Initial design of project lay-out; 
3.  Relocate proposed structures or infrastructure as necessary; 
4.  Utilize appropriate construction and planning methods to minimize damage to tree roots during construction; and 
5.  Set aside portions of project area as woodland/forest preserves conservation areas. 
9.3  Planting of new trees. If the required site density factor cannot be accomplished with existing trees, replacement trees shall be planted as required by this ordinance. Using the guidelines provided in section 9.3.3 below, the precise locations may be at the discretion of the arborist. 
9.3.1  Trees selected for planting must be free from injury, pests, disease, nutritional disorders or root defects, and must be of good vigor in order to assure a reasonable expectation of survivability. 
9.3.2  Standards for transplanting shall be in keeping with those established in the International Society of Arboriculture publication, "Tree and Shrub Transplanting Manual" or similar publication. Reference the American Association of Nurserymen publication "American Standard for Nursery Stock" (ANSI Z60, 1973) for plant material quality specifications. Reference the latest edition of the "Manual for Woody Landscape Plants: Michael Dirr, ISA Guidelines and ANSI Standards, or similar publication for information on site requirements for various tree species. 
9.3.3  Guidelines: 
(1)  Plant new trees in landscaped portions of parcel to replace those removed. 
(2)  Plant new trees on lands that currently lack trees (usually pasture or farmland). 
(3)  Plant new trees on portions of the project area set aside as tree save areas. 
9.3.4  When new plant materials are to be installed, a plant material list shall be provided. Said list shall include: 
1.  Common and botanical names of all proposed plants. 
2.  Plant quantities. 
3.  Size and condition of plants. (Example: two-inch caliper, six feet height, balled and burlapped). 
4.  Spacing. 
9.3.5  Artificial materials prohibited: All artificial plants, trees, shrubs, grass or other vegetation shall be prohibited from fulfilling the requirements of this ordinance. 
9.3.6  In the event that the minimum tree density cannot be met on a parcel then two alternatives chosen at the discretion of the arborist, are available for compensation and issuance of approval, of the tree preservation and replacement plan. 
1.  Tree bank. It shall be at the discretion of the arborist to designate sites other than said parcel for tree bank planting in order to achieve minimum site density requirements. The arborist shall have the authority to allow approval of off-site replanting in a tree bank upon receipt of a site plan indicating site constraints that prevent the replanting of said trees. Approval for off-site replanting shall not exceed 25 percent of total trees required for replanting. 
2.  Tree replacement fund contribution. County arborist will require three estimates from competent landscape contractors and middle dollar value will be used. 
The arborist shall have the authority to allow individuals developing sites to make contributions to the Cherokee County Tree Replacement Fund in lieu of the required replanting. Contributions shall be calculated by the arborist and shall be paid prior to the issuance of a land disturbance permit. Contributions shall be calculated as to reflect the current replacement cost (including labor) of the total number of trees that are required but are not planted. These contributions will be used to plant trees in public spaces or other areas of the county. Approval for tree replacement fund contribution in lieu of on site replanting shall not exceed 25 percent of the total trees required for replanting. 
(Ord. No. 2008-Z-001, § 9, 1-15-08) 
27.10 - Tree preservation and replacement plan requirements. 
10.1  Tree preservation and replacement plans shall be prepared by a professional landscape architect, urban forester or ISA certified arborist, other state licensed professionals of similar design discipline may be authorized by the arborist to prepare tree preservation and replacement plans, provided they demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the arborist, competency and knowledge in the principles and practices of arboriculture as well as the demonstrated ability to prepare such plans in accordance with this ordinance. Continuous and excessive reviews and re-submittals may disqualify the designer from further acceptance by the arborist. 
Tree protection and replacement plans must include the following: 
10.2  Tree inventories and surveys. Compliance with the required site density factor shall be demonstrated on the tree protection and replacement plan and the grading and erosion control plan. The density of 20 units per acre is based on the acreage of the overall site. All trees that are to be counted toward meeting density requirements must be inventoried or sampled based on the acreage of the overall site. The method used to inventory the trees must be indicated on the plans. 
On tree save areas greater than three acres, all tree save areas must be surveyed using an approved scientific sampling method (e.g., basal area). Timber cruising methods (50 feet by 50 feet sample areas or the prism method) of sampling is needed for large tracts. The larger the site the more sample areas should be taken. Sampling should be done in areas to remain as undisturbed tree save areas, not areas intended for development. The contents of each sample area shall be inventoried. All sampling areas shall be accurately depicted on the tree protection and replacement plan and appropriately flagged to corresponding locations on the actual site. When using sample areas, the basal area units should be averaged and an existing density factor per acre determined. Using this tree density, the appropriate amount of tree save area should be preserved to meet the site density factor requirements. These calculations must be included on the tree plan. 
On tree save areas of three acres or less, all trees to be considered for density requirements must be individually inventoried. This tree inventory list and tree locations must be shown on the plan. 
The existing tree line and vegetation characteristics of the site shall be shown on the plans. Existing trees or stands of trees used in the density calculations must be indicated on the plan. The tree save areas should be clearly shown on the plans with their size in acres. Areas designated as tree save areas must be wooded. 
10.3  Exact location of all specimen and heritage trees. Special consideration shall be given to specimen and heritage trees on development sites. Specimen trees and heritage trees must be shown on the tree preservation and replacement plan with an indication whether they are to be retained or removed and reason for removal. Said trees must be flagged and numbered in the field with correlating numbers and exact location shown on the plan. Extra tree density credit will be given for saved specimen and heritage trees. If no design features accommodate their preservation, removed specimen trees require recompense plantings of comparable species. Refer to appendix A for specimen tree criteria and tree density unit values. Use the values in the replacement tree density chart (appendix C, Table B) to determine the quantity and sizes of the needed recompense trees. 
10.4  All tree save areas must be delineated on the tree protection and replacement plan and the grading and erosion control plan. 
Methods of tree protection shall be indicated for all tree save areas and specimen/heritage trees, including tree save fencing, erosion control, retaining walls, tree wells, tunneling for utilities, aeration systems, transplanting, signage, etc. 
10.5  All buffers must be identified on the tree protection and replacement plan. 
Any portion of a zoning buffer lacking sufficient vegetation to provide effective visual screening must be supplemented with evergreen plantings. A detailed planting plan for these areas is required. Planted trees must be a minimum six feet tall. 
10.6  Indicate limits of disturbed area. During construction, tree save areas, zoning buffers, stream buffers, open space, and specimen/heritage trees must be properly protected from disturbance using high visibility orange active tree save fencing. These tree save areas and the active tree save fencing locations must appear on the clearing, grading, erosion control and tree protection plans. 
10.7  Existing and proposed location of underground utilities or easements must be shown. 
10.8  Indicate staging areas for parking, material storage, concrete washout, debris burn, and burial holes where these areas might negatively impact protected trees. 
10.9  The locations of all trees to be planted to meet site density factor requirements. All required landscaping such as street trees, parking lot trees and landscape strips should be shown graphically on the plans. In addition, a detailed planting schedule showing the type (common and botanical names), sizes and quantity of trees to be planted, and any special planting notes. 
10.10  Trees planted for specimen tree recompense, are not included in overall tree density calculations. These are additional requirements. 
10.11  Tree preservation and replacement plans that consist of more than ten new trees shall incorporate at least three separate tree genera whereby no single tree genus accounts for more than 33 percent of all newly planted trees. 
10.12  A narrative explaining the actual planting dates is needed for larger sites. Remote and/or large replanting areas such as zoning buffers are best planted between November and April. Indicate clearly on the tree protection and replacement plan when planting will take place. 
10.13  Additional information as required by the arborist on a case by case basis. After the submission of the plan, the arborist will perform a site inspection. The tree protection and replacement plan shall provide sufficient information and detail to clearly demonstrate that all applicable requirements and standards of this ordinance are or will be fully satisfied. 
(Ord. No. 2008-Z-001, § 10, 1-15-08) 
27.11 - Tree preservation standards during construction. 
In addition to proper utilization of tree protection devices (see subsection 11.1 below), the following measures are detrimental to the long term health and survivability of trees. 
Prevention of the following: 
1.  The improper use of machinery on the trees; 
2.  The storage of materials in or around the trees; 
3.  Altering the natural grade to expose the roots or to cover the tree's root system with more than four inches of soil; 
4.  Causing the infection or infestation of the tree by pests, fungus or harmful bacteria; 
5.  Pruning judged to be excessive by the arborist or not in accordance with the standard set forth by the International Society of Arboriculture (ISA); 
6.  Paving with concrete, asphalt or other impervious surface within such proximity as to be harmful to the tree or its root system; 
7.  Application of an herbicide, including pre-emergent herbicides, or defoliant to any tree without first obtaining a permit; 
8.  Soil compaction in the critical root zone from heavy equipment, vehicular; or excessive pedestrian traffic, or storage of equipment or materials; 
9.  Root disturbance due to cuts, fills, or trenching; 
10.  Wounds to exposed roots, trunks, or limbs; 
11.  Other activities such as chemical storage, cement truck cleaning, fire, etc. 
11.1  Location and types of tree protection devices. Tree protection devices are to be installed completely surrounding the critical root zone of all trees or group of trees to be preserved. Active protection (see subsection 11.2A below) is required where tree save areas are located along the limits of disturbance. Passive protection (see subsection 11.2B below) may be used in more remote tree save areas as determined by the arborist. Once tree save areas are established and approved, any changes are subject to review and written approval by the arborist. 
11.2  Materials. 
A.  Active tree protection shall consist of chain link, orange laminated plastic, wooden post, rail fencing, or other equivalent restraining material. 
B.  Passive tree protection shall consist of heavy mill plastic flagging of a bright color or equivalent signage on a continuous, durable restraint sufficient to delineate the bounds of any tree protection or save areas. See appendix E. 
11.3  Sequence of installation and removal. All tree protection devices shall be installed prior to any land disturbing activity. The arborist will inspect the installation of tree protection devices. It shall be the sole responsibility of the property owner and/or developer to ensure that all tree protection devices remain in functioning condition throughout all phases of development and shall not be removed until final landscaping is installed. In the event passive tree protection is not kept in functioning condition, active tree protection may be required throughout the project. 
11.4  Encroachment. If encroachment into a tree save area occurs, which causes irreparable damage to the trees, the tree preservation and replacement plan shall be revised to compensate for the loss. 
Under no circumstances shall the developer be relieved of responsibility for compliance with the provisions of this ordinance, nor shall plan revision activities stop the county from instituting action for violation of this ordinance (see section 4). 
11.5  Boundary trees shall also be protected and included in tree save areas. Under no circumstances shall the developer be relieved of responsibility for compliance with the provisions of this ordinance, nor shall plan revision activities stop the county from instituting action for violation of this ordinance (see section 27.4). 
11.6  Other specifications. Where clearing has been approved, trees shall be removed in a manner that does not physically impact the trees to be preserved. Felling trees into tree save areas or disturbing roots inside the tree save areas shall be treated as a violation and shall be punishable in accordance with this ordinance. All erosion and sedimentation control measures shall be installed so that sediment will not accumulate within the tree save area. All tree protection areas shall be designated as such with "tree protection area" signs posted visibly on all sides of the fenced-in area. These signs are intended to inform subcontractors of the tree protection process. Signs requesting subcontractor cooperation and compliance with the tree protection standards are recommended for site entrances. 
(Ord. No. 2008-Z-001, § 11, 1-15-08) 
27.12 - Tree replacement standards. 
12-1  General. Species selected for replacement must be quality species, and must be ecologically compatible with the intended site. See Appendix D for list of recommended species. Deviations from the Recommended Tree Planting List are acceptable for use in meeting density requirements only with prior approval from the County Arborist. 
12-2  Minimum Planting Area. In order to provide sufficient growing area for planted trees, the following minimum criteria must be observed unless otherwise approved by the County Arborist: 

 
12-3  Invasive Plants. Invasive plant species as shown on the Georgia Exotic Pest Plant Council (EPPC) Invasive Plant List shall be prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2008-Z-001, § 12, 1-15-08; Ord. No. 2018-O-009, § 2, 9-18-18) 
27.13 - Parking lot planting requirements. 
13.1  General. Trees shall be planted in areas surrounding the perimeter of the parking lot and shall be planted in planting areas or islands internal to the parking lot. Trees may be planted and spaced singly or in groups. Landscape islands shall be located in such a manner as to divide and break up the parking area. 
13.2  Quantity, spacing and planting standards. Parking lots which are required to contain five or more parking spaces shall contain landscaping and plantings as follows: 
1.  For each five parking spaces that are located around the exterior of the parking lot, there must be located a minimum of one tree around the exterior of the parking lot. 
2.  For each ten parking spaces that are located in the interior of the parking lot, there must be located a minimum of one tree on the interior of the parking lot. 
3.  Each tree shall be at least three-inch caliper at time of planting and shall be a species selected from appendix D. 
4.  The minimum planting area or space for each tree shall be in accordance with subsection 27.12.2. 
5.  Ground areas shall be sodded, seeded with grass, mulched, or planted with groundcover species, or any combination thereof. 
6.  At least 30 percent of the trees planted shall consist of overstory trees. 
(Ord. No. 2008-Z-001, § 13, 1-15-08) 
27.14 - Compliance. 
14.1  Warranty or maintenance surety. Upon final installation of new trees, shrubs or other landscape material planted to meet the requirements of this ordinance, and before acceptance by the county arborist, the owner shall either post a maintenance bond or letter of credit in an amount equal to 75 percent of the value of the new trees or landscape material and their installation, warranting the new trees, shrubs or landscape material for a period of no less than 15 months from approval of final plat or certificate of occupancy. 
14.1.1  Inspection. The arborist shall perform an inspection of the plantings and landscape materials required by this ordinance prior to the end of the 15-month warranty period. The owner shall be provided written notice of any replacements or restoration that must be made to maintain compliance with this ordinance or conditions of zoning, special use, or variance approval as pertains to trees and landscaping. 
Required landscape material found to be dead or near death shall be replaced prior to release of the warranty by the county. In no case shall replacement be delayed greater than 30 days from notification unless an additional performance bond is posted with the county. 
14.2  Performance surety. In the event that new trees required to be planted as set forth herein, cannot be installed upon application for a certificate of occupancy or final plat approval as appropriate to the project, then at the discretion of the arborist, a performance bond or letter of credit in an amount equal to 130 percent of the value of the new trees or landscape material and their installation may be accepted in accordance with the performance bonding requirements and provisions of the county. 
14.1.2  Compliance upon permit completion or expiration. Properties where a permit is issued to conduct land disturbing activities that do not require the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or the approval of a final plat, shall comply with the tree density standard of this ordinance as follows: 
14.3  Clearing, clearing and grubbing, or grading only permits. A performance bond or letter of credit shall be posted with the county for the replacement units prior to the issuance of a land disturbance permit. The amount shall be equal to 130 percent of the value of the new trees or landscape material and their installation. 
14.4  Continuing maintenance. 
14.4.1  The owner, occupant, tenant, and respective agent of each, if any, shall be jointly and severally responsible for the perpetual maintenance and protection of buffers and landscape plantings required by this ordinance. 
14.4.2  The county arborist is hereby authorized to order diseased, infested, dying, dead or damaged landscaping required herein to be replaced. 
14.4.3  Replacement trees and landscaping shall be in accordance with the applicable provisions of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2008-Z-001, § 14, 1-15-08) 
27.15 - Technology ridge tree buffer zone. 
15.1  General. The I-575 technology ridge buffer zone is herein recognized as all parcels lying within 75 feet in a horizontal linear distance measured perpendicular from each side of the I-575 right-of-way within its entirety within Cherokee County. It is the intent that the buffer zone will not only provide a visual aesthetic value, but also serve in a capacity to improve the quality of life by filtering noise, light, and airborne pollutants. These developments shall incorporate the following criteria prior to issuance of a land disturbance permit: 
15.2  Corridor. The corridor for the I-575 technology ridge tree buffer zone shall be recognized as those areas lying parallel on each side of I-575 and shall require a 75-foot minimum undisturbed tree buffer requiring 90 percent visual screening during all seasons. Supplemental planting is required if this screening does not exist. 
15.3  Interchange zones. The area within a distance of 1,000 linear feet in each direction of the crossing of a right-of-way of an interchange and parallel with I-575 shall be recognized as an interchange zone and shall require a 75-foot minimum undisturbed tree buffer requiring 75 percent visual screening during all seasons. Supplemental planting is required if this screening does not exist. 
(Ord. No. 2008-Z-001, § 15, 1-15-08) 
27.16 - Variances. 
All petitions shall require a public hearing before the zoning board of appeals and shall be subject to the provisions for variances as defined in article 15 of the Cherokee County Zoning Ordinance and the application requirements of the Cherokee Planning and Zoning Department. 
(Ord. No. 2008-Z-001, § 16, 1-15-08) 
27.17 - Non-liability of county. 
The contents of this ordinance shall not in any way be deemed to impose any liability upon Cherokee County, the board of commissioners or county employees nor shall it relieve the owner and occupant of any private property from the duty to keep trees upon private property or under his/her control in a safe condition as not to affect the health, safety and general welfare of the public. 
(Ord. No. 2008-Z-001, § 17, 1-15-08) 
27.18 - Adoption and amendment. 
18.1  Repeal clause. The provisions of any ordinances or resolutions or parts of ordinances or resolutions in conflict herewith are repealed, save and except such ordinances or resolutions or parts of ordinances or resolutions which provide stricter standards than those provided herein. 
18.2  Severability. Should any section, subsection, clause, or provision of this ordinance be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the ordinance in whole or any part thereof other than the part so declared to be invalid. 
18.3  Amendment. This ordinance may be amended from time-to-time by ordinance of the board of commissioners, Cherokee County. Such amendments shall be effective as specified in the adopting ordinance. 
18.4  Effective date. This ordinance shall become effective upon its adoption. To the extent that an individual has submitted a development plan with the county or participated in a pre-development meeting with county staff prior to the passage of this ordinance, such individual shall be vested under the previous tree ordinance and subject to all such requirements in existence prior to the passage of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2008-Z-001, § 18, 1-15-08) 
APPENDIX A - SPECIMEN TREES 
Some trees on a site warrant special consideration and encouragement for preservation. These trees are referred to as specimen trees. 
The following criteria are used to identify specimen trees. Both the size and condition criteria must be met for a tree to qualify. 

 
Condition Criteria 
Life expectancy of greater than 15 years 
Relatively sound and solid trunk with no extensive decay 
No more than one major and several minor dead limbs 
No major insect or pathological problem 
As determined by county arborist 
Type 
Pines species do not qualify as specimen trees. 
In order to encourage the preservation of specimen trees and the incorporation of these trees into the design of projects, additional density credit will be given for specimen trees which are successfully saved by a design feature specifically designated for such purpose. Credit for any specimen tree thus saved would be four times the assigned unit value shown in Appendix C - Table A. To qualify, these trees must be within or directly adjacent to the developable areas of the site. Specimen Trees which lie inside areas already protected, such as buffers, wetlands or open space areas shall not receive extra density credit. 
Considering every development site and situation will be different, specimen tree preservation cannot be expressed as a formula, but is a required design criteria. If the tree preservation plan submitted for a development site does not incorporate design features to preserve specimen trees, an alternate site design may be required. 
To ensure that preservation of specimen trees is afforded a high priority, the alternate design features may include revised building designs and locations, parking lot designs and locations and also infrastructure modifications. 
While it is understood that all specimen trees cannot be preserved in a development, this program will be closely examined on every project prior to approval of any and all site plans. In this connection, the remaining specimen trees on site, which are allowed to be removed, will require recompense planting equaling two times their density unit value in Appendix C - Table A. Specimen trees must be replaced by species with potentials for comparable size and quality. Specimen recompense trees must be a minimum four-inch caliper at the time of planting. 
If a specimen tree is to be removed, a plan or written documentation indicating the reason for the removal must be submitted to the arborist. 
In addition to the penalties addressed in subection 27.4.1.1.2 of this ordinance, any specimen tree which is removed without the appropriate review and approval of the arborist must be replaced by trees with a total density of eight times the unit value of the tree removed. Size alone will determine whether a tree was of specimen quality if the tree is removed without approval and there is no evidence of its condition. 
(Ord. No. 2008-Z-001, 1-15-08) 
APPENDIX B - HERITAGE TREES 
Cherokee County residents have long enjoyed an abundance and diversity of trees and forests. These have served as resources for shelter and products, shaded homes and streets, and immeasurably added to the aesthetic character of towns and neighborhoods. Many urban trees have been associated with historic events or sites or have been planted by individuals or groups commemorating special events or community leaders. 
The Cherokee County Heritage Tree Register will recognize noteworthy trees or groves of trees and acknowledge the significance selected individual trees or stands have had to our communities. It is the intent of this ordinance that this process of identifying and publicly noting significant (heritage) trees and maintaining the register listings with accurate historical and current data should result in appropriate maintenance and adequate consideration being given to the status of trees as urban assets of particular vulnerability in changing urban areas. 
Heritage trees are individual trees or groves of trees of any size or species that are specially designated as heritage because of their historical, commemorative, or horticultural significance. The list of designated heritage trees remains open for new designations and provides useful information to the planning and zoning staff regarding the importance of their actions while planning activities near heritage trees. 
Cherokee County shall compile a list of heritage trees which may also include the oldest, tallest, largest and rarest native and exotic tree species growing in the county. One example of each species shall be designated with a small plaque placed at base of the tree. 
Anyone may nominate a heritage tree by contacting the county arborist. 
Upon nomination by any person and with the written consent of the property owner(s), the county may designate a tree or trees as a heritage tree. After county approval of a heritage tree designation, the county arborist shall notify the property owner(s) in writing. 
No tree on private property can be designated without the consent of the current property owner. Once designated by current owner as a heritage tree, this ordinance further states that it is unlawful for any person, without a prior written permit from the board of commissioners, to remove, destroy, cut, prune, break or injure any heritage tree. No heritage tree designation can be removed without the approval of the board of commissioners. If a heritage tree becomes a hazard, follow steps as defined in subsection 27.6.3. 
Within five days of designation as a heritage tree, the property owner shall do one of the following: 
(1)  Execute an owner's affidavit that identifies the tree(s) on the property which is classified as a heritage tree(s) and state that it is unlawful for any person, without a prior written permit from the board of commissioners, to remove, destroy, cut, prune, break, or injure any heritage tree. 
The affidavit shall be recorded in the land records of Cherokee County in the chain of title for the respective property, and a copy of the affidavit shall be provided to the county arborist. A form owner's affidavit may be obtained from the county for use. 
(2)  Execute a conservation easement that identifies the tree(s) on the property which is classified as a heritage tree(s), which conservation easement shall provide for the protection, preservation, and conservation of the heritage tree(s). The conservation easement shall further state that it is unlawful for any person, without prior written permit from the board of commissioners, to remove, destroy, cut, prune, break, or injure any heritage tree. The conservation easement shall be recorded in the land records of Cherokee County in the chain of title for the respective property, and a copy of the conservation easement shall be provided to the county arborist. A form conservation easement may be obtained from the county for use. 
Requests for the removal of a heritage tree designation will be denied by the Board of Commissioners, unless one of the following findings is made: 
(1)  There is a public benefit, or a public health, safety, or welfare benefit, to the injury or removal that outweighs the protection of the specific tree (public benefit means a public purpose, service, or use which affects residents as a community and not merely as particular individuals); or 
(2)  The present condition of the tree is such that it is not reasonably likely to survive; or 
(3)  There is an objective feature of the tree that makes the tree not suitable for protection; or 
(4)  There would be a substantial hardship to a private property owner in the enjoyment and use of real property if the injury or removal is not permitted; or 
(5)  To not permit the injury or removal would constitute a taking of the underlying real property. 
Decisions on removal of a heritage tree designation are subject to appeal to the superior court. 
(Ord. No. 2008-Z-001, 1-15-08) 
APPENDIX C - SITE DENSITY REQUIREMENTS 
The basic requirement of the Tree Preservation Ordinance is that all applicable sites retain a minimum tree density of as defined in section 27.8. The term "unit" is an expression of basal area (a standard forestry inventory measurement), and is not synonymous with "tree". A single tree equal to one tree unit is between 13 and 14 inches in diameter. 
This density requirement must be met regardless of if the site had sufficient tree density prior to development. For these sites, the density may be achieved by counting existing trees to be preserved, planting new trees, or some combination of the two as represented by the formula below. 
SDF=EDF+RDF 
SDF (Site Density Factor). The minimum tree density to be met on a development site, expressed in units per acre. 
EDF (Existing Density Factor). The total number of tree density units measured or calculated based on trees that will remain as conserved on site. 
RDF (Replacement Density Factor). The density or total unit value of new trees to be planted on a site. 
The site density factor (SDF) is calculated by multiplying the number of site acres units per acre required. 
Tree density calculations for a 2.2 acre example residential site would be as follows: 
2.2 acres X 20 units per acre equal a SDF of 44 units. 
Trees Inventoried in Tree Save Areas 

 
The existing density factor (EDF) is calculated by converting the diameter of individual trees to density factor units using Table A. 
Therefore, with a site density factor requirement of 44 units, a tree save area totaling 44.6 density units satisfies the site density requirement. These trees will be protected in a tree save area. 
To determine tree density on large sites, sample areas should be taken in areas to remain undisturbed. Use an approved timber cruising method (50 feet × 50 feet sample areas or prism method sampling). Flag the sample areas onsite and delineate locations on tree preservation plan. 
TABLE A  Conversion of Existing Tree Diameters (DBH) to Density Factor Units 

 
The unit value of an individual tree may be determined by using the formula: (Diameter) 2 × .7854 ÷ 144 
Replacement density factor (RDF) - If enough trees do not exist onsite to meet the tree density requirements, replacement trees will be needed. Calculate the RDF by subtracting the EDF from the SDF. 
For instance, if it was determined that the 2.2 acre sample site mentioned earlier had only enough existing trees to yield a 30 unit per acre EDF, then replacement trees totaling 14 density factor units would be required. 
SDF (44) - EDF (30) = RDF (14) 
The density factor unit value for each caliper size of replacement (new) trees is shown in Table B. Replacement tree caliper is measured at a point on the trunk six inches from the base. 
TABLE B 
Conversion of Replacement Tree Caliper to Density Factor Units 

 
The values in Table B shall also be used to determine the quantity of replacement trees needed for any specimen tree recompense planting. This planting is additional to planting required for site density requirements. 
Pasture Land Reduction 
It is recognized that some properties, or portions of them, may be devoid of trees due to agriculture use. In these cases a reduction of minimum tree density is warranted for new developments. In areas that meet the description of pasture land, the required minimum tree density shall be ten units per acre. 
Wooded Site SDF is calculated by multiplying the number of total site acres by 20. 
EXAMPLE: A ten acre site has a SDF of 10 × 20 = 200 units 
Pasture Land SDF is calculated by multiplying the number of total site acres by 10. 
EXAMPLE: A ten acre site has a SDF of 10 × 10 = 100 units 
Mixture of wooded and pasture land SDF is calculated using each component's unit per acre requirement. 
EXAMPLE: A ten acre site has eight acres wooded and two acres pasture land a SDF of (8 × 20 = 160 units) + (2 × 10 = 20 units) for a total SDF of 180 units 
Easement Exclusion 
Properties possessing natural gas, petroleum or electric power transmission easements, or major sanitary sewer main (greater than eight inches in diameter) or water main (greater than 16 inches in diameter) distribution easements, may exclude the land area contained in the easement from the total acreage of the property in fulfilling the site density factor provided that no improvements (e.g., parking lots, tennis courts, driveways, storm water detention facilities, etc.) are proposed within the easement. If any improvements are proposed within the easement, then the land area so utilized within the easement for improvements shall be included in the site density factor requirements. 
Lake and Pond Exclusion 
Properties with an existing lake or pond greater than one acre in size may exclude the land area contained in the lake or pond from the total acreage of the property in fulfilling the site density factor. 
Partial Exclusion of Buffers from Tree Density Requirements 
When designing a site, tree preservation shall not be limited to unusable, remote areas of the site. Tree preservation areas should be more evenly distributed around these sites. 
The intent is to preserve some natural characteristics of the site, such as quality existing vegetation, specimen and heritage trees for aesthetics and conservational purposes. 
In an effort to preserve trees and other natural vegetation within a development, 50 percent of the required post-development tree density shall be met outside stream bank and zoning buffer areas. The tree requirement cannot be fully satisfied by trees in buffer areas. The area of a development outside buffer areas must separately meet at least 50 percent of the required per acre tree density, even if trees in buffer areas would compensate or more than compensate. 
Example: 
30 acres × 20 units per acre = 600 units 
600 units × 50% = 300 units minimum to be provided outside the buffer areas 
A combination of trees save areas, preserved specimen and heritage trees and quality replanted trees will be used to meet this requirement within this developed area. 
It is understood that many times open or sparsely vegetated zoning buffers will require supplemental or complete planting to meet visual screening requirements; therefore, trees planted for this purpose may count towards the SDF. 
Industrial Development Exclusion 
Large industrial buildings for headquarters, manufacturing, warehouse distribution and similar uses often cover the majority of a development site. In addition, the development of the site for a single industrial building typically requires a significant amount of tree clearing and grading. Considering these unique development conditions for this land use, 100 percent of the building footprint may be excluded from site density calculations if the following conditions are met: 
1.  Property is zoned LI or HI. 
2.  Minimum building footprint is 30,000 square feet. 
(Ord. No. 2015-O-11, Exh. A, 12-15-15) 
APPENDIX D - RECOMMENDED SPECIES LIST OVERSTORY TREES 
TABLE A-1  Deciduous Species 

 
TABLE A-2  Evergreen Species 

 
UNDERSTORY TREES 
TABLE B-1  Deciduous Species 

 
TABLE B-2  Evergreen Species 

 
APPENDIX E - STANDARD DETAILS 

(Ord. No. 2008-Z-001, 1-15-08) 

(Ord. No. 2008-Z-001, 1-15-08) 

(Ord. No. 2008-Z-001, 1-15-08) 

(Ord. No. 2008-Z-001, 1-15-08) 

(Ord. No. 2008-Z-001, 1-15-08) 

(Ord. No. 2008-Z-001, 1-15-08) 

(Ord. No. 2008-Z-001, 1-15-08) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 
This is a chronological listing of the ordinances affecting the 1992 zoning ordinance. Repealed or superseded laws and any omitted materials are not reflected in this table. 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this publication, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 

 