THE CODE OF THE CITY OF LAKE PARK, GEORGIA 
____________ 
THE CHARTER 
AND 
GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE CITY 
____________ 
Adopted: October 7, 1997 
Effective: October 7, 1997 
____________ 
Published in 2010 by the Order of the City Council 
____________ 

CURRENT 
OFFICIALS 
OF THE 
CITY OF LAKE PARK 
January 2016 
____________ 
Eric Schindler 
Mayor 
____________ 
Ronald Carter 
Mayor Pro Tem 
____________ 
Bert Rutland 
Jena Sandlin 
Deborah Sauls 
City Council 
____________ 
Tabatha Fowler 
City Clerk 
____________ 
Ann Peterson 
Clerk Consultant 
____________ 
Robert A. Plumb, Jr. 
City Attorney 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a complete codification of the ordinances of the City of Lake Park, Georgia, of a general and permanent nature. Initially published and adopted in 1980, the Code was analyzed, revised extensively, and supplemented in 1987 for readoption, and again in 2010. As expressed in the Adopting Ordinance, the Code supersedes all such ordinances not included therein or recognized as continuing in force by reference thereto. This volume also contains the Charter of the City. 
The chapters of the Code are arranged in alphabetical order and the sections within each chapter are catchlined to facilitate usage. Footnotes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant provisions of the state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations setting forth their location within the Code volume is included at the back of this volume. The source of each section is indicated by the history note appearing the parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the Comparative Table also appearing in the back of the volume, any ordinance included herein can be readily found in the Code. 
Numbering System 
The numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and municipal codes. Each section number consists of two component parts separated by a dash, the figure before the dash representing the chapter number and the figure after the dash indicating the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the first section of Chapter 1 is numbered 1-1 and the eleventh section of Chapter 2 is 2-11. Under this system each section is identified with its chapter and, at the same time, new sections or even whole chapters can be inserted in their proper places, simply by using the decimal system for amendments. By way of illustration: If new material consisting of three sections that would logically come between Sections 3-3 and 3-4 is desired to be added, such new sections would be numbered 3-3.1, 3-3.2 and 3-3.3 respectively. New chapters may be included in the same manner. If the new material is to be included between Chapter 4 and 5 it will be designated as Chapter 4.5. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject, the next successive number being assigned to the article or division. 
Index 
The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of the headings being couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by municipal officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which he is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this Code is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental service, by which the Code will be kept up-to-date periodically. Upon the final passage of amendatory ordinances, they will be properly edited and the page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to the holders of the Code with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. Each such amendment, when incorporated into the Code, may be cited as a part thereof, as provided in Section 5 of the Adopting Ordinance. 
The successful maintenance of this Code up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the volume. As revised sheets are received it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publishers that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical references purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
The publication of this Code was by Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida, under the direct supervision of Regina Sosinski, Editor, and Rachael Jamison, Proofreader. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publishers are most grateful to all city officers and employees for their cooperation and interest during the preparation of this Code. Special appreciation is due to the Honorable Ina T. Lane, Mayor and Mrs. Benny Swink, City Clerk, for their help in the initial publication, and to Ann Peterson for her assistance in the 1987 and 2010 update projects. 
MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION Tallahasse, Florida 
ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF LAKE PARK, GEORGIA 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE NO. 73 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF LAKE PARK, GEORGIA; ESTABLISHING THE SAME; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN EXCEPT AS HEREIN EXPRESSLY PROVIDED; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF AND PROVIDING WHEN THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL OF LAKE PARK, GEORGIA: 
Section 1: That the Code of Ordinances consisting of Chapters 1 through 14, each inclusive, is hereby adopted and enacted as the "Code of the City of Lake Park, Georgia," and shall be treated and considered as a new and original comprehensive ordinance which shall supersede all of the general and permanent ordinances of the city passed on or before May 6, 1997, to the extent provided in Section 2 hereof. 
Section 2: That all provisions of such Code shall be in full force and effect from and after [October 7, 1997], and all ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before May 6, 1997, not included in such Code or recognized or continued in force by reference therein are hereby repealed from and after the effective date, except as hereinafter provided. No resolution of the City, not specifically mentioned, is hereby repealed. 
Section 3: The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4: That the repeal provided for in Section 2 hereof shall not affect any of the following: 
(a)	Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of such Code; 
(b)	Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the City, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds for the City, or any evidence of the City's indebtedness; or any contract or obligation assumed by the City; 
(c)	Any administrative ordinance of the City not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of such Code; 
(d)	Any ordinance fixing salaries, retirement benefits or other benefits of officers or employees of the City, not in conflict or inconsistent with such Code; 
(e)	Any budget or appropriation ordinance, or ordinance levying, assessing or providing for the collection of any tax; 
(f)	Any right of franchise granted by the City Council to any person, firm or corporation, or any amendment thereof; 
(g)	Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, closing, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the City; 
(h)	Any ordinance establishing and prescribing the street grades of any street in the City; 
(i)	Any ordinance providing for local improvements or assessing taxes therefor;
(j)	Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the City or providing regulations for subdividing or developing property; 
(k)	Any ordinance annexing property to or discontinuing property as part of the City;
(l)	Any ordinance regulating zoning in the City, not inconsistent with such Code;
(m)	Any urban renewal ordinance;
(n)	Any ordinance prescribing traffic regulations for specific locations, prescribing through streets, parking limitations, parking prohibitions, one-way traffic, or limitation on loads of vehicles or loading zones, not inconsistent with such Code; 
(o)	Any ordinance fixing utility rates and charges;
(p)	Any ordinance amending the Charter of the City;
(q)	Any ordinance enacted after May 6, 1997.
Section 5: That whenever in such Code an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor by the City Council, or whenever in such Code the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful by the City Council, and no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provisions of such Code, or of any secondary code adopted by reference, shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment for a term not exceeding sixty (60) days as provided in Section 4.13 of the Charter and section 1-8 of such Code. 
Section 6: That any and all additions or amendments to such Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the City Council to make the same a part thereof shall be deemed to be incorporated in such Code so that reference to the "Code of the City of Lake Park, Georgia," shall be understood and intended to include such additions or amendments. 
Section 7: That in case of the amendment by the City Council of any section of such Code for which a penalty is not provided, the general penalty as provided in Section 5 of this ordinance and section 1-8 of such Code shall apply to the section as amended; or in case such amendment contains provisions for which a penalty, other than the aforementioned general penalty, is provided in another section in the same chapter, the penalty so provided in such other section shall be held to relate to the section so amended, unless such penalty is specifically repealed therein. 
Section 8: That a copy of such Code shall be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk, preserved in looseleaf form or in such other form as the City Clerk may consider most expedient. It shall be the express duty of the City Clerk, or someone authorized by him, to insert in their designated places all amendments, ordinances, resolutions or motions which indicate the intention of the City Council to make the same a part of such Code when the same have been printed or reprinted in page form, and to extract from such Code all provisions which from time to time may be repealed by the City Council. A copy of such Code shall be available for all persons desiring to examine the same. 
Section 9: That it shall be unlawful for any person to change or alter by additions or deletions, any part or portion of the Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City of Lake Park to be misrepresented thereby. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-8 of the Code of the City of Lake Park and in Section 5 of this ordinance. 
Section 10: That all ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are, to the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed. 
Section 11: That this ordinance shall become effective on the 7th day of October, 1997. 
PASSED, APPROVED, AND ADOPTED on first reading by the City Council on the 9th day of September, 1997. 
PASSED, APPROVED AND ADOPTED on second and final reading by the City Council on the 7th day of October, 1997. 
  

  


SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

 
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note—The Charter of the City of Lake Park was enacted by Ga. Laws 1973, p. 3074, Act No. 525 (H.B. 649). Amendments thereto will be cited in parentheses following amended sections or subsections. For facility of usage, the editor has inserted cross reference and state law reference notes in appropriate places.
Ord. No. 11, adopted Feb. 5, 1974, purports to modify the Charter on several points relating to licenses and taxation. Because the ordinance did not specify sections to be amended, it is noted here for informational purposes.

ARTICLE I. - INCORPORATION; CORPORATE POWERS 

Sec. 1.10. - Incorporation. 
The City of Lake Park, Georgia, in the County of Lowndes, and the inhabitants thereof shall continue to be a body politic and corporate under the same name and style of the City of Lake Park, Georgia. Under that name, said city shall continue to be vested with all of the property and rights of property which now belong to the corporation; shall have perpetual succession; may sue and be sued; may contract and be contracted with, may acquire and hold such property, real and personal, as may be devised, bequeathed, sold or in any manner conveyed or dedicated to or otherwise acquired by it, and from time to time may hold or invest, sell, or dispose of the same; may have a common seal and alter and renew the same at will; and may exercise in conformity with this charter all municipal powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities of every name and nature whatsoever. 
Sec. 1.11. - Corporate boundaries. 
(a)	The boundaries of the City of Lake Park shall be those existing on the effective date of the adoption of this charter with such alterations as may be made from time to time in the manner provided by law. The current boundaries of the City of Lake Park, at all times, shall be shown on a map, a written description or any combination thereof, to be retained permanently in the office of clerk and to be designated, as the case may be: "Map (or Description) of the Corporate Limits of the City of Lake Park, Georgia". Alterations in these boundaries shall be indicated by and under the direction of the mayor. Photographic, typed, or other copies of such map or description certified by the clerk shall be admitted in evidence in all courts and shall have the same force and effect as with the original map or description. 
(b)	The city council may provide for the redrawing of any such map. A redrawn map shall supersede for all purposes the earlier map or maps which it is designated to replace. 
Editor's note— The annexation ordinances of the city are not included in the Charter or Code; they remain on file in the office of the city clerk. 
State Law reference— Methods and procedure for annexation, OCGA § 36-36-1 et seq. 
Sec. 1.12. - Powers defined. 
(a)	The government of the City of Lake Park shall have all rights, powers, privileges and authority herein conferred or herein enlarged, and such other powers as may be necessary or desirable including all rights, powers, privileges and authority whether expressed or implied that may now or hereafter be granted to municipal corporations by the constitution of Georgia and laws of this state. 
(b)	The rights, powers, privileges and authority heretofore enjoyed, herein retained or herein claimed shall subsist, notwithstanding the repeal of any law, until any such rights, power, privilege or authority be altered or taken away by amendment to this charter. 
(c)	The city in addition to the rights, powers, privileges and authority expressly conferred upon it by this charter, shall have the right, power, privilege and authority to exercise and enjoy all other powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities necessary or desirable to promote or protect the safety, health, peace, security, good order, comfort, convenience, morals, and general welfare of said government and its inhabitants, and to exercise all implied powers necessary to carry into execution all powers granted in this charter as fully and completely as if such powers were fully enumerated herein and to do and perform all of the acts pertaining to its local affairs, property and government, which are necessary or proper in the legitimate exercise of its corporate powers and governmental functions. 
(d)	No enumeration of any right, power, privilege or authority hereinafter made, and no repeal of any law under which the government derives any rights, power, privilege or authority, shall be construed as limiting or abolishing any right, power, privilege or authority hereinabove set forth. 
Sec. 1.13. - General powers. 
In addition to all other powers herein granted, the city shall be vested with any and all powers which municipal corporations are or may hereafter be authorized or required to exercise under the constitution and laws of the State of Georgia, as fully and completely as though such powers were specifically enumerated herein; and any and all powers which the city was heretofore authorized to exercise upon the effective date of this charter. 
State Law reference— General powers of municipalities, Ga. Constitution, Art. IX, § II, ¶ 1 et seq.; OCGA § 36-34-1 et seq. 
Sec. 1.14. - Construction. 
The powers of the city shall be construed liberally and in favor of the city. The specific mention or failure to mention particular powers in this charter shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general power of the city as stated in this charter. It is the intention hereof to grant the city full power and right to exercise all governmental authority necessary for the effective operation and conduct of the city and all of its affairs. 
Sec. 1.15. - Exercise of powers. 
All powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities of the city, its officers, agencies, or employees shall be carried into execution as provided by this charter. If this charter makes no provision, such powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities shall be carried into execution as provided by ordinance of the governing authority and as provided by pertinent laws of the State of Georgia. 
Sec. 1.16. - Ordinances. 
All ordinances, bylaws, rules and regulations now in force in the city not inconsistent with this charter, are hereby declared valid and of full effect and force until amended or repealed by the governing authority. 
Cross reference— See also § 8.11. 
ARTICLE II. - GOVERNING BODY 
DIVISION 1. - LEGISLATIVE BRANCH 

Sec. 2.10. - Creation; composition; number; election. 
The legislative authority of the government of the City of Lake Park, except as otherwise specifically provided in this charter, shall be vested in a city council to be composed of a mayor and four councilmen. The mayor and councilmen shall be elected in the manner provided by Article V of this charter. 
Sec. 2.11. - Terms and qualifications of office. 
Except as otherwise provided in subsection (b) of Section 5.10, the members of the council shall serve for terms of two years and until their respective successors are elected and qualified. No person shall be eligible to serve as mayor or councilman unless the person shall have been a resident of the city for a period of one year immediately prior to the date of such official's election, shall continue to reside therein while holding office, and shall be registered and qualified to vote in municipal elections of the City of Lake Park. 
(H.B. 913, § 1, 3-22-1989)
Sec. 2.12. - Vacancy; forfeiture of office; filling of vacancies. 
(a)	Vacancies: The office of mayor or councilman shall become vacant upon the incumbent's death, resignation, forfeiture of office or removal from office in any manner authorized by this charter or the laws of the State of Georgia. 
(b)	Forfeiture of office: The mayor or any councilman shall forfeit his office if he: (1) lacks at any time during his term of office any qualifications of the office as prescribed by this charter or the laws of the State of Georgia; (2) willfully and knowingly violates any express prohibition of this charter; or (3) is convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude. 
(c)	Filling of vacancies: A vacancy in the office of mayor or councilman shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term, if any, as provided for in Article V. 
Sec. 2.13. - Compensation and expenses. 
The mayor and councilmen shall receive as compensation for their services the amount established by ordinance. The mayor and councilmen shall be entitled to receive their actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties of office. 
Editor's note— The dollar amount previously incorporated in § 2.13 has been deleted by the editor as superseded by OCGA § 36-35-4. 
Sec. 2.14. - Prohibitions. 
(a)	Holding other office: Except as authorized by law, no member of the council shall hold any other elective city office or city employment during the term for which he was elected. 
(b)	Voting when personally interested: Neither the mayor nor any other member of the council shall vote upon any question in which he is personally interested. 
Sec. 2.15. - Inquiries and investigations. 
The council may make inquiries and investigations into the affairs of the city and the conduct of any department, office, or agency thereof and for this purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony, and require the production of evidence. Any person who fails or refuses to obey a lawful order issued in the exercise of these powers by the council shall be punished as provided by ordinance. 
Sec. 2.16. - General power and authority of the council. 
(a)	Except as otherwise provided by law or by this chapter, the council shall be vested with all the powers of government of the City of Lake Park as provided by Article I. 
(b)	In addition to all other powers conferred upon it by law, the council shall have the authority to adopt and provide for the execution of such ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations, not inconsistent with this charter, the constitution, and the laws of the State of Georgia, which it shall deem necessary, expedient, or helpful for the peace, good order, protection of life and property, health, welfare, sanitation, comfort, convenience, prosperity, or well-being of the inhabitants of the City of Lake Park and may enforce such ordinance by imposing penalties for violation thereof. 
(c)	The council may by ordinance create, change, alter, abolish, or consolidate offices, agencies and departments of the city and may assign additional functions to any of the offices, agencies, and departments expressly provided for by this charter. 
DIVISION 2. - THE MAYOR 

Sec. 2.20. - Election of mayor; term of office; vacancy. 
The mayor shall be elected at large and, except as otherwise provided in subsection (b) of Section 5.10, the term of office of the mayor shall be two years. 
(H.B. 913, § 2, 3-22-1989)
Sec. 2.21. - Duties of mayor. 
The mayor shall: 
(a)	Preside at all meetings of the city council; and may vote on any question on which the council is equally divided, 
(b)	Be the official head of the city for the service of process and for ceremonial purposes,
(c)	Have power to administer oaths and to take affidavits,
(d)	Sign all written contracts entered into by the council on behalf of the city and all other contracts and instruments executed by the city which by law are required to be in writing. 
DIVISION 3. - ORGANIZATION AND PROCEDURES 

Sec. 2.30. - Oath of office; mayor pro tem. 
Before entering upon the duties of office following their election, the mayor and each councilman shall take the following oath which shall be administered by the city clerk: 
"I do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will well and truly perform the duties of (Mayor or councilman as the case may be) of the City and that I will support and defend the Charter thereof as well as the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia and of the United States of America." 
Following the induction of members, the council by majority vote of all the members thereof shall elect one of their number to be mayor pro tem, who shall serve for a term of two years and until a successor is elected and qualified. 
(H.B. 913, § 3, 3-22-1989)
Sec. 2.31. - Regular and special meetings. 
(a)	The council shall hold regular meetings at such times and places as prescribed by ordinance. The council may recess any regular meeting and continue such meetings on any weekday or hour it may fix, and may transact any business at such continued meeting as may be transacted at any regular meeting. 
(b)	Special meetings of the council may be held on call of the mayor or two members of the council. Notice of such special meetings shall be served on all other members personally, or by telephone personally, or shall be left at their residence at least 12 hours in advance of the meeting. Such notice shall not be required if the mayor and all councilmen are present when the special meeting is called. Notice of any special meeting may be waived in writing before or after such a meeting, and attendance at the meeting shall also constitute a waiver of notice of any special meeting. Only the business stated in the call may be transacted at the special meeting, except by unanimous consent of all members present. With such consent any business which may be transacted in a regular meeting may be conducted at the special meeting. 
(c)	All meetings of the council shall be public.
State Law reference— All meetings of governing bodies to be public, private executive sessions, penalty, OCGA § 36-80-1; conduct of meetings of state and local departments, agencies, boards, etc., OCGA § 50-14-1 et seq. 
Sec. 2.32. - Rules of procedure. 
The council shall adopt its rules of procedure and order of business consistent with the provisions of this charter and shall provide for keeping a journal of its proceedings, which shall be a public record. 
Sec. 2.33. - Quorum; voting. 
Three councilmen shall constitute a quorum and shall be authorized to transact business of the council. Voting on the adoption of ordinances, shall be taken by voice vote and the "ayes" and "nays" shall be recorded in the journal, but any member of the council shall have the right to request a roll call vote. The affirmative vote of a majority of the councilmen shall be required for the adoption of any ordinance, resolution, or motion except as otherwise provided in this charter. 
Sec. 2.34. - Action requiring an ordinance. 
(a)	Except as herein provided, every official action of the council which is to become law, shall be by ordinance. Each proposed ordinance or resolution shall be introduced in writing and in the form required for final adoption. No ordinance shall contain a subject which is not expressed in its title. The enacting clause shall be "The Council of the City of Lake Park hereby ordains...". 
(b)	An ordinance may be introduced by any member of the council and read at a regular or special meeting of the council. Ordinances shall be considered and adopted or rejected by the council in accordance with the rules which it shall establish; provided, however, ordinances, except emergency ordinances, shall not be adopted until the next regular meeting of the council following the meeting of their initial introduction. Upon introduction of any ordinance, the clerk shall distribute a copy to the mayor and to each councilman, and shall file a reasonable number of copies in the office of the clerk and at such other public places as the council may designate. 
Sec. 2.35. - Emergency ordinances. 
To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property, or public peace, the council may adopt one or more emergency ordinances, but such ordinances may not levy taxes, grant, renew or extend a franchise, regulate the rate charged by any public utility for its services, or authorize the borrowing of money except as provided by law. An emergency ordinance shall be introduced in the form and manner prescribed for ordinances generally except that it shall be plainly designated as an emergency ordinance and shall contain, after the enacting clause, a declaration stating that an emergency exists and describing it in clear and specific terms. An emergency ordinance may be adopted with or without amendment or rejected at the meeting at which it is introduced, but the affirmative vote of at least three councilmen shall be required for adoption. It shall become effective upon adoption or at such later time as it may specify. Every emergency ordinance shall automatically stand repealed 30 days following the date upon which it was adopted, but this shall not prevent reenactment of the ordinance in the manner specified in this section if the emergency still exists. An emergency ordinance may also be repealed by adoption of a repealing ordinance in the same manner specified in this section for adoption of emergency ordinances. 
Sec. 2.36. - Codes of technical regulations. 
(a)	The council may adopt any standard code of technical regulations by reference thereto in an adopting ordinance. The procedure and requirements governing such adopting ordinance shall be as prescribed for ordinances generally except that (1) the requirements of section 2.34 for distribution and filing of copies of the ordinance shall be construed to include copies of any code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance; and (2) a copy of each adopted code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance, shall be authenticated and recorded by the clerk pursuant to section 2.37. 
(b)	Copies of any adopted code of technical regulations shall be made available by the clerk for distribution or for purchase at a reasonable price. 
Sec. 2.37. - Signing, authenticating, recording; codification; printing. 
(a)	The clerk shall authenticate by signature and record in full in a properly indexed book kept for the purpose of all ordinances adopted by the council. Every ordinance shall be signed by the mayor as a matter of course after adoption. 
(b)	The Council shall provide for the preparation of a general codification of all of the ordinances of the city having the force and effect of law. The general codification shall be adopted by the council by ordinance and shall be published promptly, together with all amendments thereto, with this charter and any amendment thereto, and such codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations as the city council may specify. This compilation shall be known and cited officially as "The Code of the City of Lake Park, Georgia." Copies of the code shall be furnished to all officers, departments, and agencies of the city, and made available for purchase by the public at a reasonable price as fixed by the council. 
(c)	The council shall cause each ordinance and each amendment to this charter to be printed promptly following its adoption, and the printed ordinances and charter amendments shall be made available for purchase by the public at reasonable prices to be fixed by the council. Following publication of the first Code of the City of Lake Park and at all times thereafter, the ordinances and charter amendments shall be printed in substantially the same style as the code currently in effect and shall be suitable in form for incorporation therein. The council shall make such further arrangements as deemed desirable with respect to reproduction and distribution of any current changes in or additions to codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations included in the Code. 
ARTICLE III. - EXECUTIVE BRANCH 
DIVISION 1. - ORGANIZATION AND GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 3.10. - Administrative and service departments. 
(a)	The council, by ordinance, may establish, abolish, merge, or consolidate offices, positions of employment, departments and agencies of the city, as it shall deem necessary for the proper administration of the affairs and government of the city. The council shall prescribe the functions and duties of existing departments, offices, and agencies or of any departments, offices and agencies hereinafter created or established; may provide that the same person shall fill any number of offices and positions of employment; and may transfer or change the function or duties of offices, positions of employment, departments and agencies of the city. 
(b)	The operations and responsibilities of each department now or hereafter established in the city shall be distributed among such divisions or bureaus as may be provided by ordinance of the council. Each department shall consist of such officers, employees, and positions as may be provided by this charter or by ordinance, and shall be subject to the general supervision and guidance of the mayor and council. 
(c)	Except as otherwise provided by this charter, the directors of departments and other appointed officers of the city shall serve at the pleasure of the appointing authority. Vacancies occurring in an appointive office shall be filled in the same manner as prescribed by this charter for an original appointment. 
(d)	Except as otherwise provided by law, the directors of departments and other appointed officers of the city shall be appointed solely on the basis of their respective administrative and professional qualifications. 
(e)	All appointive officers and directors of departments shall receive such compensation as prescribed by ordinance of the city council. 
Sec. 3.11. - Boards, commissions and authorities. 
(a)	All members of boards, commissions and authorities of the city shall be appointed by the council for such terms of office and such manner of appointment as provided by ordinance, except where other appointing authority, term of office or manner of appointment is prescribed by this charter or by applicable state law. 
(b)	No member of any board, commission or authority shall hold any elective office in the city. 
(c)	Any vacancy in office of any member of a board, commission, or authority of the city shall be filled for the unexpired term in the manner prescribed herein for original appointment, except as otherwise provided by this charter or any applicable state law. 
(d)	No member of any board, commission or authority shall assume office until he shall have executed and filed with the clerk of the city an oath obligating himself to faithfully and impartially perform the duties of his office, such oath to be prescribed by ordinance of the council and administered by the mayor. 
(e)	Any member of a board, commission or authority may be removed from office for cause by a vote of three members of the council. 
(f)	Members of boards, commissions and authorities may receive such compensation and expenses in the performance of their official duties as prescribed by ordinance. 
(g)	The qualifications required of members of boards, commissions, and authorities shall be as prescribed by ordinance. 
(h)	Except as otherwise provided by this charter or by applicable state law, each board, commission or authority of the city government shall elect one of its members as chairman and one member as vice-chairman for terms of one year and may elect as its secretary one of its own members or may appoint as secretary an employee of the city. Each board, commission, or authority of the city government may establish such by-laws, rules and regulations, not inconsistent with this charter, ordinances of the city, or applicable state law, as it deems appropriate and necessary for the conduct of its affairs, copies of which shall be filed with the clerk of the city. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICERS 

Sec. 3.20. - City clerk. 
The council may appoint a city clerk to keep a journal of the proceedings of the city council and to maintain in a safe place all records and documents pertaining to the affairs of the city, and to perform such other duties as may be required by law or as the council may direct. 
Sec. 3.21. - Tax collector. 
The council may appoint a tax collector to collect all taxes, licenses, fees and other monies belonging to the city subject to the provisions of this charter and the ordinances of the city, and the tax collector shall diligently comply with and enforce all general laws of Georgia relating to the collection, sale, or foreclosure of taxes by municipalities. 
Sec. 3.22. - City accountant. 
The council may appoint a city accountant to perform the duties of an accountant. 
Sec. 3.23. - City attorney. 
The council shall appoint a city attorney, together with such assistant city attorneys as may be authorized by ordinance, and shall provide for the payment of such attorney or attorneys for services rendered to the city. The city attorney shall be responsible for representing and defending the city in all litigation in which the city is a party; may be the prosecuting officer in the municipal court; shall attend the meetings of the council as directed; shall advise the council, mayor, and other officers and employees of the city concerning legal aspects of the city's affairs; and shall perform such other duties as may be required of him by virtue of his position as city attorney. 
Sec. 3.24. - Consolidation of functions. 
The council may consolidate any two or more of the positions of city clerk, city tax collector, and city accountant, or any other positions or may assign the functions of any one or more of such positions. The city council may perform all or any part of the functions of any of the positions or offices in lieu of appointing other persons to perform the same. 
DIVISION 3. - PERSONNEL ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 3.30. - Position classification and pay plans. 
The mayor shall be responsible for the preparation of a position classification and pay plan which shall be submitted to the council for approval. Said plans may apply to all employees of the City of Lake Park, and of any of its agencies and offices. When a pay plan has been adopted the council shall not increase or decrease the salaries of individual employees except by amendment of said pay plan. 
Sec. 3.31. - Personnel policies. 
The council shall adopt rules and regulations consistent with this charter concerning: (1) the method of employee selection and probationary periods of employment; (2) the administration of the position classification and pay plan, methods of promotion and application of service ratings thereto, and transfer of employees within the classification plan; (3) hours of work, vacation, sick leave, and other leaves of absence, overtime pay, and the order and manner in which layoff shall be effected; and (4) such other personnel policies as may be necessary to provide for adequate and systematic handling of the personnel affairs of the City of Lake Park. 
State Law reference— Authority to provide retirement, etc., benefits, OCGA § 36-34-2. 
ARTICLE IV. - JUDICIAL BRANCH—MUNICIPAL COURT 

Sec. 4.10. - Creation; jurisdiction generally; presiding officer. 
There is hereby established a court to be known as the municipal court of the City of Lake Park which shall have jurisdiction and authority to try offenses against the laws and ordinances of said city and punish for a violation of the same. Such court shall have the power and authority to enforce its judgments by the imposition of such penalties as may be provided by law; to punish witnesses for nonattendance, and to punish also any person who may counsel or advise, aid, encourage or persuade another whose testimony is desired or material in any proceeding before said court, to go or move beyond the reach of the process of the court; to try all offenses within the territorial limits of the city constituting traffic cases which under the laws of Georgia are within the jurisdiction of municipal or police courts to the extent of and in accordance with the provisions of such laws and all laws subsequently enacted amendatory thereof. Said court shall be presided over by the judge of said court. In the absence or disqualification of the judge, the judge pro tem shall preside and shall exercise the same powers and duties as the judge when so acting. Should both the judge and judge pro tem become disqualified, then any member of the council may be designated to preside with the same powers and duties as the judge when so acting. 
State Law reference— Appointment of judges of municipal courts, OCGA § 36-32-2. 
Sec. 4.11. - Judge. 
(a)	Judicial appointment and qualifications:
The judge of the municipal court shall be appointed by and shall serve at the pleasure of the city council. No person shall be so appointed unless he is a resident of the judicial circuit in which the court is located, is duly licensed as an attorney or appointed as a judge and has been actively engaged in the practice of law (either as a licensed attorney or as a judge) for at least five years preceding his appointment. 
(b)	Before entering on duties of his office, the judge shall take an oath before an officer duly authorized to administer oaths in this state, that he will truly, honestly and faithfully discharge the duties of his office to the best of his ability without fear, favor, or partiality. The oath shall be entered upon the minutes of the council. 
State Law reference— Appointment of judges of municipal courts, OCGA § 36-32-2. 
Sec. 4.12. - Convening. 
Said court shall be convened at such times as designated by ordinance or at such times as deemed necessary to keep current the dockets thereof. 
Sec. 4.13. - Jurisdiction specifically; powers; forfeiture of bond. 
(a)	The municipal court shall try and punish for crimes against the City of Lake Park and for violation of its ordinances. The municipal court shall have authority to punish those in its presence for contempt. The municipal court may fix punishment for offenses within its jurisdiction not exceeding a fine of $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 6 months or both. 
(b)	The municipal court shall have authority to establish a schedule of fees to defray the cost of operation and shall be entitled to reimbursement of the cost of meals, transportation and caretaking of prisoners bound over to superior courts for violations of state law. 
(c)	The municipal court shall have authority to establish bail and recognizances to insure the presence of those charged with violations before said court, and shall have discretionary authority to accept cash or personal or real property as surety for appearance of persons charged with violations. Whenever any person shall give bail for his appearance and shall fail to appear at the time fixed for trial, his bond shall be forfeited by the judge presiding at such time, and an execution issued thereon by serving the defendant and his sureties with a rule nisi. In the event that cash or property is accepted in lieu of bond for security for the appearance of a defendant at trial and if such defendant fails to appear at the time and place fixed for trial the cash so deposited shall be on order of the judge declared forfeited to the City of Lake Park, or the property so deposited shall have a lien against it for the value forfeited, which lien shall be enforceable in the same manner and to the same extent as a lien for city property taxes. 
(d)	The municipal court shall have the authority to bind prisoners over to the appropriate court when it appears by probable cause that a state law has been violated. 
(e)	The municipal court shall have the authority to administer oaths and to perform all other acts necessary and proper to the conduct of said court. 
(f)	The municipal court may compel the presence of all parties necessary to a proper disposal of each case by the issuance of summons, subpoenas and warrants which may be served as executed by any officer as authorized by this charter or by state law. 
(g)	The municipal court is specifically vested with all of the jurisdiction and powers throughout the entire area of the City of Lake Park granted by state laws generally to the mayor's, recorder's and police courts, and particularly by such laws as authorize the abatement of nuisances. 
State Law reference— Powers of courts generally, OCGA § 15-1-3; power of judges of municipal courts, OCGA § 36-32-3; authority of municipal corporations to provide for forfeiture of appearance bonds, OCGA § 36-32-4; sentences and fines which may be imposed by municipal courts, OCGA § 36-32-5; authorization and procedure for abatement of nuisances in cities, OCGA § 41-2-5. 
Sec. 4.14. - Appeal. 
The right of appeal and any bond as may be required to secure the costs on appeal to the superior court of Lowndes County from the mayor's court shall lie in the same manner and under the same procedure as generally prescribed for appeals and appeal bonds from the probate and magistrate courts. Provided that any person who fails to file his appeal within thirty (30) days of the date of his conviction shall be deemed to have waived any such right. An appeal to the superior court shall be a de novo proceeding. 
State Law reference— Certiorari to superior court, OCGA § 5-4-3. 
Sec. 4.15. - Rules for court. 
With the approval of the council, the judge shall have full power and authority to make reasonable rules and regulations necessary and proper to secure the efficient and successful administration of the municipal court; provided, however, that the council may adopt in part or in total the rules and regulations relative to the procedure of the operation of the superior court under the general laws of the State of Georgia. The rules and regulations made or adopted for said court shall be filed with the city clerk, shall be available for public inspection, and, upon request, a copy shall be furnished to all defendants in municipal court proceedings at least 48 hours prior to said proceedings. 
Sec. 4.16. - Technology surcharge. 
There shall be imposed by the Lake Park Municipal Court a technology surcharge in the amount of $10.00 per offense, for all offenses except OCGA §§ 40-8-76 and 40-8-76.1, said technology surcharge to be in addition to all other fines and fees imposed by the Lake Park Municipal Court. Such fee shall be used exclusively to provide for the following technological needs of the court and city law enforcement functions: the purchase, lease, maintenance, and installation of computer hardware and software; and the purchase, lease, maintenance, and installation of equipment and software used for imaging, scanning, facsimile, communications, projections, and printing. All funds collected pursuant to this section shall be maintained in a segregated account by the clerk of the court, separate from other funds of the city, and shall be expended only for authorized purposes upon approval by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 106, § I, 3-4-2014)
Sec. 4.17. - Crime lab surcharge. 
There shall be imposed by the Lake Park Municipal Court a crime lab surcharge in the amount of $5.00 per offense, for all offenses except OCGA §§ 40-8-76 and 40-8-76.1, said crime lab surcharge to be in addition to all other fines and fees imposed by the Lake Park Municipal Court. Such fee shall be used exclusively to pay costs and charges to the city to participate in and to utilize the Valdosta—Lowndes County Regional Crime Lab. All funds collected pursuant to this section shall be maintained in a segregated account by the clerk of the court, separate from other funds of the city, and shall be expended only for authorized purposes upon approval by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 107, § I, 3-4-2014)
ARTICLE V. - ELECTIONS 
DIVISION 1. - REPRESENTATION—GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 5.10. - Regular elections; terms. 
(a)	The mayor and councilmen in office on the effective date of this section shall continue to serve until their successors are elected and qualified as provided in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)	There shall be an election on the first Tuesday next following the first Monday in November, 2015, to elect the mayor and four councilmen who shall take office on January 1, 2016. 
(1)	The mayor and the two councilmen who receive the highest vote tally during said election shall serve terms of office expiring on December 31, 2018, and until a successor is elected and qualified. Their successors and future successors shall be elected in the same manner on the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November immediately preceding the expiration of terms of office and shall take office on the first day of January immediately following their election for terms of two years and until their successors are elected and qualified. 
(2)	The two councilmen who receive the third and fourth highest vote tally during said election shall serve terms of office expiring on December 31, 2017, and until a successor is elected and qualified. Their successors and future successors shall be elected in the same manner on the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November immediately preceding the expiration of terms of office and shall take office on the first day of January immediately following their election for terms of two years and until their successors are elected and qualified. 
(3)	In the event that two or more candidates for councilman receive an equal number of votes in the election prescribed by this subsection, the tying candidates shall draw lots to decide who will serve a term of two years under paragraph (1) of this subsection and who will serve a term of one year under paragraph (2) of this subsection. In the event that two or more candidates for councilman tie for the fourth position for councilman, those candidates shall draw lots to decide who will hold the fourth position for councilman. 
(H.B. 913, § 4, 3-22-1989; Act. No. 603 (H.B. 1317), § 1, 2-18-1992; Act. No. 152 (H.B. 371), § 1, 5-6-2015) 
Editor's note— Act. No. 152 (H.B. 371), § 1, approved May 6, 2015, set out provisions amending section 5.11(b). To correct a scrivener's error, and at the editor's discretion, said provisions have been included herein as amending section 5.10(b). 
Sec. 5.11. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— H.B. 913, § 4, approved March 22, 1989, repealed § 5.11, which pertained to qualifying; nomination of candidates; absentee ballots, and derived from the original codification. 
DIVISION 2. - CONDUCT OF ELECTIONS 

Sec. 5.20. - Applicability of general laws. 
The procedures and requirements for election of all elected officials of the City of Lake Park as to primary, special or general elections shall be in conformity with the provisions of the Georgia Election Code, OCGA Title 21, Chapter 2, as amended. 
Editor's note— The editor has substituted the correct citation of current state law in place of Title 34A of the Ga. Code Ann. 
State Law reference— Use of county or municipal registration system, OCGA § 21-3-123. 
Sec. 5.21. - Special elections; vacancies. 
In the event that the office of mayor or councilman shall become vacant for any cause whatsoever, the council or those remaining shall order a special election to fill the remaining portion of the unexpired term of such office; provided, however, if such vacancy occurs within six months of the expiration of the term of office of the mayor or any councilman, said vacancy in office shall be filled by appointment by the remaining members of the council. Both special elections and qualifications of candidates therefor shall conform to the applicable provisions of this charter and the Georgia Election Code, OCGA, Title 21, Chapter 2 as amended. 
Editor's note— The editor has substituted the current state law citation in place of Ga. Code Ann. Title 34A. 
DIVISION 3. - REMOVAL OF ELECTIVE OFFICERS 

Sec. 5.30. - Grounds for removal. 
The mayor or any councilman shall be subject to removal from office for any one or more of the following causes: 
(a)	Incompetence, misfeasance or malfeasance in office;
(b)	Conviction of a crime involving moral turpitude;
(c)	Failure at any time to possess any of the qualifications of office as provided by this charter or by law; 
(d)	Willful violation of any express prohibition of this charter;
(e)	Abandonment of office or neglect to perform the duties thereof; or
(f)	Failure for any other cause to perform the duties of office as required by this charter or by law. 
Sec. 5.31. - Procedure for removal. 
Removal of an elected officer from office may be accomplished by one of the following methods: 
(a)	By action of two-thirds vote of the entire membership of the council. In the event an elected officer is sought to be removed by the action of the council, such officer shall be entitled to a written notice specifying the ground for removal and to a public hearing which shall be held not less than ten days after the service of such written notice. Any elected officer sought to be removed from office as herein provided shall have the right of appeal from the decision of the council to the superior court of Lowndes County. Such appeal shall be governed by the same rules as govern appeals to the superior court from the probate court. 
(b)	By information filed in the superior court of Lowndes County as provided by law.
Editor's note— The editor has substituted "probate court" for "court of ordinary." 
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCE AND FISCAL[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Official bonds, § 8.10.
State Law reference— Budgets and audits, OCGA § 36-81-1 et seq.; counties to furnish municipalities with information relative to fair market value of property, OCGA § 48-5-352.

DIVISION 1. - TAXATION; SERVICE CHARGES; SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS 

Sec. 6.10. - Property taxes. 
All property subject to taxation for state or county purposes, assessed as of January first in each year, shall be subject to the property tax levied by the City of Lake Park. The council by ordinance shall elect to use the county assessment for the year in which the city taxes are to be levied and shall request the county to furnish appropriate information for such purpose. 
Sec. 6.11. - Tax levy. 
The council shall make an ad valorem tax on all real and personal property, not exempt from taxation, within the corporate limits of the city for the purpose of raising revenues to defray the costs of operating the city government, providing governmental services, and for any other public purpose as determined by the council in its discretion. The tax levy shall be expressed as a fixed millage rate of assessed valuation. The council is also authorized to provide for sufficient levy to pay principal and interest on general obligations. 
Editor's note— Ga. Code Ann., §§ 92-4101—92-4104 have been repealed; therefore, reference to those section has been deleted by the editor. 
Sec. 6.12. - Tax due dates and tax bills. 
The council shall provide by ordinance the procedure for the issuance of tax bills, the date when the taxes of the city shall fall due and the period of time during which taxes may be paid. The council shall provide by ordinance for the payment of taxes due to the city in installments, or in one lump sum, and may authorize the voluntary payment of taxes prior to the time when due. 
Sec. 6.13. - Collection of delinquent taxes. 
The council may provide by ordinance for the collection of delinquent taxes by fi. fa. issued by the city clerk and executed by any officer authorized by ordinance to execute such fi. fas. under the same procedure provided by the laws governing execution of such process from the superior court, or by the use of any other available legal processes and remedies. A lien shall exist against all property upon which city property taxes are levied, as of the assessment date of each year, which lien shall be superior to all other liens, except that it shall have equal dignity with those of federal, state or county taxes. In cases of hardship, the council shall have discretionary authority to waive any and all penalties imposed by this charter on delinquent taxes, fees, assessments, or on other amounts due to the city. 
Sec. 6.14. - Licenses, occupational taxes, excise taxes. 
The council by ordinance shall have full power to levy such license and specific or occupation taxes upon the residents of the City of Lake Park, both individual and corporate, and on all those who transact or offer to transact business therein, or who practice or offer to practice any profession or calling therein, as the council may deem expedient for the public health, safety, benefit, convenience or advantage of the city; to classify businesses, occupations, professions or callings for the purpose of such taxation in any way which may be lawful; to require such persons to procure licenses; to compel the payment of such licenses by execution or any other lawful manner; and to make laws and regulations necessary or proper to carry out the powers herein conferred, and to prescribe penalties for the violation thereof. The council shall have full power and authority to levy an excise tax not prohibited by general law. 
Cross reference— See also § 7.20 et seq. 
Sec. 6.15. - Sewer service charges. 
The council by ordinance shall have the right, power and authority to assess and collect fees, charges, and tolls for sewer services rendered both within and without the corporate limits of the City of Lake Park, to provide for the cost and expense of providing for the collection and disposal of sewage through a sewerage facility of said city. If unpaid, said sewer service charge shall constitute a lien against any property of persons served, which lien shall be of equal dignity with liens for county and city property taxes and shall be enforceable in the same manner and under the same remedies as a lien for city property taxes. 
Cross reference— See also § 7.11 et seq. 
Sec. 6.16. - Sanitary and health services charge. 
The council shall have authority by ordinance to provide for, to enforce, to levy and to collect the cost of sanitary and health services necessary in the operation of the city from all individuals, firms and corporations, residing in or doing business in said city benefiting from such service. Such authority shall include the power to assess, levy and collect annual or monthly sanitary taxes or fees in such amount or amounts, and based upon and in accordance with such classification of property and sanitary service or services provided, as may be fixed by ordinance. Said sanitary taxes and the assessment thereof shall be a charge and lien against the real estate in respect to which said taxes are so assessed, and the owner or owners thereof, and shall be of equal dignity with liens for county and city property taxes, and shall be enforceable in the same manner and under the same remedies as a lien for city property taxes. 
Cross reference— See also § 7.11 et seq. 
Sec. 6.17. - Special assessments. 
The council shall have power and authority to assess all or part of the cost of constructing, reconstructing, widening, or improving any public way, street, sidewalk, curbing, gutters, sewers, or other utility mains and appurtenances, against the abutting property owners, under such terms and conditions as may be prescribed by ordinance. Such special assessments shall become delinquent 30 days after their due dates, shall thereupon be subject, in addition to fi. fa. charges, to a penalty of ten percent and shall thereafter be subject to interest at the rate of seven percent per annum from date due until paid. A lien shall exist against the abutting property of equal dignity with liens for county and city property taxes, and said lien shall be enforceable by the same procedures and under the same remedies as provided for in this article for city property taxes. 
Cross reference— See also § 7.10 et seq. 
Sec. 6.18. - Transfer of executions. 
The city clerk shall be authorized to assign or transfer any fi. fa. or execution issued for any tax or for any street, sewer, or other assessment in the same manner and to the same extent as provided by Georgia law regarding sales and transfers of tax fi. fas. Such transfer or assignment, when made, shall vest the purchaser or transferee with all right, title and interest as provided by Georgia law governing sales and transfers of tax fi. fas. Provided that, upon levy of execution and sale of property pursuant to such tax fi. fa., whether assigned, transferred, or executed by the city, the owner of such property, in fee simple or lesser interest, shall not lose his right to redeem the property in accord with the requirements of redemption of property sold under state or county ad valorem tax fi. fas., as said requirements now exist or as may be hereafter provided by law. 
DIVISION 2. - BORROWING 

Sec. 6.20. - General obligation bonds. 
The council shall have the power to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program or venture authorized under this charter or the general laws of the state. Such bonding authority shall be exercised in accordance with the laws governing bond issuances by municipalities in effect at the time said issue is undertaken. 
State Law reference— Bonds required on contracts for public works, OCGA § 13-10-1; financing of facilities and services, OCGA § 36-34-6; street improvements, OCGA § 36-39-1 et seq.; power to issue notes, certificates and other evidence of indebtedness in anticipation of taxes, OCGA § 36-80-2; bonds generally, OCGA § 36-82-1 et seq. 
Sec. 6.21. - Revenue bonds. 
Revenue bonds may be issued by the council as provided by an Act known as the "Revenue Bond Law," approved March 31, 1937, (Ga. L. 1937, § 761), as amended, or by any other Georgia law as now or hereafter provided. 
State Law reference— Such law codified as OCGA § 36-82-60 et seq. 
Sec. 6.22. - Short term notes. 
Pursuant to applicable state law the city may obtain temporary loans between January first and December 31st of each year, subject to the short term debt limitations as set forth in Ga. Constit. Art. 9, § 5, Par. V. 
DIVISION 3. - PROCUREMENT AND PROPERTY MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 6.30. - Contracting procedures. 
All contracts shall be made or authorized by the council, and no contracts shall bind the city unless reduced to writing and approved by the council. All contracts, and all ordinances or resolutions making contracts or authorizing the same, shall be drawn by the city attorney or shall be submitted to him before authorization by the council. 
Sec. 6.31. - Sale and conveyance of land. 
(a)	The council may sell and convey any real or personal property owned or held by the City of Lake Park for governmental or other purposes, at a public or private sale, with or without advertisement, for such consideration as it shall deem equitable and just for the city, in accordance with Chapter 37 of Title 36 of the Code of Georgia, as amended. 
(b)	The council may quit claim any rights it may have in property not needed for public purposes upon report by the mayor and adoption of a resolution, both finding that the property is not needed for public or other purposes and that the interest of the city has no readily ascertainable monetary value. 
ARTICLE VII. - MUNICIPAL SERVICES AND REGULATORY FUNCTIONS 
DIVISION 1. - MUNICIPAL SERVICES 

Sec. 7.10. - Streets. 
The council is hereby vested with the power to layout, open, widen, change, straighten, alter, improve, vacate, abandon, and otherwise to exercise complete control over the streets, alleys, squares and sidewalks of the City of Lake Park. The council shall provide for the removal of any and all obstacles and nuisances in regard to the streets, alleys or sidewalks or other public places within the city and shall adopt appropriate ordinances to accomplish this purpose. 
Sec. 7.11. - Municipal utilities. 
The council shall have the power and authority to acquire, own, hold, build, maintain and operate a system of waterworks, electric lights, sewerage and gas distribution; to establish rates and charge fees for services rendered in any of said systems; to finance any of said systems through appropriate bond issues in accordance with the laws of Georgia; to exercise the power of eminent domain in regard to any of said systems, both within and without the corporate limits; and to contract to furnish the services of any of said systems to consumers outside the corporate limits of the City of Lake Park. 
Cross reference— See also § 6.15 as to sewer service charges, and 6.16 as to sanitary and health service charges; see § 6.17 as to special assessments. 
Sec. 7.12. - Sewers and drains. 
The council shall have the power and authority to provide for the establishment, extension, and maintenance of a system of sewers and drains, together with a sewerage disposal system. This power includes the authority to extend said system beyond the corporate limits. For these purposes the city is granted the power of eminent domain both within and without its corporate limits. The council may provide by ordinance for reasonable connection fees for tapping on to the water and sewer lines of said city, and, subject to applicable state law, may compel citizens to tap into the sewer lines when such service is made available. It may cause said connection to be made when the owners refuse, and issue executions to be made for the amount so expended, which execution shall create a lien on the property connected with said water and sewerage systems from the date of the order or connection. 
Sec. 7.13. - Right-of-way. 
The City of Lake Park shall have the right, easement and franchise of laying the necessary mains, pipes, conduits and drains, for waterworks and sewerage system purposes along the highways in the County of Lowndes without cost; it shall have full power and authority to enact and enforce such rules, regulations and ordinances as may be necessary to protect the water basin and watershed, from which the water supply is taken, from contamination and to protect said waterworks and sewerage system, including the mains, pipes, and conduits whether the same be situated within or without the corporate limits of said city. 
Sec. 7.14. - Eminent domain. 
The council is hereby empowered to acquire, construct, build, operate and maintain public ways, parks, public grounds, cemeteries, markets, market houses, public buildings, libraries, sewers, drains, sewage treatment, water-works, electrical systems, gas systems, airports, hospitals, and charitable, educational, recreational, sport, curative, corrective, detentional, penal and medical institutions, agencies and facilities, and any other public improvements inside or outside the city, and to regulate the use thereof, and for such purposes, property may be taken under OCGA Title 22 subject to such amendments as shall be enacted, or any other applicable Georgia law. 
Editor's note— The editor has substituted the current state law citation in place of Ga. Code Ann. § 36-202. 
State Law reference— Acquisition and construction of water and sewage systems, OCGA § 36-34-5. 
DIVISION 2. - REGULATORY FUNCTIONS 

Sec. 7.20. - Power to regulate and license. 
The council shall have the power and authority to provide by ordinance for the registration and licensing of any trade, business, occupation, vocation, profession or any and every other undertaking pursued for the purpose of personal gain or profit of whatever nature, engaged in or carried on within the limits of the City of Lake Park, regardless whether or not the subject has an office of establishment within said city. The council shall be authorized to fix the amount, terms, and manner of issuing and revoking licenses, provided that this authority is subject to the constitutions and laws of the United States and the State of Georgia. This power is conferred for the purpose of regulation under the police powers of the city and for the purpose of raising revenue for the operation of the city government through the imposition of a tax or fee on the privilege of operating within the city. This authority extends over individuals, partnerships, associations, corporations, and their agents, and any other legal entity capable of transacting business. 
Cross reference— See also § 6.14. 
Sec. 7.21. - Franchises. 
The council shall have authority to exercise control over the use of streets of the City of Lake Park. The power is hereby conferred upon the council to grant franchises for the use of said city's streets and alleys, for the purposes of railroads, street railways, telephone companies, cable, satellite and telecommunications companies, electric companies, gas companies, and transportation companies. This franchise right extends to, but is not limited to, the erection of poles, stringing of wires, laying of pipes, lines or conduits both above and below the ground surface. The council shall determine the duration, provisions, terms, whether the same shall be exclusive or nonexclusive, and the consideration of such franchises; provided, however, that no franchise shall be granted for a period in excess of 25 years and no franchise shall be granted unless the city receives just and adequate compensation therefor. The council shall provide for the registration of all franchises with the city clerk in the registration book to be kept by him. The council may provide by ordinance for the registration within a reasonable time of all franchises previously granted. 
Sec. 7.22. - Building, housing, electrical, and plumbing regulations. 
The council shall have the power and authority to enact such reasonable rules and regulations as it may deem necessary or expedient regarding the construction and maintenance of buildings, remodeling of buildings, plumbing, and electrical wiring and equipping of buildings, in order to promote the safety and welfare of its citizens and to guard against fire or other property damage. This power may, in the discretion of the council, be exercised by adoption of any such standard building, housing, gas, heating and air-conditioning, electrical, and plumbing codes as may be deemed appropriate. The council shall be empowered to engage the necessary personnel to enforce such rules and regulations as adopted, and to charge reasonable fees of inspections and permits; and may require the obtaining of a permit as a condition precedent to any construction, building, electrical or plumbing work. The council may enact all ordinances necessary to enforce such rules and regulations. The provisions of this section shall not be construed to authorize the establishment of standards for, or the regulation of the electrical wiring and equipment by or for a utility rendering communication services and required by it to be utilized in the rendition of its duly authorized service to the public. 
Cross reference— Authority to adopt technical codes, § 2.36. 
ARTICLE VIII. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 8.10. - Official bonds. 
The officers and employees of the City of Lake Park, both elective and appointive, shall execute such official bonds in such amounts and upon such terms and conditions as the city council may from time to time require. 
Sec. 8.11. - Existing ordinances and regulations. 
Existing ordinances and resolutions of the City of Lake Park not inconsistent with the provisions of this charter shall continue in effect until they have been repealed, modified, or amended by the council. Existing rules and regulations of departments or agencies of the City of Lake Park not inconsistent with the provisions of this charter shall continue in effect until they have been repealed, modified, or amended. 
Cross reference— See also § 1.16. 
Sec. 8.12. - Specific repealer. 
An act incorporating the City of Lake Park in the County of Lowndes, approved December 24, 1897 (Ga. L. 1897, p. 250) and an act amending an act incorporating the City of Lake Park, approved August 15, 1904 (Ga. L. 1904, p. 488) are hereby repealed in their entirety. 
Sec. 8.13. - Severability. 
If any article, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, or part thereof of this charter shall be held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect or impair other parts of this charter, unless it clearly appears that such other parts are wholly and necessarily dependent upon the part or parts held to be invalid or unconstitutional, it being the legislative intent in enacting this charter that each article, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence or part thereof be enacted separately and independent of each other. 
Sec. 8.14. - Repealer. 
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this act are hereby repealed. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and the special acts and ordinances amending the Charter. 

 
  
  

 
PART II - CODE OF ORDINANCES 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - Code designated and cited. 
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated "The Code of the City of Lake Park, Georgia," and may be so cited. 
Charter reference— Requirement or authority to codify and name code, § 2.37(b), (c). 
Sec. 1-2. - Rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the governing body: 
City. The words "the city" or "this city" shall mean the City of Lake Park, Georgia. 
City council, council, governing body. The words "city council," "council" and "governing body" shall mean the city council or other lawfully constituted legislative body of the City of Lake Park. 
Computation of time. When a number of days is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege, or the discharge of any duty, only the first or last day shall be counted; and if the last day shall fall on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise such privilege or to discharge such duty. When the last day prescribed for such action shall fall on a public or legal holiday as set forth in state law enumerating public and legal holidays, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following day to exercise such privilege or to discharge such duty; however, when said following day shall be a Saturday or Sunday, the party shall have through the following Monday to exercise such privilege or to discharge such duty. 
State Law reference— Public and legal holidays, OCGA § 1-4-1. 
County. The words "the county" or "this county" shall mean Lowndes County, Georgia. 
Day. The word "day" means a calendar day, of 24 hours. 
Gender. A word importing one gender only shall extend and be applied to the other genders if the context so admits. 
Month. The word "month" means a calendar month. 
Number. Words used in the singular include the plural, and the plural includes the singular number. 
Oath. The word "oath" shall include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
Other officials, officers, offices, etc. Whenever reference is made to officials, boards, commissions, departments, etc., by title only, i.e., "city clerk," "chief of police," etc., they shall be deemed to refer to the officials, boards, commissions and departments of this city. 
Person. The word "person" shall extend and be applied to firms, partnerships, associations, organizations, trustees, receivers, and bodies politic and corporate, or any combination thereof, as well as to individuals. 
Signature or subscription includes a mark when the person cannot write. 
State. The words "the state" or "this state" shall mean the State of Georgia. 
Street. The word "street" shall be construed to embrace streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts and all other public streets and ways in the city and shall embrace all parts thereof constituting the designated right-of-way. 
Writing. The word "writing" or "written" includes printing and all numerals. 
Year. The word "year" means a calendar year. 
State Law reference— Definitions of terms used in state statutes, OCGA §§ 1-3-1, 1-3-3. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections. 
The catchlines of sections of this Code printed in boldface type, italics, or otherwise, are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections, and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the sections, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or re-enacted. 
Sec. 1-4. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinance in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal for an offense committed under the ordinance repealed. 
Sec. 1-5. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is declared to be the intention of the governing body that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code. 
Sec. 1-6. - Amendment to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code, may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion therein. When subsequent ordinances repeal any chapter, section or subsection or any portion thereof, such repealed portions may be excluded from said Code by omission from reprinted pages. 
Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section of this Code in substantially the following language: "That section _____ of the Code of the City of Lake Park, Georgia, is hereby amended to read as follows: __________ (Set out new provisions in full) __________." 
When the governing body desires to enact an ordinance of a general and permanent nature on a subject not heretofore existing in the Code, which the governing body desires to incorporate into the Code, a section in substantially the following language may be made a part of the ordinance: 
"Section _____. It is the intention of the (governing body), and it is hereby ordained that the provisions of this ordinance shall become and be made a part of the Code of the City of Lake Park, Georgia, and the sections of this ordinance may be renumbered to accomplish such intention." 
All sections, articles, chapters or provisions of this Code desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by section or chapter number, as the case may be. 
Sec. 1-7. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)	By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the governing body. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the governing body or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)	In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)	When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)	Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions;
(2)	Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catch-lines, headings and titles; 
(3)	Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)	Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _____ to _____" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)	Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meanings of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance. 
Charter reference— Amendments to be printed in same style, § 2.37(c). 
Sec. 1-8. - General penalty. 
Whenever in this Code or any ordinance, or in any secondary code adopted by reference, any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or whenever in such Code or secondary code adopted by reference, the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor in this Code or the ordinance, the violation, concealing of a violation, or the harboring, assisting or protecting of a person charged with or convicted of a violation of any such provision of this Code or any ordinance or any secondary code adopted by reference shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00, or by sentence of imprisonment not exceeding six (6) months, or both, in the discretion of the judge. 
Charter reference— Authority to punish, § 4.10; limit of punishment, § 4.13(a). 
Cross reference— Municipal court rules, § 2-10; criteria for fines for traffic violations, § 13-3. 
State Law reference— Powers of courts generally, OCGA § 15-1-3; powers of judges and municipal courts, OCGA § 36-32-3; sentences and fines which may be imposed by municipal courts, OCGA § 36-32-5; authorization and procedure for abatement of nuisances in cities, OCGA § 41-2-5. 
Sec. 1-9. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever, which will cause the law of the City of Lake Park, Georgia, to be misrepresented thereby. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-8 hereof. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Personnel, Ch. 10; police department, § 10-20 et seq.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Consolidation of offices—City clerk, water department superintendent, tax collector, city accountant and superintendent of public works. 
For the proper and expedient administration of the affairs and government of same, and to provide these services to all of the citizens at the least possible financial cost, and in compliance with the charter, the city council hereby establishes and consolidates the positions of superintendent of the water department, city clerk, tax collector, city accountant, and superintendent of public works. 
(Ord. No. 7, § 1, 1-8-74; Ord. No. 7 Amd. 3, § 1, 3-2-82; Ord. No. 7 Amd. 4, § 1, 9-3-85) 
Charter reference— See §§ 2.16(c), 3.10, 3.20, 3.21, 3.22, 3.24. 
Sec. 2-2. - Same—Remuneration of officer. 
The city council hereby declares the remuneration for these consolidated offices shall be set from time to time by council as circumstances require and finances permit. 
(Ord. No. 7, § 2, 1-8-74; Ord. of 3-5-74, § 1; Ord. of 1-7-75, § 1; Ord. No. 7 Amd. 3, § 2, 3-2-82) 
Sec. 2-3. - Same—Scope of duties. 
The consolidation shall involve the performance of those duties regularly and normally designated to each such position. 
(Ord. No. 7, §§ 3, 7, 1-8-74)
Sec. 2-4. - Same—Term of office. 
The appointment and the term of office for these consolidated positions shall coincide with that of the elected officials of the city. 
(Ord. No. 7, § 8, 1-8-74)
Sec. 2-5. - Same—Duties of city clerk. 
The city clerk shall keep an accurate record of the financial income and expenditures of all the city finances and provide an accounting of the financial status of all departments at each of the regular meetings of the council, or at any special meeting if same shall be requested; and all records shall be open for examination by the mayor and council at any time. 
(Ord. No. 7, § 4, 1-8-74; Ord. No. 7 Amd. 5, § I, 4-2-2013)
Sec. 2-5.1. - Insurance in lieu of bond. 
(a)	The city shall purchase and maintain a commercial government crime insurance policy or employee dishonesty policy to provide coverage on the officers and employees of the City of Lake Park in lieu of a bond or master bond. 
(b)	Conditions. The form of such an insurance policy shall meet the following minimum for standards: 
(1)	The amount shall not be in amount less than $1,000,000.00.
(2)	The insurance policy shall be issued by a company authorized to do business in the State of Georgia. 
(3)	The insurance policy shall be issued by a company with a Best's rating of no less than A-. 
(4)	The insurance policy shall include "faithful performance" coverage and shall encompass claims for forgery or alteration; theft, disappearance, or destruction; robbery and safe burglary; public employee dishonesty; computer fraud; and fund transfer fraud. 
(5)	The policy may be issued on an annual or longer basis.
(6)	The form of the policy shall be subject to approval by the city attorney.
(c)	City to pay premium. The city shall pay the premium for each insurance policy required for an officer or employee. 
(Ord. No. 7 Amd. 5, § II, 4-2-2013)
Sec. 2-6. - Clerk assistant. 
The clerk shall have the authority to employ a qualified assistant to assist in any or all of the duties of the office if deemed necessary and advisable and in keeping with the performance and expediency of the duties involved. Reimbursement to the clerk for the employment of an assistant in any or all of the consolidated positions shall be made only by action of the governing body. 
(Ord. No. 7, § 5, 1-8-74)
Sec. 2-7. - Water department; established, superintendent. 
There shall be a department of the city known as the water department and there shall be a superintendent of said water department. The superintendent shall be such person as the mayor and council shall from time to time employ for such position. The superintendent shall have jurisdiction over the operation of the water department and over all persons employed in said department who are not under the direct jurisdiction of the mayor and council or some other officer. The superintendent shall be under the direct supervision and directly accountable to the mayor and council. The superintendent shall be paid such salary as may be fixed by the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 21, §§ 1, 2, 2-5-74)
Cross reference— Duties of superintendent, § 14-20 et seq. 
Sec. 2-8. - Independent audit. 
The city council shall have the authority to order a general, partial, or complete audit of any or all of the financial departments of the city by an outside accountant at any time if said council shall have reason or justification for such action. 
(Ord. No. 7, § 6, 1-8-74)
State Law reference— Audits of financial affairs and transactions, OCGA §§ 36-60-8, 36-81-7. 
Sec. 2-9. - Municipal court—Days and time of sessions. 
(a)	Pursuant to the charter, the council hereby declares the official meeting of the municipal court shall be held on Tuesday of each week if current dockets or outstanding and necessary business shall be on hand and in order. 
(b)	The official time for the meeting of the municipal court shall be 6:00 p.m.
(c)	The municipal court shall be called at any other such time as circumstances shall necessitate. 
(Ord. No. 6, §§ 1, 2, 4, 1-8-74)
Charter reference— Convening, § 4.12. 
State Law reference— Certiorari to superior court, OCGA § 5-4-3; powers of courts generally, OCGA § 15-1-3; municipal courts, OCGA § 36-32-1 et seq.; authority of municipal corporations to provide for forfeiture of appearance bonds, OCGA § 36-32-4; authorization and procedure for abatement of nuisances in cities, OCGA § 41-2-5. 
Sec. 2-10. - Same—Rules. 
The official procedure for the conduct of the municipal court shall be in accordance with that set forth in the charter, and as adopted by the council. 
(Ord. No. 6, § 3, 1-8-74)
Charter reference— Rules of court as prescribed, § 4.15. 
Secs. 2-11—2-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY COUNCIL[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Adoption of rules, § 2.32.

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-21. - Compensation. 
(a)	Each council member shall receive compensation in such amounts as may be set by the city council from time to time, subject to the requirements of OCGA § 36-35-4. 
(Res. of 7-1-86)
Sec. 2-22. - Terms of office. 
The term of office of the city council and mayor shall be defined as the second Tuesday after the election and until the city council and mayor are sworn in for duty to the city. 
(Res. of 7-1-86)
DIVISION 2. - MEETINGS 

Sec. 2-23. - Meeting day, place and time. 
The regular meetings of the city council shall be held on the first Tuesday of each month, at the city hall, at the hour of 7:30 p.m. The organizational meeting, after elections in even years, shall be held on the second Tuesday in February, at the hour of 7:30 p.m. 
(Ord. No. 36, § 1, 3-2-82; Ord. No. 42, § 1, 3-17-86)
Charter reference— Times and place as prescribed by ordinance, § 2.31. 
Sec. 2-24. - Acting presiding officer. 
In the absence of the mayor and mayor pro tem, the council shall elect a presiding officer for that meeting, who shall exercise all the powers of the mayor during that meeting. 
Sec. 2-24.1. - Opening invocation. 
(a)	Intent. It shall be the policy of the city council that the procedures stated in this rule concerning opening invocation shall govern all official meetings of the city council and that the members of the city council and city staff shall adhere to these rules. These policies and procedures are not intended, shall not be implemented, and shall not be construed in any way to affiliate the city council or the city with, nor express a preference for or against any faith, belief, opinion, religion, or denomination. Rather, these policies and procedures are intended to acknowledge and express the city council's respect for the diversity of religious denominations and faiths represented and practiced among the citizens of the city. 
(b)	Timing. After the call to order of all official meetings of the city council an opening invocation as described herein shall occur. The opening invocation will occur and be completed during the opening, ceremonial portion of the city council meeting and shall in no event occur, or be construed to occur, during the policymaking or legislative portions of the city council meeting. Persons delivering the invocation shall limit their remarks to no more than two minutes. 
(c)	Speaker selection. The opportunity to give the opening invocation shall be open to all, regardless of religious affiliation or non-affiliation. The council shall publish on the city website an invitation to volunteers interested in delivering the invocation. The respondents to the invitation shall be scheduled on a first-come, first-serve basis to deliver the invocation. All reasonable efforts shall be made to ensure that a variety of invocation speakers are scheduled for city council meetings. Notwithstanding the preceding, no invocation speaker shall be scheduled to offer an invocation at consecutive meetings of the city council, or at more than three city council meetings in any calendar year. The volunteer delivering the invocation shall not receive compensation from the city for his/her participation or services. 
(d)	No member of the city council, city employee or staff shall engage in any prior inquiry, review, or involvement in, the content of any invocation to be offered by an invocation speaker. However, consistent with U.S. Supreme Court precedent, invocation speakers are hereby advised that the invocation should not denigrate nonbelievers or religious minorities; threaten damnation; or preach conversion. Statements reflecting ideals relating to peace and security for the nation, safety of our armed forces, police, firefighters and emergency service personnel, wisdom for the lawmakers, and justice for the people are encouraged. 
(e)	The city clerk may add the name and affiliated organization of the selected invocation speaker for a particular meeting to the city council agenda next to the "invocation" item. 
(f)	In addition to volunteers submitting requests, the city council may invite religious leaders, chaplains, ministers, rabbis or similar [leaders] of congregations located within the jurisdictional limits of the city and Lowndes County to conduct the opening invocation, keeping in mind the objective of including a variety of speakers in the giving of the invocation. 
(g)	Conduct of opening invocation. Persons in attendance at the city council meeting are invited to stand during the opening invocation and pledge of allegiance. However, such invitation shall not be construed as a demand, order, or any other type of command. Such invitation constitutes a general invitation that a person in attendance may stand if he/she wishes to do so for such observances. 
(h)	Agenda disclaimer. The following statement shall be placed at the bottom of city council meeting agendas: 
Any invocation that is offered before the official start of the city council meeting shall be the voluntary offering of a private person, to and for the benefit of the city council. The views or beliefs expressed by the invocation speaker have not been previously reviewed or approved by the city council or the city staff, and the city is not allowed by law to endorse the religious beliefs or views of this, or any other speaker. Persons in attendance at the city council meeting are invited to stand during the opening invocation and pledge of allegiance. However, such invitation shall not be construed as a demand, order, or any other type of command. No person in attendance at the meeting shall be required to participate in any opening invocation that is offered. A person may exit the city council chambers and return upon completion of the opening invocation if a person does not wish to participate in or witness the opening invocation. 
(Ord. No. 110, § 1, 8-4-2015)
Sec. 2-25. - Order of business. 
Unless otherwise provided in a previously prepared agenda, the following order of business shall be observed: 
(1)	Reading the minutes.
(2)	Petitions and communications.
(3)	Report of special committees.
(4)	Report of officers.
(5)	Resolutions, orders and ordinances.
(6)	Accounts and salaries.
(7)	Unfinished business.
(8)	Trial of appeals.
Sec. 2-26. - Speaking rules for members. 
When any councilman is about to speak in debate or deliver any matter to the council, he shall rise from his seat and respectfully address himself to the presiding officer. He shall be confined to the matter in debate and shall not speak more than twice on any subject, nor more than once until every member choosing to speak shall have spoken. If any member, in speaking or otherwise, transgresses the rules of the council, the mayor shall call him to order, in which case the member so called to order shall sit down, unless permitted to explain. The council shall, if appealed to, decide, and if the decision of the council is not appealed to, the delinquent shall be reproved for the first offense, and for the second offense he shall be fined in a sum not exceeding $10.00. For the third offense, he may be expelled from the council chamber. 
Sec. 2-27. - Silence to be preserved by nonspeaking members. 
The members of council at all council meetings shall refrain from private conversation, and they shall preserve silence until a speaking member shall have taken his seat. 
Sec. 2-28. - Addressing members through the chair. 
No member of the council shall address the council or interrogate a member who is speaking except through the chair. 
Sec. 2-29. - Passing between chair and member speaking; leaving seat before adjournment. 
No member or other person shall pass between the chair and a member of council while he is speaking, nor shall any member of council at the time of adjournment leave his seat until the mayor shall announce the council adjourned. 
Sec. 2-30. - Calling for division of question. 
Any councilman may call for a division of the question of a subject which the sense thereof will admit. 
Sec. 2-31. - Proper motions when subject under consideration. 
When a subject is before the council for consideration, no motion shall be received but to adjourn, to lay on the table, for the previous question, to postpone indefinitely, to postpone to a day certain, to commit or to amend, which several motions shall have precedence in the order they stand here arranged. No motion for adjournment shall be debatable, and the motion for adjournment for the second time shall be out of order until further progress has been made in the business of the council. 
Sec. 2-32. - Resolutions and motions to amend; record of voting. 
All resolutions and all motions to amend any matter before the council shall be in writing. No motion to lay an amendment on the table shall be in order. The yeas and nays on any question shall, at the desire of any one councilman, be entered on the record, and the clerk shall also enter on the record the names of those councilmen not voting and voting. 
Sec. 2-33. - Communications through chair; interruption of proceedings. 
When a petition, communication or message of any kind shall be sent to the council, it shall be respectfully communicated to the chair by the person through whom it may be sent, and all such petitions, communications or messages shall be numbered as they are received, and taken up and disposed of in the order they are received, unless otherwise ordered by a majority of the council. 
No person in the chamber shall address the council without first having been recognized by the presiding officer, nor shall any person interrupt the proceedings of the council in attempting to be recognized or otherwise. 
Sec. 2-34. - Motion to reconsider. 
When the minutes of the preceding meeting of the council shall be read, it shall be within the power of any member to move for a reconsideration of any matter therein contained, provided such member shall notify the council of his intention to move such reconsideration at any time before the minutes are confirmed. 
Sec. 2-35. - Reconsidered matters to foot of agenda. 
Ordinances, resolutions or other matters reconsidered shall take their place at the foot of all other business before the council for consideration. 
Sec. 2-36. - Matter in possession of council. 
After an ordinance, resolution, motion or other matter is introduced before the council and stated by the mayor or read by the clerk, it shall be deemed to be in the possession of the council, but may be withdrawn at any time before a decision thereon by consent of the council. 
Sec. 2-37. - Protest against proceeding. 
Any councilman may enter a protest against any proceeding of council. 
Sec. 2-38. - Rules governing introduction, passage, etc., of measures. 
The rules contained in the charter shall apply to the introduction, passage, amendment, or repeal of ordinances of the city. 
Charter reference—See § 2.34 et seq. 
Sec. 2-39. - Questions put first. 
On all questions before the council, the last amendment, the most distant day, and the largest sum shall be put first. 
Sec. 2-40. - Calling up matter from table. 
A simple majority may call up, for consideration, any matter ordered to lie on the table. 
Sec. 2-41. - No debate during reading of yeas and nays. 
During the reading of yeas and nays on any question, no debate shall be had. 
Sec. 2-42. - Requiring motion in writing; deciding matters not otherwise provided. 
The council may require any motion to be put in writing. On all questions, not otherwise provided in these rules, a majority vote of council may decide. 
Sec. 2-43. - Motion to adjourn always in order. 
A motion to adjourn shall always be in order. 
Sec. 2-44. - Trials to be closed. 
In all trials of persons or personnel questions before the council, the chamber shall be closed after the evidence and argument are closed, until the council is ready to render a decision. 
Sec. 2-45. - Meetings open; exceptions. 
All meetings of the council shall be in public, except where the public good will be manifestly jeopardized, when the council shall, by unanimous vote, sit with closed doors; provided there shall be compliance with OCGA § 50-14-1 et seq. 
Sec. 2-46. - Calling ordinances and resolutions. 
All ordinances and resolutions shall be called in the order in which they stand on the minutes, and before reading any ordinance or resolution the second time, the clerk shall distinctly state its number and the name of the councilman by whom introduced. 
Sec. 2-47. - Parliamentary rules. 
When any question arises which is not provided for in the rules contained in this article, the same, as far as practicable, shall be controlled by Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised. 
Sec. 2-48. - Changing rules. 
No change of, or addition to, these rules shall be made, unless such proposed change or addition is first referred to a committee on rules, and reported back to the council, and shall then require a majority vote of council for adoption. 
Sec. 2-49. - Suspending rules; changing order of business. 
The rules of the council shall in no case be suspended, nor shall the order of business be changed, except by a vote of a majority of the council. 
Sec. 2-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CODE OF ETHICS 
Subdivision 1. - General Provisions 

Sec. 2-51. - Declaration of policy. 
It is essential to the proper administration and operation of the City of Lake Park that the members of its governing authority be, and give the appearance of being, independent and impartial; that public office not be used for private gain; and that there be public confidence in the integrity of the governing authority. The governing authority finds that the public interest requires that they protect against such conflicts of interest by establishing appropriate ethical standards with respect to the conduct of the members of the governing authority in situations where a conflict may exist. 
(Ord. No. 89, 10-7-08)
Sec. 2-52. - Definitions. 
As used in this division, the term: 
City council member shall be any person who is an elected city official, including the mayor, of the City of Lake Park. 
Government or city shall be construed to mean the City of Lake Park, Georgia government. 
Interest means any direct pecuniary benefit, which is not a remote interest, held by or accruing to a member of the governing authority as a result of a contract or transaction that is or may be the subject of an official act or action by or with the city. A member of the governing authority shall be deemed to have an interest in transactions involving: 
(1)	Any person in the member's immediate family;
(2)	Any person with whom a contractual relationship exists whereby the member may receive any payment or other benefits unless the member is receiving a benefit for goods and services in the normal course of business for which the member has paid a commercially reasonable rate; 
(3)	Any business in which the member is a director, officer, employee, agent, or shareholder, except as otherwise provided herein; or 
(4)	Any person of whom the member is a creditor, whether secured or unsecured.
Governing authority or member of the governing authority means the mayor or any council member of the city and any member appointed to any board or commission of the city (hereinafter sometimes referred to as "member" or "members"). 
(Ord. No. 89, 10-7-08)
Sec. 2-53. - Intent. 
It is the intent of this section that members of the governing authority avoid any action whether or not specifically prohibited which might result in, or create the appearance of the following: 
(1)	Using public office for private gain;
(2)	Impeding government efficiency or economy; or
(3)	Affecting adversely the confidence of the public in the integrity of the government.
(Ord. No. 89, 10-7-08)
Sec. 2-54. - Financial interests of members. 
Members of the governing authority may not: 
(1)	Have direct or indirect financial interests that conflict substantially with their responsibilities and duties as government servants; or 
(2)	Engage in, directly or indirectly, financial transactions as a result of, or primarily relying upon, information obtained from their office. 
Aside from these restrictions, members are free to engage in lawful financial transactions to the same extent as private citizens. 
(Ord. No. 89, 10-7-08)
Sec. 2-55. - Use of public property. 
A member of the governing authority shall not use government property of any kind for other than officially approved activities, nor shall he or she direct employees to use such property for these purposes. 
(Ord. No. 89, 10-7-08)
Sec. 2-56. - Use of confidential information. 
A member shall not directly or indirectly, make use of, or permit others to make use of, for the purpose of furthering a private interest, official information not made available to the general public. 
(Ord. No. 89, 10-7-08)
Sec. 2-57. - Disclosure of information by members of the governing authority. 
As custodians of taxpayer funds, all elected officials will disclose in a public forum any and all possible conflicts pertaining to personal credit problems, ongoing or past legal issues and any business or civic relationships which could give the appearance of influence in their decisions regarding expenditure of city funds, contractual negotiations and/or obligations. 
Members shall not knowingly or willfully make or provide false statements or information on which the governing authority, city staff or other agencies would reasonably be expected to rely to establish policy or make important decisions. A member violates this rule if he/she knows the statement or information is untrue, or the person has knowledge that would lead a reasonable person of ordinary prudence to conclude that the statement is untrue. 
(Ord. No. 89, 10-7-08)
Sec. 2-58. - Coercion by members. 
A member of the governing authority shall not use his position in any way to coerce, or give the appearance of coercing, another person to provide any financial benefit to him or persons within his immediate family, or those with whom a member has business or financial ties. 
(Ord. No. 89, 10-7-08)
Sec. 2-59. - Voting in matters of personal interest. 
A member shall disqualify himself from participating in any official act or vote, and any debate thereon, of the governing authority which results or could result in a pecuniary benefit to the member or to a business or activity in which he has an interest, when such benefit is not available to the public at large. 
(Ord. No. 89, 10-7-08)
Sec. 2-60. - Unauthorized purchases. 
A member shall not order any goods and services for the City of Lake Park without prior official authorization for such expenditure. 
(Ord. No. 89, 10-7-08)
Sec. 2-61. - Meetings of the council. 
Meetings of the council shall be conducted in accordance with the OCGA Title 50, Chapter 14, as amended, and Title 36, Chapter 80, Section 1. 
(Ord. No. 89, 10-7-08)
Sec. 2-62. - City attorneys used for private business. 
A member of the governing authority shall not use the attorney or attorneys who are under retainer by the City of Lake Park for personal or private business without paying just compensation. 
(Ord. No. 89, 10-7-08)
Sec. 2-63. - Unauthorized use of public employees. 
A member shall not use his superior position to request or require an employee to: 
(1)	Do clerical work on behalf of his family, business, social, church or fraternal interests;
(2)	Purchase goods and services to be used for personal, business, or political purposes; and 
(3)	Work for him personally without offering just compensation.
(Ord. No. 89, 10-7-08)
Sec. 2-64. - Travel expenses. 
A member shall not draw per diem or expense monies from the City of Lake Park to attend a seminar, convention, or conference and then fail to attend the seminar, convention, or conference without refunding the pro-rata unused per diem or expense monies to the city. 
(Ord. No. 89, 10-7-08)
Subdivision 2. - Administration 

Sec. 2-65. - Ethics committee. 
An ethics committee shall be established in the following manner: The ethics committee shall consist of three persons, one appointed by the mayor, one appointed by the council, and the third member shall be appointed by the mayor and council. All members of the ethics committee shall serve a two-year term. The members of the ethics committee shall serve without compensation. Each member of the committee shall have been a resident of the city for at least one year immediately preceding the date of taking office and shall remain a resident of the city while serving as a committee member. No person shall serve as an ethics committee member if the person has, or has had within the preceding two-year period, any interest in any contract, transaction, or official action of the city. 
(Ord. No. 89, 10-7-08)
Sec. 2-66. - Receipt of complaints. 
(a)	"Complaint" means a written sworn statement filed with the ethics committee containing specific allegations of misconduct by a member; provided, however, in order for the ethics committee to be able to act on a complaint, the complaint must be filed within six months of the date the complaining party knew or should reasonably have known of the alleged misconduct. 
(b)	Upon receipt of a written complaint, the ethics committee shall review it to determine whether the complaint is unjustified, frivolous, patently unfounded or fails to state facts sufficient to invoke the disciplinary jurisdiction of the Lake Park City Council. The city attorney shall assist the ethics committee in its review and investigation of the complaint as requested by the committee. The ethics committee shall be empowered to collect evidence and information concerning any complaint and to add the findings and results of its investigations to the file containing such complaint. 
(c)	Upon completion of its investigation of a complaint, the ethics committee shall be empowered to dismiss those complaints which are unjustified, frivolous, patently unfounded or which fail to state facts sufficient to invoke the disciplinary jurisdiction of the Lake Park City Council; provided, however, that a rejection of such complaint by the ethics committee shall not deprive the complaining party of any action he might otherwise have at law or in equity against the respondent government servant. 
(d)	The ethics committee shall be empowered to conduct probable cause investigations, to subpoena witnesses, to take evidence and hold hearings where provided for in the rules. 
(e)	The ethics committee shall be empowered to adopt forms for formal complaints, subpoenas, notices, applications for reinstatement and any other written instruments necessary or desirable under these rules. 
(Ord. No. 89, 10-7-08)
Sec. 2-67. - Service of complaint; hearings and disposition of complaints. 
The ethics committee as appointed herein set forth shall cause the complaint to be served on the member of the governing authority charged as soon as practicable after receipt. Service may be by personal service or by certified mail, return receipt requested. Unless the complaint is dismissed, a hearing shall be held within 60 days after filing of the complaint or as soon thereafter as reasonably possible. The ethics committee shall conduct the hearing in accordance with the procedures and regulations it establishes but, in all circumstances, the hearing shall include the taking of testimony, the right to representation by counsel, and the right to call witnesses on behalf of the accused and to cross-examination of adverse witnesses. The decision of the ethics committee shall be rendered to mayor and council within five days after completion of the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 89, 10-7-08)
Sec. 2-68. - Penalty and member rights. 
(a)	Any member of the governing authority who knowingly violates any provision of the code of ethics provided in this division shall be subject to public reprimand or censure by the governing authority of the city. Imposition of penalties under this division shall not preclude prosecution and/or imposition of such other penalties as may be authorized under the City Charter, state or federal law. 
(b)	At any hearing held by the ethics committee, the member of the governing authority who is the subject of inquiry shall have the right to written notice of the allegations at least ten business days before a hearing, to be represented by counsel, to hear and examine the evidence and witnesses and to present evidence and witnesses in opposition or in extenuation. 
(Ord. No. 89, 10-7-08)
Sec. 2-69. - Appeals. 
(a)	Any member of the governing authority adversely affected by a final action by the city council based on the findings of the ethics committee may obtain judicial review of such decision as provided in this section. 
(b)	An action for judicial review may be commenced by filing an application for a writ of certiorari in the Superior Court of Lowndes County within 30 days after any final action by the city council based on the decision of the ethics committee. The filing of such application shall act as supersedeas. The review by the superior court shall be limited to an inquiry of whether there was any evidence before the city council which supported the decision of the council, provided, however, that no action of the city council refusing or failing to take action pursuant to this code of ethics shall be reviewable by the superior court. 
(Ord. No. 89, 10-7-08)
Sec. 2-70. - Additional regulations. 
This division shall be cumulative to any other division, resolution or act now existing. 
(Ord. No. 89, 10-7-08)
Subdivision 3. - Acceptance of Gifts and Conflict of Interest 

Sec. 2-71. - Acceptance of gifts, gratuities, special privileges. 
Members of the governing authority shall not solicit or accept directly or indirectly anything of value from any person, corporation, or group which: 
(1)	Has, or is seeking to obtain contractual or other business or financial relationships with the City of Lake Park; 
(2)	In exchange for the thing of value seeks to have a member exercise a matter of discretion in his or her favor; 
(3)	In exchange for the thing of value seeks to have interests, which may be affected by the performance or nonperformance of the official duty of the member. 
This section shall not apply to campaign contributions, which shall be reported in accordance with Georgia laws. 
(Ord. No. 89, 10-7-08)
Sec. 2-72. - Proprietorship of creations. 
All plans, designs, reports, specifications, drawings, devices, inventions, and other items produced or created by members of the governing authority during their time in office or through the use of city facilities or equipment or at the request of the city shall be and become the sole property of the City of Lake Park. 
(Ord. No. 89, 10-7-08)
Sec. 2-73. - Confidential information. 
Members of the governing authority shall not disclose confidential information gained by reason of their official position, nor shall they otherwise use such information for their personal gain or benefit. 
(Ord. No. 89, 10-7-08)
Sec. 2-74. - Conflict of interest. 
No elected official, appointed officer, or employee of the city or any agency or political entity to which this charter applies shall knowingly engage in any business or transaction or have a financial or other personal interest, direct or indirect, which is incompatible with the proper discharge of his official duties or which would tend to impair his independence of judgment or action in the performance of his official duties. 
(Ord. No. 89, 10-7-08)
Sec. 2-75. - Political activity. 
Members of the governing authority shall not utilize any city equipment or vehicles in support of any political campaign. 
(Ord. No. 89, 10-7-08)
Secs. 2-76—2-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PLANNING COMMISSION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note—Ord. No. 93, §§ 1—16, adopted Dec. 2, 2008, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, inclusion herein as superseding former Art. III was at the discretion of the editor. Former Art. III, §§ 2-61—2-66, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 70, 1-7-97. The provisions of Ord. No. 93 have been included as §§ 2-81—2-96.

Sec. 2-81. - Continuation of the Greater Lowndes Planning Commission. 
The Greater Lowndes Planning Commission, herein referred to as the commission, shall be continued as herein provided. All actions heretofore made by the commission as created in 1996 are hereby ratified and confirmed. Any unfinished business of the commission as created in 1996 shall be assumed and continued by the commission as continued by this joint ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 93, § 1, 12-2-08)
Sec. 2-82. - Membership. 
The commission shall consist of no more than 11 members, herein referred to as commission members; three appointed by Lowndes County, four appointed by the City of Valdosta, one appointed by the City of Hahira, one appointed by the City of Remerton, one appointed by the City of Lake Park, and one appointed by the City of Dasher. The ten currently active commission members shall continue to serve as members of the commission. In addition, the City of Remerton shall appoint one commission member. If any government fails to confirm their intention to fill their designated appointment(s) within 60 days of adoption of the ordinance, that position(s) shall be eliminated. 
(Ord. No. 93, § 2, 12-2-08)
Sec. 2-83. - Terms. 
The ten currently active commission members shall serve terms to expire as follows: 

 
The term of the commission member appointed by the City of Remerton shall begin upon appointment and end December 31, 2013. Thereafter, all commission members shall be appointed for terms of five years to begin January 1 and end December 31. Any commission member may be appointed to succeed himself or herself. If at the end of any term of any commission member a successor thereto has not been appointed, the commission member whose term has expired shall continue to serve as a commission member until his or her successor is appointed; provided, however, the term of any such successor shall be deemed to begin on the day following the expired term of the commission member then holding office. 
(Ord. No. 93, § 3, 12-2-08)
Sec. 2-84. - Eligibility. 
Each commission member shall be a resident of Lowndes County at the time of his or her appointment and shall remain a resident of Lowndes County in order to continue serving as a commission member. It is recommended that appointees to the commission live within the jurisdictional boundaries of the appointing government. With exception of current commission members, for their current terms, commission members shall hold no other elected office or an appointed office for which compensation is received. 
(Ord. No. 93, § 4, 12-2-08)
Sec. 2-85. - Vacancy. 
Any vacancy on the commission shall be filled by the member government that appointed the commission member whose resignation or ineligibility resulted in such vacancy. The commission member so appointed shall serve for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
(Ord. No. 93, § 5, 12-2-08)
Sec. 2-86. - Officers, meetings, rules. 
The commission shall elect from its members a chairman, to serve for a term of one calendar year and until a successor is elected, and a vice-chairman, to serve for a term of one calendar year and until a successor is elected. The chairman and vice-chairman may succeed themselves by re-appointment by the commission. The commission shall meet once a month at the call of the chairman except as otherwise determined by the commission and at such other times as the chairman or a majority of commission members shall determine. The commission shall adopt rules and procedures for the conduct of its meetings and the transaction of its business and shall cause minutes of its meetings and records of its actions to be kept, which minutes and records shall be public records within the meaning of Georgia law. 
(Ord. No. 93, § 6, 12-2-08)
Sec. 2-87. - Duties and responsibilities. 
The duties and responsibilities of the commission shall be: 
(1)	To provide each member government advice and recommendations upon proposed amendments to its respective zoning ordinance, subdivision regulations, and other land use ordinances and regulations, as requested by such member government; 
(2)	To provide each member government advice and recommendations upon its respective local comprehensive plan, as requested by such member government; and 
(3)	To provide each member government advice and recommendations on such other matters as requested from time to time by such member government. 
(Ord. No. 93, § 7, 12-2-08)
Sec. 2-88. - Training. 
Each commission member shall attend one training session within the first year of his or her appointment. Additionally, each member shall attend at least one training session on a bi-annual basis. Training must be provided by City of Valdosta, Lowndes County, or South Georgia Regional Commission (SGRC) planning staff or sponsored by one of the following organizations: American Planning Association (APA), Georgia Planning Association (GPA), Georgia Department of Community Affairs (DCA), Georgia Association of Zoning Administrators (GAZA), [or] International City County Management Association (ICMA). Training events provided by organizations outside of this list must be approved by the SGRC Planning Director, City of Valdosta Planner, and Lowndes County Planner. Expenses associated with registration fees, travel, and lodging shall be subject to reimbursement as provided in section 2-93. 
(Ord. No. 93, § 8, 12-2-08)
Sec. 2-89. - Conflicts of interest. 
A commission member shall have a conflict of interest when he or she: 
(1)	Has a financial interest directly affected by advice or recommendation under consideration by the commission; 
(2)	Has a financial interest in any business entity that has a financial interest directly affected by advice or recommendation under consideration by the commission; or 
(3)	Has an immediate family member having any financial interest described in subsection (1) or (2) of this section. 
Any commission member having a conflict of interest shall immediately disclose the nature and extent of such interest to the commission. The commission member who has such an interest shall be disqualified from discussing and voting on and shall not attempt to influence the advice or recommendation of the commission under consideration which gave rise to the conflict of interest. 
(Ord. No. 93, § 9, 12-2-08)
Sec. 2-90. - Fiscal year. 
The fiscal year of the commission shall begin July 1 of each calendar year and end June 30 of the following calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 93, § 10, 12-2-08)
Sec. 2-91. - Meeting space. 
The commission shall determine a proper location for their meetings. 
(Ord. No. 93, § 11, 12-2-08)
Sec. 2-92. - Reimbursement for expenses. 
The member governments shall provide budgeted funding for each commission member to receive reimbursement for expenses related to the completion of those duties and responsibilities described in section 2-88, including but not limited to reimbursement for use of personal vehicle and mileage. This reimbursement shall be paid to the commission member following their attendance at each regular monthly public hearing provided, however, the total amount of such funding for each fiscal year of the commission shall be within the annual budget of the commission for such funding approved by the member governments. The amount of reimbursement for expenses shall be determined by the member governments on an annual basis in connection with their approval of the annual budget of the commission. 
(Ord. No. 93, § 12, 12-2-08)
Sec. 2-93. - Training expenses. 
The member governments shall provide funding for the purpose of training for commission members, including attending out-of-town training seminars and training provided locally for planning commission members; provided, however, the total amount of such funding for each fiscal year of the commission shall be within the annual budget of the commission for such funding approved by the member governments. 
(Ord. No. 93, § 13, 12-2-08)
Sec. 2-94. - Miscellaneous expenses. 
The member governments shall provide funding for miscellaneous expenses of the commission, to include the purchase of journals and other publications and plaques or similar mementos provided to commission members at the end of a final term as a member of the commission, provided, however, the total amount of such funding for each fiscal year of the commission shall be within the annual budget of the commission for such funding approved by the member governments. 
(Ord. No. 93, § 14, 12-2-08)
Sec. 2-95. - Administrative assistance. 
The member governments shall provide funding for the purpose of the provision of administrative assistance to the commission necessary for the performance of the commission's duties and responsibilities, including assistance for the purpose of providing reimbursement for expenses to commission members, making arrangements for commission members to attend training seminars, coordinating and overseeing the provision of local training opportunities for commission members, making payment of training expenses, preparing meeting agenda, taking and preparing minutes of commission meetings, maintaining and distributing journals and other publications to commission members, keeping records of the commission, preparing annual budgets of the commission for submission to the member governments, and providing the commission expense data as requested by the commission; provided, however, the total amount of such funding for each fiscal year of the commission shall be within the annual budget of the commission for such funding approved by the member governments. 
(Ord. No. 93, § 15, 12-2-08)
Sec. 2-96. - Budget. 
In advance of each fiscal year of the commission, the commission shall meet with the SGRC to review the proposed budget for funding by the member governments prior to the submittal of the budget to the member governments. Such proposed budget shall include funding for reimbursement of expenses to commission members, training for commission members, miscellaneous expenses, and the provision of administrative assistance to the commission. Following approval by the member governments, each member government shall pay a portion share of the approved budget based on its population based on the most recent annual local government population estimates available from the U.S. Census Bureau, with Lowndes County's population to be the population of the unincorporated area of the county. Lowndes County's share of funding shall be paid from the unincorporated area revenues of Lowndes County. The proportion share of the cities of Hahira, Lake Park, Dasher, and Remerton shall be paid for from SGRC revenues and shall equal the annually established SGRC dues rate applied to the current Census population estimate for each of the aforementioned communities actively participating in the commission. Following the end of each fiscal year, any remaining funds shall be credited or refunded to the funding entity based on the formulas on which such funding was provided except, however, in the case of Hahira, Lake Park, Dasher and Remerton such funding shall be returned to the SGRC. 
(Ord. No. 93, § 16, 12-2-08)
Chapter 3 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note—Ord. No. 104, adopted Jan. 4, 2011, repealed the former Ch. 3, §§ 3-1—3-12, and enacted a new Ch. 3 as set out herein. The former Ch. 3 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 28, 11-12-74; Ord. No. 28 Amd. 1, 12-3-81; Ord. No. 5 Amd. 3, 12-3-85.

ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 3-1. - Definitions. 
In this chapter, in addition to the definitions provided in specific articles hereof in this Code, the following words shall have the indicated meanings: 
(1)	Alcoholic beverage means and includes all alcohol, distilled spirits, beer, malt beverage, wine or fortified wine. 
(2)	Building code means and include all building, plumbing and electrical codes and any other similar technical code of the city. 
(3)	Church means any permanent building where persons regularly assemble for religious worship and shall not include any church land or property not regularly used as an assembly area for religious worship services. 
(4)	College means those state, county, city, church or other colleges that teach the subjects commonly taught in the common colleges of this state. 
(5)	Distance shall be measured from the property line of the tract on which is located the business regulated under this chapter to the property line of the tract on which is located the church, residence, school, corporate boundaries etc. 
(6)	Distilled spirits means any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume, including, but not limited to, all fortified wines. 
(7)	Election day shall be deemed to refer to any day upon which any municipal, county, statewide, or national primary, special, or general election is held and to any day upon which any runoff is held for such election. 
(8)	Liquor store or retail liquor means any establishment that is licensed for the retail sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(9)	License year means that 12-month period for and with respect to which licenses under this chapter shall be issued; such license year shall begin on the first day of January of each year and end on the 31st day of December next following. 
(10)	Malt beverage means any alcoholic beverage obtained by fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops, or any other similar product, or any combination of such products in water, containing not more than six percent alcohol by volume and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager beer, small beer, and strong beer. The term does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine. 
(11)	Premises means the definite closed or partitioned-in locality, whether room, shop or building, wherein alcoholic beverages are sold or consumed. Premises also include any area or patio immediately adjacent to the main licensed facility and located on property owned or leased by such licensee. The area or patio need not be covered. 
(12)	Private club means a corporation or association organized and existing under the laws of the state, actively in operation within the city immediately prior to the application for a license hereunder, having at least 25 members regularly paying dues, organized and operated exclusively for pleasure, recreation and other nonprofitable purposes, no part of the net earnings of which inure to the benefit of any shareholder or member and owning, hiring or leasing a building or space therein for the reasonable use of its members with suitable kitchen and dining room space and equipment and maintaining and using a sufficient number of servants and employees for cooking, preparing and serving meals for its members and guests; provided that no member or officer, agent or employee, is paid or directly or indirectly receives in the form of salary or other compensation any profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages beyond the amount of such salary as may be fixed by its members at an annual meeting, or by its governing body, out of the general revenue of the club. For the purpose of this subsection, tips which are added to the bill under club regulations shall not be considered as profits hereunder. A private club organized or operated primarily for the selling or serving of alcoholic beverages by the drink shall not be licensed under this article nor permitted to sell or serve such beverages at all. 
(13)	Private residence means a house or dwelling located in any residential zoning classification including all single-family or multi-family zoning classifications under zoning ordinances of the City of Lake Park. 
(14)	Retail means retail sales packaged to go and not for consumption on the premises. 
(15)	School means those state, county, city, church or other schools that teach the subjects commonly taught in the common schools of this state and shall include the adjacent open land used for school purposes. 
(16)	Wine means any alcoholic beverage containing not more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term includes, but is not limited to all sparkling wines, champagnes, combinations of such beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines, and like products. The term does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. A liquid shall first be deemed to be a wine at the point in the manufacturing process when it conforms to the definition of wine contained in this subsection. 
(Ord. No. 104, 1-4-2011)
Sec. 3-2. - License required; scope of chapter. 
(a)	No malt beverage, wines, distilled spirits or any other alcoholic beverage shall be stored, delivered, sold or manufactured in the city except under a license issued pursuant to this chapter and then only for the specific beverage and manner of sale provided in the license. 
(b)	The requirements of this chapter shall be in addition to any other requirements for business licenses under this Code; and if other provisions of this Code conflict with this chapter, then this chapter shall control. 
(c)	Licenses which may be issued under this chapter include:
(1)	Retail:
a.	Malt beverages;
b.	Wine;
c.	Distilled spirits;
(2)	Consumption on the premises:
a.	Malt beverages;
b.	Wine;
c.	Distilled spirits;
d.	Sunday sales; or
(3)	Any combination of the above at the same location provided no retail or wholesale licensee shall hold any consumption-on-the-premises license for the same location. 
(d)	Licenses hereunder shall be mere grants or privileges, and the City Council of Lake Park shall have the discretion to approve, or deny any application for a license to sell alcoholic beverages by the drink, or to revoke the same. 
(Ord. No. 104, 1-4-2011)
Sec. 3-3. - Time limits on opening and continuing business. 
(a)	All licenses issued under this chapter must, within 90 days after the issuance of a city license, open for business. Failure to open for business shall constitute a forfeiture and cancellation of the issued licenses and no refund of license fees or business taxes shall be made. Any applicant unable to comply with the time limit of this section may make written request to the city council for an extension of time not to exceed 90 days; and the city council, at its discretion, may grant or deny the request. 
(b)	Any license issued under this chapter shall automatically be null and void where the licensed business has not operated or been open to the public for six consecutive months. Said license shall automatically become null and void and be of no further force or effect without the necessity of any action of the clerk, city manager or city council. 
(Ord. No. 104, 1-4-2011)
Sec. 3-4. - Prohibited interests. 
(a)	No person who has any direct financial interest in a license for the sale of alcoholic beverages at wholesale shall hold any other license or an interest in any other license under the terms of this chapter. 
(b)	No person, related within the first degree of consanguinity or affinity under civil law to any wholesale licensee or employee thereof or any person with any interest therein shall hold any other license or an interest in any other license issued under this chapter. 
(c)	No elected or full-time appointed official of the city or any person related within the first degree of consanguinity or affinity under civil law to such an official of the city shall own any interest in any license issued under this chapter unless the interest was obtained prior to election or appointment to office. 
(d)	No applicant herein, nor any member of the immediate family of any applicant herein, shall own, control, or have a financial interest in more than two liquor stores, liquor store licenses, or liquor businesses in Lowndes County, Georgia or in any other county adjoining Lowndes County, and shall not have any interest in any liquor distillery, or wholesale liquor distributorship or business anywhere. 
(Ord. No. 104, 1-4-2011)
Sec. 3-5. - Applications for new license. 
(a)	The provisions of this Code on general business licensing shall apply in addition to the following: 
(1)	All applications for new licenses under this chapter shall be accompanied by a payment in the form of certified funds, for all the minimum fees and business taxes provided for in this Code for the classification into which the applicant falls. If the initial alcoholic beverage license applications are filed after January 1, the applicable licensing fee shall be prorated for the remainder of the initial year. 
(2)	The city application shall be a photostatic or other copy of all the appropriate state applications and forms along with a city supplemental application form provided by the city along with the following: 
a.	A legal description of the property upon which the premises are located;
b.	A current photograph of the applicant;
c.	Fingerprints of the applicant to be taken by the City of Lake Park Police Department;
d.	A signed consent on forms prescribed by the Georgia Crime Information Center authorizing the release of the applicant's criminal records to the City of Lake Park. 
e.	A sketch or plat of the proposed location showing the surrounding area for 500 feet and noting the location of any church, school, public library or child care facility or residence within 500 feet of the proposed location. 
(b)	The application shall also contain a form of oath providing that the information disclosed in the application is true and correct and that the proposed location meets all the standards necessary for issuance of a similar license by the state and providing further that the applicant will abide by, observe and conduct his or her business according to the rules and regulations prescribed by the city, Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code, OCGA § 3-1-1 et seq., as now or hereafter amended, and the rules and regulations of the state department of revenue in respect thereto. The oath shall be taken by the applicant and the agent in charge of the establishment if different from or additional to the applicant, and the oath shall be taken by the true owners. 
(c)	Sunday sales license. The application for a Sunday alcohol sales license shall be filed on a form provided by the city and shall be accompanied by a letter from a certified public accountant certifying that the financial records, including tax returns, daily sales receipts and sales records have been audited by the accountant and that the applicant derives at least 50 percent of the establishment's total annual gross sales from the sale of prepared meals or food in all of the combined retail outlets of the individual establishment where food is served or, if applicable, derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross income from the rental of rooms for overnight lodging. 
(d)	Any false statement or material misrepresentation in any application hereunder shall be grounds for denial of the application and where a license has been issued, the revocation of any license granted hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 104, 1-4-2011)
Sec. 3-6. - Residency required; agents. 
All applications for licenses under this chapter by any person, firm or corporation shall name in the application one or more residents of the State of Georgia as the agent and representative of the person, firm or corporation to receive all communications, notices, service of process or other papers or documents, on behalf of the corporation in connection with any matter arising out of or connected with the issuance, holding, suspension, revocation or other action with respect to any city license. The application shall give the mailing address of the person or persons, and the mailing to any person at that address of any notice required to be given under this chapter or any other law shall be sufficient notice to the corporation. If any person shall cease to be a resident of the State of Georgia, another person shall immediately be appointed in writing in his or her place, and written notice shall be given the city clerk stating the name and address of the new agent within 30 days. 
(Ord. No. 104, 1-4-2011)
Sec. 3-7. - Preliminary approval required; taxes; police. 
(a)	The clerk shall cause an inquiry to be made into the city tax records to determine if the applicant or other parties with interest in the application has any outstanding taxes or special assessments that are delinquent against his or her property or any other monies owing to the city. No license shall be issued or renewed until such debts are paid in full. 
(b)	All applications shall be approved or disapproved by the city council or a designee as a condition to action thereon and issuance of a license by the city clerk. In the event that the city council determines that the application is not in order, in view of the requirements of federal or state law or this Code and any police department investigation, the city council or its designee shall then notify the applicant of the reasons for not issuing the license to the applicant. 
(c)	All applicants shall furnish all reasonable data, information and records requested of them by the city council, city clerk or police department and failure to furnish such data, information, contracts, documents, financial statements and other records within 30 days of the request shall automatically serve to dismiss the application. 
(d)	The city council or designee may require in addition to the licensee, fingerprinting and background investigation of any person interested in the application, including any person with a financial interest, such as stockholders, partners or employees, and any spouse, brother, child or parent of any person with a financial interest. Should the applicant fail to produce such persons within 30 days of the request, the application may be denied by the city council. 
(e)	Applicants by filing an application agree to produce for oral interrogation any person or persons requested by the police department and considered as being important in the ascertainment of the facts relative to such license. The failure to produce those persons within 30 days after being requested to do so may result in a denial of the application. 
(f)	The city may require 60 days for processing any application for a license required under this chapter. For investigative purposes, the city council may extend the 60 days processing period according to the licensee's compliance should the chief of police deem it necessary. 
(Ord. No. 104, 1-4-2011)
Sec. 3-8. - Notice of application to be published; signs. 
(a)	At least once a week for two weeks immediately preceding the hearing before council on any license application under this chapter, the applicant, at its sole expense shall cause advertisements to be placed in any newspaper used for sheriff's advertisements in this county. The advertisements shall be in a form prescribed by the city council or city clerk and shall include the name and address of the applicant, type of license applied for, business location applied for, and the time, date and location of the council meeting for which the appeal of the application shall be heard. 
(b)	The applicant shall also cause to be placed upon the location of the proposed premises to be licensed, signs of a size, number and form prescribed by the clerk stating the time, date and location of the council meeting for which the appeal of the application shall be heard. 
(Ord. No. 104, 1-4-2011)
Sec. 3-9. - Completion of premises proposed to be licensed. 
Where a building in which any person intends to operate under the provisions of this chapter is, at the time of the application for the license, not in existence or not yet completed, a license may be issued for the location provided the plans for the proposed building show clearly a compliance with the other provisions of this chapter and all applicable building and zoning codes and regulations. No sales or consumption shall be allowed in the establishment until it has been completed in accordance with the plans and is in conformity with all of the other provisions of this chapter and the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 104, 1-4-2011)
Sec. 3-10. - Issuance of license to persons with prior convictions prohibited. 
(a)	No license under this chapter shall be issued, renewed or transferred to any person, partnership or corporation where any individual having an interest either as owner, partners, stockholder, directly or indirectly, beneficial or absolute, shall have been convicted within five years immediately prior to the filing of the application for any felony or convicted within two years immediately prior to the filing of the application for any misdemeanor relating to any alcoholic beverage business or any state, county or municipal ordinance violation relating to any alcoholic beverage business. 
(b)	The term "conviction" shall include an adjudication of guilty, a plea of guilty or nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond in part or in whole when charged with a crime or the suspension or revocation of any alcoholic beverage license owned in whole or in part by persons listed in subsection (a) above. 
(Ord. No. 104, 1-4-2011)
Sec. 3-11. - Denial of license application; granting; appeal. 
(a)	The city council shall deny a city license under this chapter on any of the following grounds: 
(1)	Failure to meet state requirements for state license;
(2)	Failure to pay required fees and taxes;
(3)	Failure to provide valid information, documents and the like required by this chapter;
(4)	False information in the application or attached documents;
(5)	Improper residency of applicant, owner, or registered agents;
(6)	Failure to pass review by the city council or designee;
(7)	Failure to be in compliance with zoning laws. Compliance will be determined by the zoning administrator and city council. The city council's and zoning administrator's determination will be delivered in writing to the applicant and the licensing administrator; 
(8)	Failure to meet the distance requirements as set forth in Code section 3-21 of this chapter; 
(9)	Prior convictions as herein provided; or
(10)	Failure to meet any other requirements in this chapter for a license of the class applied for. 
(11)	Previous revocation of license. If the applicant is person or entity whose alcohol license, issued under the police power of any county or municipality in Georgia, has been previously revoked for violation of any ordinance, statute or regulation with the exception of distance violations or failure to renew. 
(b)	An application which has been denied shall not be resubmitted for twelve months after the denial unless there is a substantial change therein which would affect the reason for denial originally. 
(c)	The clerk shall issue the license once it is determined that the property and applicant has met all of the requirements of this chapter. Any applicant that is denied a license by the clerk for any reason under this chapter will be notified in writing as required by state law. 
(d)	Any license that is denied by the city council for any reason under this section or failure to comply with any other section in this chapter may at the request of the applicant be appealed to the city council and, upon hearing, the determination of whether to uphold the denial or grant the license shall be made by said city council. Said hearing shall be held in accordance with Code section 3-28 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 104, 1-4-2011)
Sec. 3-12. - State regulations. 
All licenses issued under this chapter shall be subject to the rules and regulations set forth in OCGA Title 3, as now or hereafter amended, and those prescribed by the state department of revenue and violation of these statutes and regulations shall be violations of this Code. In addition, all businesses, the applicant for the license, the agent in charge of the business and the owner and owners thereof shall observe and obey the regulations provided in this article and any other applicable provisions of this chapter. 
State Law reference— Alcoholic beverages, Ga. Code Ann., Tit. 3. 
(Ord. No. 104, 1-4-2011)
Sec. 3-13. - Open to inspection. 
Any establishment holding a license issued under this chapter shall at all times, during the period allowable by law for operation of the business, be made available and open to inspection without a warrant by any license inspector of the city or to any person designated by the city council. In addition, if the premises are being used after hours by employees or the owners or their agents, the premises may be inspected at this time by the designated persons in this section. 
(Ord. No. 104, 1-4-2011)
Sec. 3-14. - Open containers prohibited; exception. 
No bottle or other container of alcoholic beverages shall be opened or consumed by any person on the premises or in any adjacent parking area, upon which the place of business is conducted and licensed under this chapter, whether the bottle or other container so opened or consumed was bought or obtained at that place of business or elsewhere unless the premises is licensed for consumption on the premises under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 104, 1-4-2011)
Sec. 3-15. - Transfer of license. 
(a)	Scope of section. Licenses hereunder shall not be transferable, except as otherwise provided herein. All transfers will require the applicant to pay the same fee as new applicants and go through the same process as a new applicant. 
(b)	Death of licensee. In case of the death of any person holding such license, or any interest therein, the same may, in the discretion of the City Council of Lake Park, be transferred to the administrator, executor or the lawful heirs of the deceased person. 
(c)	Withdrawal of partner. Nothing in this section, however, shall prohibit one or more of the partners in a partnership holding a license from withdrawing from the partnership in favor of one or more of the partners who were partners at the time of the issuance of such license. Such a withdrawal shall not, however, serve to bring any new ownership into the partnership. 
(d)	New ownership. New ownership of an existing business will occur when an existing business is purchased or transferred in its entirety to a new person, persons or entity. The new owner must follow the same procedures as a new applicant. 
(e)	Addition of partners, stockholders. However, a licensee may take in partners or additional stockholders where it is determined by the city that the additional capital furnished is to be used exclusively for additional inventory or expanding the facilities of the business, or for building new facilities and where it appears that neither the licensee himself, nor any partner or stockholder therein receives directly or indirectly any of the additional capital invested. Under this section an additional partner or new principal stockholder must be approved by the city council. 
(f)	Transfer from agent to agent; name change. Where licenses are held by agents, upon the resignation or removal of an agent holding the liquor license for a particular location, the partners, owners or stockholders of the business entity shall immediately appoint a new agent to hold said liquor license, which agent shall apply to the city council for the reissuance of the liquor license for the stated location in his name. Upon completion of the police background check and investigation as required herein, the police department shall make a recommendation to the city council and the licensing administrator for the approval or disapproval of the transfer of agent. In such a transfer, it will be required that a new investigation fee be paid for the investigation of the new agent but no new fees for the issuance of the liquor license will be collected until the normal expiration date of the existing license. In those instances in which only the name of the establishment holding a liquor license is to change, with no change in the ownership or agent holding the license, the partners, owners or stockholders shall notify the city council of the change of name, which notation shall be made on the records of the city clerk and forwarded to the license inspector's office for a change on the records of that office. No charge will be made for this name change. 
(Ord. No. 104, 1-4-2011)
Sec. 3-16. - Legal hours of sale; separate from package sale rooms; adequate seating. 
(a)	Sales by the drink. No licensee shall sell, give away or otherwise dispense distilled spirits, wines, champagnes or malt beverages or other alcoholic beverages by the drink for consumption on the premises except between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m., Monday through Saturday, and between the hours of 12:30 p.m. to 12:00 midnight on Sunday, according to standard time in effect at the time the sale is made. To clarify, Saturday sales by the drink shall be allowed to continue until 2:00 a.m. Sunday morning. Sunday alcohol sales of alcoholic beverages by the drink for consumption on the premises shall be permitted only in licensed liquor or beer and wine by the drink establishments which: (1) obtain a Sunday sales license; and (2) derive at least 50 percent of their annual gross sales from the sale of prepared meals or food in all of the combined retail outlets of the individual establishments where food is served and in any licensed establishment which derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross income from the rental of rooms for overnight lodging. Alcoholic beverages shall not be sold or dispensed in the same room used for the sale of packaged alcoholic beverages except where adequate seating arrangements are provided for the licensee's patrons. 
(b)	Package sales. Package sales of distilled spirits, malt beverages, wine and other alcoholic beverages by licensees shall be permitted between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight, Monday through Saturday, and between the hours of 12:30 p.m. to 11:30 p.m. on Sunday, according to standard time in effect at the time the sale is made. Sunday package sales of alcoholic beverages shall be permitted only in licensed package sale establishments which obtain a separate Sunday sales license. 
(Ord. No. 104, 1-4-2011; Ord. No. 104 Amd 1, § I, 5-5-2015)
Sec. 3-17. - Reserved. 
Sec. 3-18. - Minors; prohibited practices. 
(a)	Except as otherwise authorized by law:
(1)	No person knowingly, directly or through another person, shall furnish, cause to be furnished, or permit any person in such person's employ to furnish any alcoholic beverage to any person under 21 years of age; 
(2)	No person under 21 years of age shall purchase, attempt to purchase, or knowingly possess any alcoholic beverage; 
(3)	No person under 21 years of age shall misrepresent such person's age in any manner whatever for the purpose of obtaining illegally any alcoholic beverage; 
(4)	No person knowingly or intentionally shall act as an agent to purchase or acquire any alcoholic beverage for or on behalf of a person under 21 years of age; or 
(5)	No person under 21 years of age shall misrepresent his or her identity or use any false identification for the purpose of purchasing or obtaining any alcoholic beverage. 
(b)	The prohibitions contained in paragraphs (1), (2), and (4) of subsection (a) of this Code section shall not apply with respect to the sale, purchase, or possession of alcoholic beverages for consumption: 
(1)	For medical purposes pursuant to a prescription of a physician duly authorized to practice medicine in this state; or 
(2)	At a religious ceremony.
(c)	It shall be unlawful for any person, licensee, or employee or agent to sell, furnish or serve any alcoholic beverage to any person without first requesting and being furnished with proper evidence of age and identification. Proper evidence of age and identification shall mean any document properly issued by a governmental agency containing a description of such person, such person's photograph, or both, and giving such person's name, and date of birth, a passport, valid driver's license, military identification card, or an identification card authorized under OCGA §§ 40-5-100 through 40-5-104 shall be deemed sufficient evidence. Traffic citations and complaint forms and birth certificates shall not be deemed sufficient evidence. 
(d)	The prohibition contained in paragraph (1) of subsection (a) of this Code section shall not apply with respect to sale of alcoholic beverages by a person when such person has been furnished with proper identification showing that the person to whom the alcoholic beverage is sold is 21 years of age or older. For purposes of this subsection, the term "proper identification" means any document issued by a governmental agency containing a description of the person, such person's photograph, or both, and giving such person's date of birth and includes, without being limited to, a passport, military identification card, driver's license, or an identification card authorized under OCGA §§ 40-5-100 through 40-5-104, as amended. "Proper identification" shall not include a birth certificate and shall not include any traffic citation and complaint form. 
(e)	If such conduct is not otherwise prohibited pursuant to subsection (f) nothing contained in this Code section shall be construed to prohibit any person under 21 years of age from: 
(1)	Dispensing, serving, selling or handling alcoholic beverages as a part of employment in any licensed establishment; 
(2)	Being employed in any establishment in which alcoholic beverages are distilled or manufactured; or 
(3)	Taking orders for and having possession of alcoholic beverages as a part of employment in a licensed establishment. 
(f)	No person shall allow or require a person in his employment under 18 years of age to dispense, serve, sell, or take orders for any alcoholic beverages. This subsection shall not prohibit persons under 18 years of age who are employed in supermarkets, convenience stores, breweries or drugstores from selling or handling alcoholic beverages which are sold for consumption off the premises. 
(g)	Testimony by any person under 21 years of age, when given in an administrative or judicial proceeding against another person for violation of any provision of this Code section, shall not be used in any administrative or judicial proceedings brought against such testifying person less than 21 years of age. 
(h)	In any case where a reasonable or prudent person could reasonably be in doubt as to whether or not the person to whom an alcoholic beverage is to be sold or otherwise furnished is actually 21 years of age or older, it shall be the duty of the person selling or otherwise furnishing, such alcoholic beverage to request to see and to be furnished with proper identification as provided for in subsection (d) of this section in order to verify the age of such person; and the failure to make such request and verification in any case where, the person to whom the alcoholic beverage is sold or otherwise furnished is less than 21 years of age may be considered by the trier of fact in determining whether the person selling or otherwise furnishing such alcoholic beverage did so knowingly. 
(i)	Any retailer or retail consumption dealer, or any person acting on behalf of such retailer or retail consumption dealer, who upon requesting proper identification from a person attempting to purchase alcoholic beverages from such retailer or retail consumption dealer pursuant to subsection (h) of this section is tendered a driver's license which indicates that such driver's license is falsified, is not the driver's license of the person presenting it, or that such person is under the age of 21 years, the person to whom said license is tendered shall be authorized to either write down the name, address, and license number or to seize and retain such driver's license and in either event shall immediately thereafter summon a law enforcement officer who shall be authorized to seize the license either at the scene or at such time as the license can be located. The procedures and rules connected with the retention of such license by the officer shall be the same as those provided for the acceptance of a driver's license as bail on arrest for traffic offenses pursuant to OCGA § 17-6-11. 
(j)	Violation of any provision of this section shall constitute an offense hereunder and shall be punishable in the municipal court; provided, violation of this section by a child shall be handled as provided by OCGA § 15-1-1 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 104, 1-4-2011)
Sec. 3-19. - Reserved. 
Sec. 3-20. - Duration and renewal of license. 
(a)	Generally. Except as otherwise provided, duration and renewal of licenses under this chapter shall be as for business licenses generally; and no licensee shall have any vested right to the renewal of any city license. No licenses under this chapter may be renewed if the licensee could be denied a new license under this chapter. In the case of the revocation or surrender of such license before the expiration of such license year, the holder thereof shall not be entitled to receive any refund whatsoever. 
(b)	All annual licenses renewal fees shall be paid on or before December 31 of each year or be charged a late penalty as set out hereafter. All fees will be accompanied by an application form as prescribed by the City Council of Lake Park which will be reviewed by the city clerk for any new (within the last year) infractions that would cast doubt as to whether the applicant should hold a license. Any licensee filing an application for renewal from January 1 until January 31 shall be charged a late penalty of 25 percent of the license fee to be paid in addition to the regular renewal fee. Any licensee filing an application for renewal from February 1 until February 28 shall be charged a late penalty of 50 percent of the license fee to be paid in addition to the regular renewal fee. An application for renewal filed after February 28 shall be treated as an original application must comply with all rules and regulation then in existence for new licenses. 
(c)	Expiration; renewal of distilled spirits licenses. Applicants in any given year for renewal of their licenses hereunder for the sale of distilled spirits for the next year shall file their application on or before the tenth day of December with the license inspector for the City of Lake Park. Upon payment of such fees and license taxes as are applicable on or before the 31st day of December, to the city, the license inspector shall issue the renewal license for the applicant. All licenses shall expire on the 31st day of December of the year for which they are issued, except when extended as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 104, 1-4-2011)
Sec. 3-21. - Distance and area requirements. 
(a)	No person shall be licensed by the city under this chapter for the retail sale of distilled spirits, malt beverages or wine where the parcel is located within 500 feet of any parcel upon which is located any of the following: 
(1)	Any public or private school;
(2)	Any public library;
(3)	Any church or similar place of worship;
(4)	Any child care or day care facility;
(5)	Any residence.
The distance will be measured as provided in section 3-1(5) of this chapter. 
(b)	No license shall be issued by the city under this chapter for consumption on the premises of distilled spirits, malt beverages, wine where the use of the property is a private club, as defined in section 3-101(5) or a supper club as defined in section 3-101(7) or a lounge as defined in section 3-101(3) and either use is located on a parcel within 300 feet of any parcel upon which is located any of the following: 
(1)	Any public or private school;
(2)	Any public library;
(3)	Any church or similar place of worship;
(4)	Any child care or day care facility;
(5)	Any residence.
The distance will be measured as provided in section 3-1(5) of this chapter. 
(c)	Except as is herein provided, no license shall be issued by the city under this chapter for consumption on the premises of distilled spirits, malt beverages or wine where the use of the property is a restaurant as a defined in section 3-101(6) or a hotel as defined in section 3-101(1) and either use is located on a parcel within 100 feet of a parcel upon which is located any of the following: 
(1)	Any public or private school;
(2)	Any public library;
(3)	Any child care or day care facility.
The distance will be measured as provided in section 3-1(5) of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 104, 1-4-2011)
Sec. 3-22. - Penalties; revocation of license. 
Any license under this chapter shall be subject to penalty and revocation for any conviction of the licensee or any agent, employee or officer thereof for violation of this chapter or any state law or regulation involving alcoholic beverages or sale of any illegal substance or article under the following procedure: 
(1)	Upon the conviction or entry of a plea of guilty or nolo contendere of a licensee or any agent, employee, or licensee thereof for a violation described in this section, the city clerk shall propose a penalty to be assessed against the licensee according to the following schedule: 
a.	For the first violation within the preceding 24 months, a fine of up to $5,000.00 and suspension of the license for up to seven days, or revocation. 
b.	For the second violation within the preceding 24 months, a fine of up to $10,000.00 and suspension of the license for up to 30 days, or revocation. 
c.	For the third violation within the preceding 24 months, a fine of up to $20,000.00 and/or revocation of the license. 
(2)	The city clerk shall cause to be served upon the licensee or any license agent thereof a written notice of the violation described in this section and the penalty proposed therefor. The licensee shall have five days from the date of service to request a hearing before the city council. Upon receipt of a request for a hearing, the city council shall provide by certified mail a notice to the licensee of the date, time and place of hearing, which date shall be not less than five days subsequent the date of such notice. At the hearing the licensee may present evidence and cross-examine opposing witnesses. 
(3)	Within five days after the hearing, or, if no hearing has been requested, after review of the proposed penalty, the city council shall issue a written decision either affirming, modifying or denying the proposed penalty. A copy of the written decision shall be provided to the licensee by certified mail and shall state the date and time of the next regular meeting of the city council at which the decision of the city council shall be presented for confirmation. 
(4)	The city council shall by resolution confirm, modify or deny the decision of the city clerk, or shall remand the action to the city clerk for further proceedings as may be directed. Following confirmation by the city council, the city clerk may cause the penalty to be imposed. 
(Ord. No. 104, 1-4-2011)
Sec. 3-23. - Employment of persons convicted of certain offenses; permits. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any licensee hereunder to employ in any premises used for the sale by the drink of alcoholic beverages, any person in any capacity whatsoever, including but not limited to performers, entertainers and musicians, who have been or has been, within three years prior to the date of such application for employment, convicted, served any sentence or other penalty or punishment, been on parole, or probation for a charge or violation of, soliciting for prostitution, pandering, letting premises for prostitution, keeping a disorderly place, illegally dealing in narcotics or other controlled substances, sex offenses, any crime involving moral turpitude or any felony. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any licensee hereunder to employ in any premises used for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink, any person in any capacity whatsoever, including but not limited to performers, entertainers and musicians, who have been or has been, within three years prior to the date of such application for employment, convicted on two or more occasions, or served any sentence or other penalty or punishment, been on parole or probation for a charge or violation relating to the manufacture or sale of alcoholic beverages of any type. 
(Ord. No. 104, 1-4-2011)
Sec. 3-24. - Outstanding licenses, compliance. 
(a)	So as to prevent an unconstitutional taking of property, all licensees for alcoholic beverages within the city in compliance with city ordinance requirements involving residency, distance, location, parking and type of building structure in effect at the time of first receiving the licenses and continuing to be in compliance therewith shall be exempt from the requirements of this chapter involving residency, distance, location, parking and type of building structure. 
(b)	Renewals and transfers of business ownership at the same location shall also be deemed in compliance hereunder to the extent provided in subsection (a) above. 
(c)	Business transfers to new locations and new licenses must comply with all requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 104, 1-4-2011)
Sec. 3-25. - Collection of taxes from distributors, wholesale dealers and manufacturers. 
At the time of delivery of any of such beverages as set out in this chapter such wholesale dealer, distributor or manufacturer shall collect from the retail dealer the taxes imposed by this chapter giving a correct and proper receipt therefor, and hold such taxes in trust for the city until the tax is remitted to the city as provided in this chapter. It shall be unlawful for any wholesaler, distributor, manufacturer or person to sell or deliver any such beverages as set out in this chapter to any retail dealer in the city, or for any such beverage to be transported into the city for resale by any means whatsoever, except to a licensed wholesale distributor, without collecting the taxes thereon as above set out at the time of sale or delivery. 
(Ord. No. 104, 1-4-2011)
Sec. 3-26. - Duties of retail dealers generally. 
All retail dealers in any of such beverages as set out in this chapter and all persons selling any of such beverages at retail within the city shall keep a correct record of all purchases and sales of each of such beverages, and shall demand of and require all persons from whom they purchase such beverages to furnish and deliver to them with such beverages, a correct invoice of each purchase, such invoice to be kept and preserved by such retailer at his place of business for a period of one year from the date of such purchase, and such invoices shall be open and subject to inspection by any authorized representative of the city at all reasonable times. Such retailer shall, on or before the close of business on the tenth business day of each month, make a report to the city clerk showing the number of containers of each and all such beverages purchased and/or sold during the previous month, and up to the close of business on the last business day of each month, showing the size and contents of each container, the name and address of all dealers and persons from whom purchases were made, the dates of delivery of same, and the amounts of total purchases such retailer has made from each wholesaler from whom such retailer has made purchases during the period covered by such statements. In addition, retailers licensed to sell alcoholic beverages by the drink for consumption on the premises shall make a report to the city clerk showing the total gross sales derived from the sale of distilled spirits by the drink. Gross sales shall include all credit card sales. The retailer shall accompany such reports with a remittance of all taxes due under this chapter for all purchases and sales made except those on which taxes have been paid to the manufacturer, distributor or wholesaler at the time of delivery as hereinbefore provided; and for all such taxes paid to such manufacturers, distributors or wholesalers such retailers shall furnish the city the proper original receipts showing the tax payment. 
(Ord. No. 104, 1-4-2011)
Sec. 3-27. - Refusal to make reports and remittances. 
If any wholesaler, distributor or retail dealer mentioned in this chapter fails or refuses to make the reports or remittances as provided herein and at the time specified, the license inspector shall notify such party in writing by mail, or otherwise, and if such reports are not made and the taxes paid within five days from the date of such notice, the license of the offending person shall stand revoked without further notice or cause, and the license inspector shall proceed to assess the amount of taxes due by such dealer from the best information available, plus ten percent thereof as a penalty, and cause an execution for the same to issue at once, and proceed to collect such taxes, penalty and cost as provided by ordinance for the collection of any other delinquent taxes, and in addition thereto make a case against such licensee in the municipal court for such offense. 
(Ord. No. 104, 1-4-2011)
Sec. 3-28. - Appeal hearing guidelines. 
Appeal hearing guidelines to read as follows: 
The city council is authorized to conduct an appeal hearing at the request of any applicant denied a license under this chapter or any licensee, license representative, employee or owner of a licensed establishment in the city whose license was suspended, probated, revoke or denied renewal. The licensee should be prepared to prove or show evidence of all business practices and procedures instituted to ensure compliance with this chapter and state law. The council inquiry may include, but is not limited to: 
(1)	Employment standards of the licensee;
(2)	Employee direction/supervision;
(3)	Sales procedures;
(4)	Training program (initial, recurrent, verification);
(5)	Enforcement check reports;
(6)	Previous violations;
(7)	Any other ordinance or law deemed relevant to the violation that is the subject matter of the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 104, 1-4-2011)
Sec. 3-29. - Procedure; right to counsel; cross examination of witnesses. 
(a)	Upon request for an appeal hearing to council, notice shall be sent to either the licensee or license representative personally or by certified mail at least 15 days, but no more than 45 days prior to the hearing date. Notice shall state the time, place and purpose of the hearing. 
(b)	The licensee shall be entitled to have counsel present at any hearing brought to inquire into suspension, revocation or probation of a license, and shall have the right to cross examine witnesses against him, and to produce evidence on his own behalf. 
(c)	Council will have present at said hearing any employee, agent or consultant that was involved in making the decision that is subject to the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 104, 1-4-2011)
Secs. 3-30—3-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DISTILLED SPIRITS 

Secs. 3-41—3-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RETAIL ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES 

Sec. 3-61. - Scope of article. 
In addition to the general business license requirements of this Code and article I of this chapter, the following sections shall apply to the licensing and operation of retail alcoholic establishments in the city; and should any section of this article conflict with other provisions in this chapter or the general business license requirements of this Code, then this article shall control. 
(Ord. No. 104, 1-4-2011)
Sec. 3-62. - Separation of alcoholic beverages for prohibition of sales during designated periods. 
All licensees hereunder shall provide a means of limiting access to alcoholic beverages, including malt beverages and/or wine, during times of prohibited sales, such as Sundays, or any other times of prohibited sales. 
(Ord. No. 104, 1-4-2011)
Sec. 3-63. - Employee regulations. 
An employee of a retail licensee shall meet the same character requirements as set forth in the general provisions of this chapter and pursuant to section 3-23 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 104, 1-4-2011)
Sec. 3-64. - Reserved. 
Sec. 3-65. - Excise tax on wholesale distributors of alcoholic beverages. 
(a)	The excise tax levied and imposed upon wholesalers for the selling of alcoholic beverages within the city, as contained further herein, shall be paid to the city as follows: 
(1)	Each wholesaler selling alcoholic beverages within the city shall file a report on the tenth day of each month showing for the preceding calendar month the exact quantities of alcoholic beverage, by size and type of container, constituting a beginning and ending period for the month, sold within the city, including an itemized report of purchases by each licensed establishment in the city. Each such wholesale dealer shall remit to the City of Lake Park, on the tenth day of the month next succeeding the calendar month in which such sales were made, the amount of excise tax due in accordance with this section. 
(2)	No decal, stamp or other identifying mark shall be required on malt beverages or wine sold within the city. 
(b)	The excise tax provided for hereinabove shall be in addition to any license fee, tax or charge which may now or in the future be imposed upon the business of selling malt beverages at retail or wholesale, within the corporate limits of the city. 
(c)	The failure to make a timely report and remittance shall render a wholesale dealer liable for a penalty equal to ten percent of the total amount due during the first 30-day period following the date such report and remittance were due and a further penalty of ten percent of the amount of such remittance for each successive 30-day period or any portion thereof, during which such report and remittance are not filed. The filing of a false or fraudulent report shall render the wholesale dealer making such report liable for a penalty equal to 50 percent of the amount of the remittance which would be required under an accurate and truthful statement or report and shall be grounds for revocation of the license of any dealer making such a report. 
(Ord. No. 104, 1-4-2011)
Sec. 3-66. - Reserved. 
Sec. 3-67. - License required for retail sale of alcoholic beverages; annual fee. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, club, society, association, or institution to have for sale at retail or to sell or offer for sale at retail, in the City of Lake Park, any alcoholic beverage without having first obtained a license to do so from the city. 
(Ord. No. 104, 1-4-2011)
Sec. 3-68. - Limitations on size and number of containers for retail sale. 
(a)	In retail establishments selling refrigerated (i.e. on ice or contained within an electric refrigeration system) alcoholic beverages and motor fuel: 
(1)	No refrigerated malt beverages may be sold in single containers equal to one quart or less except in packages of at least six such containers. 
(2)	No refrigerated wine may be sold in single containers of less than 750 ml.
(b)	The prohibitions of subsection (a) shall not apply to sales of such containers within a multiple package of identical containers prepared for retail sale by the brewer, distiller, distributor, or wholesaler and constituted of four or more units. 
(Ord. No. 104, 1-4-2011)
Secs. 3-69—3-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CONSUMPTION ON THE PREMISES 

Secs. 3-81—3-91. - Reserved. 
Sec. 3-92. - Happy hour regulations. 
(a)	It is the intent and purpose of this section to prohibit activities typically associated with promotions referred to as "happy hour." 
(b)	No licensee or employee, or agent of a licensee, shall engage in any of the following practices in connection with the sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises: 
(1)	The giving away of any alcoholic beverage in conjunction with the sale of any other alcoholic beverage; 
(2)	The sale of two or more alcoholic beverages for a single price, including the sale of all such beverages a customer can or desires to drink at a single price; 
(3)	The sale or serving of two or more alcoholic beverages at substantially the same price customarily charged for one such alcoholic beverage; 
(4)	Requiring or allowing the purchase of a second or subsequent alcoholic beverage at the same time another alcoholic beverage is purchased or before the first such beverage has been consumed, by any one person. 
(Ord. No. 104, 1-4-2011)
Sec. 3-93. - Prohibited activities. 
No business under this article may promote, encourage or make available any activity that involves gambling. Gambling includes but is not limited to any activity where there is a chance for profit if a player is skillful or lucky; the act involves a payment of a price for a chance to win a prize or paying value against an uncertain event in hope of gaining something of value, typically in an amount beyond the amount originally paid. 
(Ord. No. 104, 1-4-2011)
Sec. 3-94. - Condition of premises. 
All licensed premises shall be kept clean and in proper sanitary condition, and in full compliance with the provisions and regulations governing the conditions of premises used for the storage and sale of food for human consumption. It shall be unlawful to permit any disturbance of the peace, or obscenity or any lewd, immoral or improper entertainment, conduct, or practices on such premises. 
(Ord. No. 104, 1-4-2011)
Secs. 3-95—3-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - LOUNGES, HOTELS AND RESTAURANTS 

Sec. 3-101. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article only the following terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them, to wit: 
(1)	Hotel shall mean every building or other structure kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public to be a place where food is actually served and consumed and sleeping accommodations are offered for adequate pay to travelers and guests, whether transient, permanent or residential, in which 50 or more rooms are used for the sleeping accommodations of such guests and having one or more public dining rooms, where meals are regularly served to such guests, such sleeping accommodations and dining rooms being conducted in the same building or in separate buildings or structures used in connection therewith that are on the same premises and are a part of the hotel operation. Motels meeting the qualifications set out herein for hotel shall be classified in the same category as hotels. Hotels shall have the privilege of granting franchises for the operation of a lounge, restaurant or supper club in their premises and the holder of such franchise shall be included in the definition of hotel hereunder. The public dining room connected herewith shall not be confused or defined with the definition of separate lounges, restaurants, private clubs or supper clubs as may be contained further herein, but in this instance, must be a dining room conducted in the same building or in separate buildings or structures used in connection therewith that are on the same premises and are a part of the hotel operation. The seating capacity for these hotel-connected facilities shall not be fixed as may be contained in further definitions herein. Further, the fee for the operation of any sale of alcoholic beverages shall be that fee as contained in section 3-146 of this chapter, and as relates to restaurants in connection with hotels, shall be determined by the seating capacity of 149 and below and 150 and above for the fee as designated in said section 3-146. 
(2)	Licensee shall mean a person, firm, corporation, association or establishment holding a license to engage in the retail sale of any and all alcoholic beverages by the drink for consumption on the licensed premises, and the annual license fees prescribed by this chapter includes any and all of such beverages sold by the drink by such licensee for consumption on the licensed premises. 
(3)	Lounge shall mean a separate room connected with, a part of, and adjacent to a restaurant or located in hotels or motels as defined herein, with all booths, stools and tables being open and unobstructed to the view of any other customers of, and in such lounge or the manager thereof. All lounges shall be air conditioned, and having a seating capacity of at least 50. A lounge, as defined herein, which is operated on a different floor in the premises, or in a separate building, or is not connected to or adjacent to a restaurant, shall be considered a separate establishment and shall pay an additional license fee therefor. 
(4)	Premises shall mean the lot and building thereon, closed or partitioned-in locality, whether room, shop or building wherein alcoholic beverages are sold by the drink, except in case of a hotel or motel premises. 
(5)	Private club shall be defined as contained in the definition under section 3-1, specifically subparagraph (10), as contained in this chapter. 
(6)	Restaurant shall mean any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place where meals are served and where meals are actually and regularly served, without sleeping accommodations, such place being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and seating capacity of at least 50 people, having employed therein a sufficient number and kind of employees to prepare, cook and serve suitable meals for consumption at tables in a dining room or dining rooms on the premises. Dining room(s) shall be staffed by a full service wait staff that will be responsible for the taking of the order at the table, delivering the order to the table, clearing the table and cashing out the bill. At least one meal per day shall be served at least six days a week, with the exception of holidays, vacations and periods of redecorating, and the serving of such meals shall be the principal business conducted, with the serving distilled spirits to be consumed on the premises as only incidental thereto. Said business must derive at least 50 percent of its total annual gross income from food and non-alcoholic beverage sales. 
(7)	Supper club shall mean those establishments having a seating capacity of at least 150 persons with all booths and tables being open to unobstructed view, and providing a band and/or other professional entertainment, a minimum of 20 days in each calendar month, each and every calendar month of a calendar year, with the exception of holidays, vacations and periods of redecorating. All such supper clubs shall be equipped with air conditioning, and shall maintain an adequate kitchen with a sufficient number of servants and employees for cooking, preparing, and serving food and meals for their patrons, and shall regularly serve at least one meal each day for six days each calendar week; provided, that supper clubs located in hotels or motels as defined herein having dining room and kitchen facilities may be relieved from maintaining a kitchen in connection with such supper club. The principal business of such supper clubs shall be entertainment, and any serving of alcoholic beverages shall be incidental thereto. 
(Ord. No. 104, 1-4-2011)
Sec. 3-102. - License constituted grant or privilege. 
Licenses hereunder shall be mere grants or privileges, and the City Council of Lake Park shall have the discretion to approve, or deny any application for a license to sell alcoholic beverages by the drink, or to revoke the same. 
(Ord. No. 104, 1-4-2011)
Sec. 3-103. - Sale without license. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell any alcoholic beverages for use or consumption on the premises without the license required herein. 
(Ord. No. 104, 1-4-2011)
Sec. 3-104. - Reserved. 
Sec. 3-105. - Residence requirements of applicants. 
Where the applicant for a license hereunder is a corporation, with an office and agent in this state, the license shall be issued to the corporation and its principal officer or agent residing in this state. For the purposes of this article, the agent may be the manager of the business at the applied for location. The agent for service may be different than the licensed agent at the licensed location. If the applicant is a partnership, the requirements of this section apply to all of the partners. 
(Ord. No. 104, 1-4-2011)
Sec. 3-106. - City official, spouse, children prohibited from holding license. 
It shall be unlawful for any elected or full or part time appointed employee or official of the state, county or city, or his or her spouse or minor child or children to hold any license hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 104, 1-4-2011)
Sec. 3-107. - Restrictions upon wholesalers of liquors. 
No person shall hold a license hereunder who also has any direct financial interest in any wholesale liquor business. No financial aid or assistance to any licensee hereunder from any wholesaler or manufacturer of intoxicating liquors shall be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 104, 1-4-2011)
Sec. 3-108. - Effect of prior conviction of crime upon applicant. 
No original license shall be issued to any person, partnership or corporation organized for pecuniary gain where any individual having an interest either as owner, partner or principal stockholder, directly or indirectly beneficial or absolute, or his spouse, shall have been convicted, or shall have entered a plea of nolo contendere within ten years immediately prior to the filing of said application, for any felony or misdemeanor of any state or of the United States or any municipal ordinance except traffic violations; the term "conviction" shall include an adjudication of guilty or a plea of guilty or nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond when charged with such a crime or violation. 
(Ord. No. 104, 1-4-2011)
Sec. 3-109. - Surveyor's drawing to accompany application for license. 
All applications for an original or new license shall include a certificate from a registered surveyor showing a scaled drawing of the location of the proposed premises, and the distance as measured in section 1-1(5) from the proposed licensee's location to the nearest church building, school building, residence or public library; provided this section shall not apply to a hotel or motel as a licensee hereunder if all alcoholic sales and consumption are on or above a second story level from the adjacent street level. 
(Ord. No. 104, 1-4-2011)
Sec. 3-110. - Forms, data, information, records for license application. 
The City Council of Lake Park shall prescribe forms for new or renewal applications hereunder. All applicants shall furnish all data, information and records requested of them by the police committee or the police department, and failure to furnish such data, information, and records within 30 days from the date of such request shall automatically be cause to dismiss, with prejudice, such applications. Applicants, by filing an application, agree to produce for oral interrogation any person or persons requested by the police committee or police department and considered by such committee or department as being important in the ascertainment of the facts relative to the grant of such license. The failure to produce such person or persons within 30 days after being requested to do so shall result in the automatic rejection of such application. 
(Ord. No. 104, 1-4-2011)
Sec. 3-111. - Untrue, misleading information in license application. 
Any material untrue or misleading information contained in, or material omission left out of an original, renewal, or transfer application for a license hereunder shall be cause for the denial thereof, and, if any license has been granted under such circumstances, shall be cause for the revocation of the same. 
(Ord. No. 104, 1-4-2011)
Secs. 3-112, 3-113. - Reserved. 
Sec. 3-114. - Registration of new applications for licenses. 
New or original applications hereunder shall be dated with the time of filing with the city clerk, and shall be designated by an "S" for supper clubs, "R" for restaurants, "H" for hotels and motels and "O" for others, followed by a number to designate the order of filing, the numbers to begin anew with each calendar year; preference shall be given, in each category, whenever feasible, to the order in which the applications are filed. 
(Ord. No. 104, 1-4-2011)
Sec. 3-115. - License not to issue to applicant not meeting requirements herein. 
No license shall issue to any applicant who does not meet the requirements of a restaurant, hotel, motel, private club, lounge or supper club as defined herein. 
(Ord. No. 104, 1-4-2011)
Sec. 3-116. - Reserved. 
Sec. 3-117. - Due date for license fees; prorating license fees. 
All annual license renewal fees hereunder shall be paid on or before December 31 of each year or be charged a late penalty as provided in section 3-120. Any new license granted hereunder shall pay the full license fee without proration, except that the fee for a new license granted after June 30 in any calendar year shall be 50 percent of the above-stated annual license fees for the remainder of that calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 104, 1-4-2011)
Sec. 3-118. - Time limit for obtaining license, paying fee. 
All licenses must be obtained and fees therefor paid not later than two weeks from the date of the approval of the application by the City of Lake Park, and if not so obtained, the existing permit shall be void. 
(Ord. No. 104, 1-4-2011)
Sec. 3-119. - Duration of license; refunds. 
No license shall issue for less than a calendar year period, or the remainder thereof, except as otherwise provided in this article. In the case of the revocation or surrender of such license before the expiration of such calendar year period, the holder thereof shall not be entitled to receive any refund whatsoever. 
(Ord. No. 104, 1-4-2011)
Sec. 3-120. - Renewal of licenses. 
All licensees hereunder shall be required to apply for and renew their licenses annually on forms prescribed by the City Council of Lake Park. Any licensee filing an application for renewal from January 1 until January 31 shall be charged a late penalty of 25 percent of the license fee to be paid in addition to the regular renewal fee. Any licensee filing an application for renewal from February 1 until February 28 shall be charged a late penalty of 50 percent of the license fee to be paid in addition to the regular renewal fee. When any such licensee fails to file his application on or before the 28th day of February, any application thereafter shall be treated as an original application for a new license and not for a renewal. 
(Ord. No. 104, 1-4-2011)
Sec. 3-121. - Forfeiture of license for nonuse. 
(a)	Failure to open for business. All holders of licenses hereunder must within nine months after the issuance of the license open for business the establishment referred to in the license, and begin the sale of the product or products authorized by the license. Failure to open the proposed establishment, and begin the sale referred to above within the nine-month period shall serve as automatic forfeiture and cancellation of the unused license, and no refund of license fees shall be made to the license holder. 
(b)	Cessation of business. Any license issued under this chapter shall automatically be null and void where the licensed business has not operated or been open to the public for six consecutive months. Said license shall automatically become null and void and be of no further force or effect without the necessity of any action of the clerk, city manager or city council. 
(Ord. No. 104, 1-4-2011)
Sec. 3-122. - Suspension, revocation of license. 
(a)	Grounds, hearing required. No license which has been issued or which may hereafter be issued by the city hereunder, which has not expired under provisions of this article, shall be suspended or revoked, except for due cause, as herein defined, after a hearing upon five days prior written notice to the holder of such license of the time, place and purpose of such hearing, and a statement of the reasons for such hearing. 
(b)	Due cause defined. "Due cause" for the suspension or revocation of such license shall consist of conviction in a court of competent jurisdiction of fraud in obtaining it, the violation of any laws or ordinances regulating such businesses, or violation of regulations made pursuant to authority granted for the purpose of regulating such businesses, or conviction of a felony under any state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 104, 1-4-2011)
Sec. 3-123. - Violation of article constitutes grounds for revocation of license. 
Any violation of any provision of this article by the holder of a license hereunder or designee shall be subject to any penalties or sanction set forth in section 3-22. 
(Ord. No. 104, 1-4-2011)
Sec. 3-124. - Reserved. 
Sec. 3-125. - Distance requirements from church, school, residence. 
The distance requirements as contained in section 3-21 shall apply to licensees hereunder; provided that after careful consideration of the proposed location, the city council may waive the distance requirements herein for hotels and motels as defined herein. 
(Ord. No. 104, 1-4-2011)
Sec. 3-126. - Prohibited activities. 
No business under this article may promote, encourage or make available any activity that involves gambling. Gambling includes but is not limited to any activity where there is a chance for profit if a player is skillful or lucky; the act involves a payment of a price for a chance to win a prize or paying value against an uncertain event in hope of gaining something of value, typically in an amount beyond the amount originally paid. 
(Ord. No. 104, 1-4-2011)
Sec. 3-127. - Condition of premises. 
All licensed premises shall be kept clean and in proper sanitary condition, and in full compliance with the provisions and regulations governing the conditions of premises used for the storage and sale of food for human consumption. It shall be unlawful to permit any disturbance of the peace, or obscenity or any lewd, immoral or improper entertainment, conduct, or practices on such premises. 
(Ord. No. 104, 1-4-2011)
Sec. 3-128. - Standards for prescribed sleeping or seating capacity; applicability of fire regulations. 
Where a minimum sleeping or seating capacity is prescribed herein, the same shall be judged by existing ordinances, or by reasonable standards. The fire department shall, upon request of the police committee, inspect such premises and report their findings to the committee. All premises licensed hereunder shall conform at all times to all fire regulations of the city. 
(Ord. No. 104, 1-4-2011)
Sec. 3-129. - Reserved. 
Sec. 3-130. - Service of drinks to be by employees only. 
Drinks sold hereunder shall be served only by employees of the licensee hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 104, 1-4-2011)
Sec. 3-131. - Regulations to be posted, employees to be instructed as to contents thereof. 
It shall be the duty of the licensee hereunder to maintain a copy of this article on such premises, and to instruct each and every employee of the terms hereof. 
(Ord. No. 104, 1-4-2011)
Sec. 3-132. - Prohibited activities by employees. 
It shall be unlawful for an employee of a supper club or lounge to dance or sit with customers in the premises, or for any customer to be permitted to purchase food or drink for such employees in such premises. 
(Ord. No. 104, 1-4-2011)
Sec. 3-133. - Employment of minors. 
No licensee hereunder shall employ a minor in his establishment except under the conditions as provided in section 3-18 of this chapter; provided that musicians and other entertainers 18 years of age may provide professional entertainment upon the premises of the licensee. 
(Ord. No. 104, 1-4-2011)
Sec. 3-134. - Reserved. 
Sec. 3-135. - Serving drinks on trains, airplanes. 
Nothing herein shall prohibit the serving of distilled spirits by the drink on dining or club cars of trains or on airplanes in transit on regular schedules. 
(Ord. No. 104, 1-4-2011)
Sec. 3-136. - Reserved. 
Sec. 3-137. - Sale to minors or incapacitated persons; loitering about premises. 
No licensee hereunder shall sell alcoholic beverages to or allow any persons under 21 years of age or incapacitated persons to be in, frequent or loiter about the licensed premises of a supper club or lounge; provided, however, persons under 21 years of age may frequent or be in such supper clubs or lounges if they are accompanied by a parent or legal guardian. 
(Ord. No. 104, 1-4-2011)
Sec. 3-138. - Misrepresentation of age, possession, consumption by minors. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person under 21 years of age to misrepresent his age in any manner whatsoever to a licensee hereunder. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any person under 21 years of age to drink or possess any alcoholic beverage as defined herein on any licensed premises. 
(Ord. No. 104, 1-4-2011)
Sec. 3-139. - Package sales by licensees. 
Licenses hereunder shall not permit the sale of distilled spirits by the bottle or package. Such persons holding such licenses shall have the right to sell wines, champagnes or malt beverages to the public by the bottle or package for consumption on the premises without the issuance of a separate retail license therefor. 
(Ord. No. 104, 1-4-2011)
Sec. 3-140. - Opened original packages on licensed premises prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person except a licensee, his manager or agent in charge of any licensed premises hereunder to carry into or have in his possession on any licensed premises, any alcoholic beverage in the original package the seal of which has been broken or the original package opened. 
(Ord. No. 104, 1-4-2011)
Sec. 3-141. - Misrepresenting quantity, quality of bottle. 
It shall be illegal for licensees hereunder to add to the contents of a bottle, or to refill empty bottles, or in any other manner to misrepresent the quantity, quality or brand name of any alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. No. 104, 1-4-2011)
Sec. 3-142. - Service in back rooms prohibited. 
The sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption by persons in any back room or side room which is not open to general public use is prohibited, except that private parties or conventions, which have been scheduled in advance, may be served in public or private dining rooms or meeting rooms; and provided further, that this prohibition shall not apply to private clubs hereunder, nor to the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption hereunder to the registered guest of any hotel or motel in their designated and private rooms. 
(Ord. No. 104, 1-4-2011)
Sec. 3-143. - Sales outside premises. 
It shall be unlawful for any sales to be made outside of the premises on the lot on which such business is licensed for such sale, except as permitted herein. 
(Ord. No. 104, 1-4-2011)
Sec. 3-144. - Acts prohibited unless licensed. 
It shall be illegal and an offense against the ordinances of the city for any person, firm, corporation, association, society, union, institution, private club, or other form of organization, or any combination thereof, without having applied for, and obtained a annual license to sell at retail alcoholic beverages by the drink for consumption on the premises where such sale occurs, to engage or continue in any of the following activities or conduct: 
(1)	Selling alcoholic beverages at retail by the drink for consumption on the premises where sold for such consumption; 
(2)	Selling at retail alcoholic beverages for consumption by the drink on the premises where such retail sale occurs; 
(3)	Controlling or possessing alcoholic beverages for retail sale by the drink for consumption on the premises where controlled or possessed for such retail sale; 
(4)	Offering alcoholic beverages for sale at retail by the drink for consumption on the premises where offered; 
(5)	Furnishing alcoholic beverages, to be served by the drink, at retail for consumption on the premises where so furnished; 
(6)	Storing or keeping, or permitting the storage or keeping of broken or unsealed packages of alcoholic beverages of members for consumption thereof by the owners of such liquors on the premises where so stored or kept; 
(7)	Acquiring, delivering, receiving or accepting alcoholic beverages by any one at or on any premises other than his or her bona fide home for consumption thereat or therein, if no city license for the retail sale of such beverage at such place by the drink is in effect; 
(8)	Providing a room, place, or premises for keeping or storage, of sealed and unopened, or opened or unsealed containers or bottles of alcoholic beverages for sale at retail, or for consumption thereof on such premises when no valid city license to retail alcoholic beverages by the drink for consumption on such premises shall be in force; 
(9)	Evading any provision of this or any other valid ordinance of this city relating to the retail sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink for consumption on the premises where sold, served, or furnished for consumption on such premises, by whatever false scheme, trick or device may be employed; 
(10)	Making gratuitous gifts or donations of spurious memberships in an alleged private, regular, dues-paying members club, or including enough not specified in the price charged for purchases of merchandise or privileges, other than distilled spirits, to cover membership dues, shall be held an evasion, and shall not be treated as a bona fide donation or gift; 
(11)	Aiding, abetting, counseling, advising, or assisting in the violation of this or any other applicable valid city ordinance relating to the sale at retail of any alcoholic beverage by the drink for consumption on the premises where sold. 
(Ord. No. 104, 1-4-2011)
Sec. 3-145. - Private clubs defined. 
(a)	In addition to the definition as provided in section 3-1(10) of this chapter, a private membership club, within the meaning of this section, shall be and is hereby defined as only such organizations as: 
(1)	Cannot limit or restrict the authority, control, or power of one of its members within three months from the date he becomes such member; or 
(2)	Shall make and keep a correct and true printed or typewritten list of all of its members open to inspection of the city license inspector, mayor, all members of the city council, the city manager, and any member of the police department of the city, at all times of day and night when the club is open to its members; and 
(3)	Confine its membership to persons over 21 years of age; and
(4)	Restricts their patronage to their bona fide regular dues-paying members; and
(5)	Derive the most of their income from their bona fide regular membership dues, sales and service of meals, and private dances by such members and their immediate families, or other lawful activities not related to or involving the sale or use of distilled spirits; and 
(6)	Do not derive their chief income from the sale of alcoholic beverages.
(b)	The prohibitions contained in section 3-144 shall specifically apply herein. 
(Ord. No. 104, 1-4-2011)
ARTICLE VI. - LICENSE FEES AND EXCISE TAXES 

Sec. 3-146. - Schedule of license fees and excise taxes. 
There shall be an application fee of $100.00 for all applications for a new alcoholic beverage license. Applicants applying for more than one type of license at the same time shall only be required to pay one application fee. The application fee shall not apply to applications to renew existing licenses. In addition to any other business license fees that may be applicable under this Code, the following annual license taxes shall be paid for the type of license being acquired as follows: 
(1)	License fee for on-premises consumption of:
a.	Malt beverages: .....$165.00 
b.	Wine: .....$165.00 
c.	Distilled spirits: .....$2,920.00 
d.	Sunday sales of alcoholic beverages by the drink for consumption on the premises (in addition to all licenses to sell alcoholic beverages by the drink): .....$500.00 
(2)	License fee for package sale (no on-premises consumption) of malt beverages: .....$165.00 
(3)	License fee for package sale (no on-premises consumption) of wine: .....$165.00 
(4)	License fee for package sale (no on premises consumption) of distilled spirits: .....$2,920.00 
(4.1)	License fee for Sunday package sales of beer, wine and/or distilled spirits (no on premises consumption, in addition to all regular licenses for package sales): .....$500.00 
(5)	License fee for on-premises consumption of malt beverages and wine at private membership club: .....$400.00 
a.	Sunday sales of alcoholic beverages by the drink for consumption on the premises at private membership club (in addition to all licenses to sell alcoholic beverages by the drink): .....$500.00 
(6)	Excise tax upon wholesalers selling malt beverages within the city per 12-ounce container or fraction thereof: .....0.05 
Or, per ounce of malt beverage sold by each wholesale dealer within the corporate limits of the city: .....0.0041 
(7)	Excise tax upon distilled spirits wholesalers: $0.22/liter, excluding fortified wines, and a proportionate tax at the same rate for all fractional parts of a liter. 
(8)	Excise tax upon retail sales of distilled spirits by the drink: Three percent of the charge to the public for the beverages. 
(9)	Excise tax upon all retail dealers of wine in the amount of: $0.22/liter and a proportionate tax at the same rate for all fractional parts of a liter, except that the following shall be exempt from tax: 
a.	Wine sold to and used by established and recognized churches and synagogues for use in sacramental services only; 
b.	Any wine exempt from taxation by the state under the United States Constitution;
c.	Wine sold to persons outside this state for resale or consumption outside this state; and 
d.	Wine containing less than one-half of one percent alcohol by volume.
(Ord. No. 104, 1-4-2011; Ord. No. 104 Amd 1, § II, 5-5-2015)
Chapter 4 - ANIMALS AND FOWL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Creation of noise by animals, § 7-3(7).
State Law reference— Livestock running at large or straying, OCGA § 4-3-1 et seq.; abandonment of dogs, OCGA § 4-8-3; liability of owner, etc., for damages done to livestock or poultry by dog, OCGA § 4-8-4; control of rabies, OCGA § 3-19-1 et seq.; licensing and regulations of animals of local authorities, OCGA § 31-19-3; notice when person bitten by animal suspected of being rabid, OCGA § 31-19-4.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 4-1. - Livestock or poultry at large prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner, or any other person having possession of any cow, horse, mule, hog, sheep or goat, or any poultry, to allow such animal or poultry to run at large in any street or public place within the city. 
Sec. 4-2. - Proximity of livestock to residence—Minimum distance of keeping; declaration of nuisance. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner, or any other person having possession of any cow, horse, mule, sheep or goat, to stable or otherwise confine any such animal in the city within 100 yards of any dwelling wherein a person resides; the violation of which is declared to be a nuisance likely to endanger the public health. 
Sec. 4-3. - Same—Minimum distance of pens or enclosures. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain a stable, pen, or other place of confinement for the keeping of cows, horses, mules, sheep or goats within 100 yards of any dwelling wherein a person resides; the violation of which is hereby declared to be a nuisance likely to endanger the public health. 
Sec. 4-4. - Minimum area per three head of livestock. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner, or other person having possession of, any cows, horses, mules, sheep or goats, to stable or confine more than three of such animals together within an enclosure containing less than 500 square yards; the violation of which is declared to be a nuisance likely to endanger the public health. 
Sec. 4-5. - Swine prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep swine in the city; the violation of which is declared to be a nuisance likely to endanger the public health. 
Sec. 4-6. - Nuisance control. 
Without regard to other provisions of this chapter or other sections of the Lake Park Code, it shall be unlawful for owners of dogs, cats or other animals to allow, permit or by negligence fail to prevent such animals from acting or performing in such a manner as to cause damage or insanitary conditions to the property of another or otherwise to cause a nuisance in Lake Park. Acts deemed to be nuisances shall include but are not limited to the following: 
(1)	Dogs or cats entering any place where a food is stored, prepared, served or sold to the public except "Seeing Eye" dogs while in the company of a blind person. 
(2)	Any dog chasing, running after or jumping at vehicles moving on public streets and alleys. 
(3)	Any dog habitually snapping, growling, snarling, jumping upon or otherwise threatening persons lawfully using the public sidewalks, streets, alleys or other public ways or habitually attacking other animals. 
(4)	Any animal howling, yelping, whining or barking in such manner as to reasonably disturb any person or neighborhood. 
(5)	Any dog feeding from, turning over or otherwise disturbing garbage containers.
(6)	Any animal scratching or digging in flower beds or soiling or damaging the property of anyone other than the owner. 
(7)	Male animals having access to female animals or vice versa during a breeding season except within enclosures so arranged as to obstruct such animals entirely from the view of persons outside such enclosures. 
(8)	Dogs running at large not on a leash or in voice control of a person and having access to yards or property of persons other than that of the owner of such dog. 
(Ord. No. 3 Amd. 1, 10-6-87)
Sec. 4-7. - Violations and penalties for sections 4-6, 4-25 and 4-29. 
Any person violating the provisions of sections 4-6, 4-25, or 4-29 and convicted in municipal court shall receive a $150.00 fine and/or 30 days' confinement in the county jail and contempt of court. Also, should the provisions of section 4-29 be violated, identified vicious dogs will be confined at the county pound at the owner's expense as directed by the municipal court. 
(Ord. No. 3 Amd. 1, 10-6-87)
Secs. 4-8—4-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DOGS; RABIES CONTROL 

Sec. 4-20. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them: 
Dog means a canine animal of either sex. 
Dog under control means a dog is under control if he is controlled by a leash, is at heel, or is beside a competent person and obedient to that person's commands, or is within a vehicle being driven or parked on the streets, or is within the property limits of his owner or custodian. 
Sec. 4-21. - Enforcement of article. 
The governing body may enforce this article, or may negotiate with and contract with the county for the purpose of cooperating with the county in the enforcement of this article; and may enter into contracts with the county to provide for a dog catcher and dog pound facilities all in furtherance of the enforcement of this article. 
Sec. 4-22. - Identification and vaccination—Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner or custodian of a dog to keep such dog without a collar which shall have attached a valid vaccination tag as required by the law of the state, and identification tag showing the name and address of the owner or custodian of said dog. 
Sec. 4-23. - Same—Illegal attachment or removal of tag. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to attach a vaccination or identification tag to any dog for which it was not intended, or to remove a vaccination or identification tag or collar from any dog without the consent of its owner or custodian. 
Sec. 4-24. - Same—Qualifications to vaccinate. 
No person shall vaccinate dogs against rabies who is not licensed to practice veterinary medicine in the state. 
Sec. 4-25. - Dogs at large prohibited. 
Irrespective of and/or in addition to impoundment provisions, including assessment of penalty fees relating to impoundment of animals as prescribed in other sections of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for owners of dogs to allow, permit, or by negligence fail to prevent their dogs from running at large not on a leash or in voice control of a responsible person. Any dog on the owner's property and not confined thereto by fence, chain, or other suitable and effective means, and when no responsible person is present to control such dog, shall be considered running at large and in violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 3, § 1, 8-7-73; Ord. No. 3 Amd. 1, 10-6-87)
Sec. 4-26. - Impounding—Required as to dogs in violation. 
Any dog found running at large in violation of this article shall be immediately impounded by the duly authorized officers and agents of the city. 
Sec. 4-27. - Same—Impounding; costs; redemption. 
(a)	The chief of police shall have the authority to impound any dogs found at large on the streets. Such officer shall charge the owner for the actual cost to the city of impounding and upkeep of the dog. 
(b)	If the owner of the dog does not reclaim the impounded dog within ten days the chief of police may dispose of the same. 
(Ord. No. 3, §§ 2, 3, 8-7-73)
Sec. 4-28. - Same—Authority when owner unknown. 
In the event that the owner or custodian of a dog is not known, and such dog is upon the streets, alleys, sidewalks, school grounds, public places, and premises of another, any law enforcement officer or agent or employee duly authorized by the city shall be authorized to take possession of such dog and impound it in accordance with the rules and regulations now or hereinafter provided by law or by ordinance of the city for the detention, control and disposition of dogs impounded pursuant to applicable law or ordinance. 
Sec. 4-29. - Vicious dogs. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, permit, accompany or be responsible for the presence of any vicious dog on the streets of the city or in any other public place therein, at any time, unless and in addition to the other requirements of this article, such dog shall be securely muzzled or confined to effectively prevent it from biting any person or other animal. Biting is defined as breaking of the skin of a person or animal by the teeth of the dog. In addition, any vicious dog which attacks a human being or another domestic animal may be ordered destroyed when, in the court's judgment, such vicious dog represents a continuing threat of serious harm to human beings or domestic animals. 
(Ord. No. 3 Amd. 1, 10-6-87)
Chapter 5 - BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority to enact rules and regulations, and to adopt codes, § 7.22.
Cross reference— Fire prevention, Ch. 6.5; cleanliness of premises, § 7-20 et seq.; utilities and services, Ch. 14.
State Law reference— State building, plumbing, electrical, etc., codes, OCGA § 8-2-20 et seq.; application of building and fire related codes to existing buildings, OCGA § 8-2-200 et seq.; adoption of ordinances relating to land-disturbing activities, OCGA § 12-7-4; building permits and certificates of occupancy for buildings presenting special hazards to persons or property, OCGA § 25-2-14; electrical contractors, plumbers and conditioned air contractors, OCGA § 43-14-1 et seq.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 5-1. - Building inspector—Office created; appointment, acting official. 
(a)	The office of building inspector is hereby created.
(b)	The building inspector shall be appointed by the mayor, with the consent of the council. His appointment shall be for one year, unless sooner removed. 
(c)	During temporary absence or disability of the building inspector the appointing authority shall designate an acting building inspector, and shall include his duly authorized assistants. 
Sec. 5-2. - Same—Duties. 
It shall be the duty of the building inspector to enforce all laws relating to the construction, alteration, removal, and demolition of buildings and structures. 
Sec. 5-3. - Same—Right of entry. 
The building inspector, in the discharge of his official duties and upon proper identification, shall have authority to enter any building, structure or premises at any reasonable hour. 
Sec. 5-4. - Appeals. 
From a denial of a building permit or other adverse decision by the building inspector, any party may appeal to the governing body. 
Sec. 5-5. - Duties of property owner. 
It is the duty of the owner of every dwelling, building, structure, or property within the city to construct and maintain such dwelling, building, structure, or property in conformance with applicable codes in force within the city, or such ordinances which regulate and prohibit activities on property and which declare it to be a public nuisance to construct or maintain any dwelling, building, structure, or property in violation of such codes or ordinances. 
State Law reference— O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9(a)(1). 
Secs. 5-6—5-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - HOUSING CODE 

Sec. 5-20. - Adoption; penalty. 
For the purpose of maintaining the health and cleanliness of the city by establishing minimum housing standards and providing for abatement of nuisances within the city, there is hereby adopted as the housing code of the city that certain housing code promulgated by the Southern Building Code Congress International, Inc., Birmingham, Alabama, being particularly the Standard Housing Code, 1985 edition, save and except such portions as are hereinafter stricken or modified, or are in conflict with this Code of Ordinances, and from the date on which this section shall take effect the same shall be controlling within the jurisdiction of the city. At least one copy thereof is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
Any person violating said code shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-8. 
(Ord. of 1-6-76)
State Law reference— Adoption and continuation of state minimum standard codes, OCGA § 8-2-21. 
Secs. 5-21—5-29. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DANGEROUS STRUCTURES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Abating nuisance structures, OCGA § 41-2-7 et seq.

Sec. 5-30. - Definitions. 
As used in this article: 
Closing means securing and causing a dwelling, building, or structure to be vacated. 
Dwellings, buildings, or structures means any building or structure or part thereof used and occupied for human habitation, commercial, industrial, or business uses, or intended to be so used, and includes any outhouses and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith and also includes any building or structure of any design. 
Owner means the holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee of record. 
Municipal court means the Municipal Court for the City of Lake Park, Georgia. 
Parties in interest means persons in possession of the property and all individuals, associations, and corporations who have interest of record in the county where the property is located in a dwelling, building, or structure, including executors, administrators, guardians, and trustees. 
Public authority means any housing authority or any officer who is in charge of any department or branch of the government of the municipality, county, or state relating to health, fire, or building regulations or to other activities concerning dwellings, buildings, or structures in the municipality. 
Public officer means the city marshal, the city building inspector and such officer or officers who are authorized by this article to exercise the powers prescribed herein, or any agent of such officer of officers. 
Repair means closing a dwelling, building, or structure or the cleaning or removal of debris, trash, and other materials present and accumulated which create a health or safety hazard in or about any dwelling, building, or structure. 
(Ord. No. 84, § I, 11-2-04)
Sec. 5-31. - Powers of city officer in regard to unfit buildings or structures. 
An officer properly authorized by the city may exercise the powers necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purpose and provisions of this article, including the following powers in addition to others herein granted: 
(1)	To investigate the dwelling conditions in the city in order to determine which dwellings, buildings, or structures therein are unfit for human habitation or are unfit for current commercial, industrial, or business use; 
(2)	To administer oaths and affirmations, to examine witnesses, and to receive evidence;
(3)	To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations; provided, however, that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession; 
(4)	To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents, and employees as he deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this article; and 
(5)	To delegate any of his functions and powers under this article to such officers and agents as he may designate. 
Sec. 5-32. - Determination by public officer that dwelling, building, or structure is unfit. 
A public officer may determine that a dwelling, building, or structure is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use if he finds that conditions exist in such building, dwelling, or structure which are dangerous or injurious to the health, safety, or morals of the occupants of such dwelling, building, or structure; of the occupants of neighborhood dwellings, buildings, or structures; or of other residents of the city; such conditions may include the following (without limiting the generality of the foregoing): 
(1)	Defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities;
(2)	Lack of adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities;
(3)	Dilapidation;
(4)	Disrepair;
(5)	Structural defects; and
(6)	Uncleanliness.
Sec. 5-33. - Procedure for correcting deficiencies. 
(a)	Whenever a request is filed with the public officer by a public authority or by at least five residents of the city charging that any dwelling, building, or structure is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use or whenever it appears to the public officer (on his own motion) that any dwelling, building, or structure is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use, the public officer shall, if his preliminary investigation discloses a basis for such charges, issue and cause to be served upon the owner of and any parties in interest in such dwelling, building, or structure a complaint stating the charges in that respect and containing a notice that a hearing will be held before the municipal court at a place within the county fixed not less than ten days nor more than 30 days after the serving of said complaint; that the owner and any parties in interest shall be given the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person, or otherwise, and give testimony at the place and time fixed in the complaint; and that the rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not be controlling in hearings before the public officer; 
(b)	If, after such notice and hearing, the municipal court determines that the dwelling, building, or structure under consideration is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use, it shall state in writing its findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner thereof an order: 
(1)	If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the dwelling, building, or structure can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner or parties in interest, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter, or improve such dwelling, building, or structure so as to render it fit for human habitation or for current commercial, industrial, or business use or to vacate and close the dwelling, building, or structure as a human habitation; or 
(2)	If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the dwelling, building, or structure cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner or parties in interest, within the time specified in the order, to remove or demolish such dwelling, building, or structure. 
(3)	For purposes of this section, the court shall make its determination of "reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure" without consideration of the value of the land on which the structure is situated; provided, however, that costs of the preparation necessary to repair, alter, or improve a structure may be considered. Income and financial status of the owner shall not be factor in the court's determination. The present value of the structure and the costs of repair, alteration, or improvement may be established by affidavits of real estate appraisers with a Georgia appraiser classification as provided in Chapter 39A of Title 43, qualified building contractors, or qualified building inspectors without actual testimony presented. Costs of repair, alteration, or improvement of the structure shall be the cost necessary to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violations in force in the jurisdiction. 
In no event shall the council require removal or demolition of any dwelling, building, or structure except upon a finding that the cost of repair, alteration, or improvement thereof exceeds one-half the value such dwelling, building, or structure will have when repaired to satisfy the minimum requirements of this law; 
(c)	If the owner or parties in interest fail to comply with an order to vacate and close or demolish the dwelling, building, or structure, the public officer may cause such dwelling, building, or structure to be repaired, altered, or improved or to be vacated and closed or demolished; and that the public officer may cause to be posted on the main entrance of any building, dwelling, or structure so closed a placard with the following words: 
"This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use; the use or occupation of this building for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use is prohibited and unlawful." 
(d)	If the owner fails to comply with any order to remove or demolish the dwelling, building, or structure, the public officer may cause such dwelling, building, or structure to be removed or demolished; provided, however, that the duties of the public officer, set forth in the preceding paragraph and this paragraph, shall not be exercised until the council shall have by ordinance ordered the public officer to proceed to effectuate the purpose of this article with respect to the particular property or properties which the public officer shall have found to be unfit for human habitation or unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use, which property or properties shall be described in the ordinance. 
(e)	The amount of the cost of such vacating and closing or removal or demolition by the public officer shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. The lien shall attach to the real property upon the payment of all costs of demolition by the municipality and the filing of an itemized statement of the total sum of the costs by the public officer in the office of the clerk on a lien docket maintained by the clerk for such purposes. If the dwelling, building, or structure is removed or demolished by the public officer, he shall sell the materials of such dwellings, buildings, or structures and shall credit the proceeds of such sale against the cost of the removal or demolition and any balance remaining shall be deposited in the superior court by the public officer, shall be secured in such manner as may be directed by such court, and shall be disbursed by such court to the persons found to be entitled thereto by final order or decree of such court. Nothing in this section shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the city to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise. 
(f)	The city may enforce the collection of any amount due on such lien for removal or demolition of dwellings, buildings, or structures only in the following manner: 
(1)	The owner or parties at interest shall be allowed to satisfy the amount due on such lien by paying to the city, within 30 days after the perfection of the lien, a sum of money equal to 25 percent of the total amount due and by further paying to the city the remaining balance due on such lien, together with interest at the rate of seven percent per annum, in three equal annual payments, each of which shall become due and payable on the anniversary date of the initial payment made as hereinabove prescribed. 
(2)	Should the property upon which such lien is perfected be sold, transferred, or conveyed by the owner or parties at interest at any time prior to the termination of the three-year period, then the entire balance due on such lien shall be due and payable to the city. 
(3)	Should the amount due on such lien, or any portion thereof, be unpaid after the passage of the three-year period, or upon the occurrence of the contingency provided for in subparagraph (b) of this paragraph, the city may enforce the collection of any amount due on such lien for alteration, repair, removal, or demolition of dwellings, buildings, or structures in the same manner as provided in OCGA § 48-5-358 and other applicable state statutes. This procedure shall be subject to the right of redemption by any person having any right, title, or interest in or lien upon said property, all as provided by Article 3 of Chapter 4 of Title 48, OCGA. 
Sec. 5-34. - Service of complaints or orders. 
(a)	Complaints or orders issued by a public officer shall, in all cases, be served as provided in OCGA § 41-2-12. 
(b)	A copy of such complaint or orders shall be filed in the proper office or offices for the filing of lis pendens notice in the county in which the dwelling, building, or structure is located and such filing of the complaint or orders shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices provided by law. Any such complaint or orders or an appropriate lis pendens notice may contain a statement to the effect that a lien may arise against the described property and that an itemized statement of such lien is maintained on a lien docket maintained by the city clerk. 
Sec. 5-35. - Injunctions against order to repair, close, or demolish unfit buildings or structures. 
Any person affected by an order issued by the public officer or municipal court may petition to the superior court for an injunction restraining the public officer from carrying out the provisions of the order and the court may, upon such petition, issue a temporary injunction restraining the public officer pending the final disposition of the cause; provided, however, that such person shall present such petition to the court within 15 days of the posting and service of the order of the public officer. De novo hearings shall be had by the court on petitions within 20 days. The court shall hear and determine the issues raised and shall enter such final order or decree as law and justice may require; provided, however, that it shall not be necessary to file bond in any amount before obtaining a temporary injunction under this section. 
Sec. 5-36. - Taking of unfit buildings or structures by eminent domain; police power. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed as preventing the owner or owners of any property from receiving just compensation for the taking of such property by the power of eminent domain under the laws of this state nor as permitting any property to be condemned or destroyed except in accordance with the police power of this state. 
Sec. 5-37. - Authority to use revenues, grants, and donations to repair, close, or demolish unfit buildings or structures. 
The city is authorized to make such appropriations from its revenues as it may deem necessary and may accept and apply grants or donations to assist it in carrying out the provisions of this article. 
Sec. 5-38. - Article cumulative. 
This article shall be cumulative of all other remedies of the city provided by law or by the technical codes adopted by the city. 
Sec. 5-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SWIMMING POOLS 

Sec. 5-40. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them: 
Reconstruction means the replacement of, alteration of, or addition to, an existing swimming pool, but not including equipment. 
Swimming pool means any structure intended for swimming, recreational bathing or wading that contains water over 24 inches deep. This includes in-ground, above-ground and on-ground pools; hot tubs; spas and fixed-in-place wading pools. 
(Ord. No. 105, § I, 9-6-2011)
Sec. 5-41. - Enforcement—Officer designated; inspections required. 
The building inspector shall enforce the provisions of this article, and to that end shall make periodic inspections of all swimming pools. 
Sec. 5-42. - Same—Allowing inspection. 
The owner or other person in possession of any swimming pool shall allow any person charged with the enforcement hereof to inspect the same at reasonable times. 
Sec. 5-43. - Declaration of necessity. 
It is determined and declared that the use of public or private swimming pools in the city without appropriate precautionary safety measures constitutes a hazard to the safety of the residents of the city, particularly children. 
Sec. 5-44. - Same—Noncompliance unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful to construct, maintain, install or enlarge any swimming pool in the city except in compliance with all the provisions of this article. 
Sec. 5-45. - Location. 
No portion of a swimming pool, pumping equipment, filters, pool water disinfection equipment installations or any other related swimming pool accessory equipment shall be closer to property lines than the applicable setback or building lines in the zoning district in which the development occurs. 
Sec. 5-46. - Permit. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, install, relocate, or reconstruct, or permit the construction, installation, relocation, or reconstruction of a swimming pool on any premises owned by him, or in his possession or control, without having first obtained a permit therefor as provided herein; provided, however, the words "install," "reconstruct," "installation," and "reconstruction" shall not be construed to mean the reassembling of a pool for which a permit has been issued, or the reassembling of a pool which qualifies as an existing pool, and no permit shall be required for such reassembling. 
(b)	Application for such permit shall be made in writing in duplicate to the city clerk, accompanied by: 
(1)	A permit fee as may be fixed from time to time by the city council, but not less than $20.00; 
(2)	A description of the size and type of the pool in question; and
(3)	Two copies of a plot plan of the exact location of the proposed pool, and all proposed accessory buildings or structures on the premises. 
(c)	The city clerk will not pass on the structural features or durability of the swimming pool. 
(Mo. of 5-7-96)
Sec. 5-47. - Approval before use. 
No swimming pool constructed, installed, relocated, or reconstructed, pursuant to a permit obtained hereunder, shall have any water put into it or be put in use until the building inspector, or other person charged with enforcement hereof, shall have inspected and approved the same, by appropriate endorsement on a certificate of compliance, as complying herewith. 
Sec. 5-48. - Water supply. 
There shall be no physical connection between a potable water supply below the maximum water level of the pool, or to a recirculating or heating system of a pool, unless such physical connection is so installed and operated that no pool water can be discharged or siphoned into a potable water supply system. 
Sec. 5-49. - Fence or barrier. 
(a)	Every swimming pool shall be completely enclosed by a barrier. The barrier may be the walls of a building, a fence or a combination of both, or for above-ground or on-ground pools, the pool structure itself, as described below. A spa or hot tub with a safety cover complying with ASTM F 1346 shall be exempt from this requirement. 
(b)	Barrier height and clearances. The top of the barrier shall be at least 48 inches above grade measured on the side of the barrier that faces away from the swimming pool. The maximum vertical clearance between grade and the bottom of the barrier shall be two inches measured on the side of the barrier that faces away from the swimming pool. Where the top of the pool structure is above grade, the barrier is authorized to be at ground level or mounted on top of the pool structure, the maximum vertical clearance between the top of the pool structure and the bottom of the barrier shall be four inches. 
(c)	Openings. Openings in the barrier shall not allow passage of a four-inch-diameter sphere. 
(1)	Solid barrier surfaces. Solid barriers which do not have openings shall not contain indentations or protrusions except for normal construction tolerances and tooled masonry joints. 
(2)	Closely spaced horizontal members. Where the barrier is composed of horizontal and vertical members and the distance between the tops of the horizontal members is less than 45 inches, the horizontal members shall be located on the swimming pool side of the fence. Spacing between vertical members shall not exceed 1.75 inches in width. Where there are decorative cutouts within vertical members, spacing within the cutouts shall not exceed 1.75 inches in width. 
(3)	Widely spaced horizontal members. Where the barrier is composed of horizontal and vertical members and the distance between the tops of the horizontal members is 45 inches or more, spacing between vertical members shall not exceed four inches. Where there are decorative cutouts within vertical members, spacing within the cutouts shall not exceed 1.75 inches in width. 
(4)	Chain link dimensions. Maximum mesh size for chain link fences shall be a 2.25-inch square unless the fence is provided with slats fastened at the top or the bottom which reduce the openings to no more than 1.75 inches. 
(5)	Diagonal members. Where the barrier is composed of diagonal members, the maximum opening formed by the diagonal members shall be no more than 1.75 inches. 
(d)	Gates. Access gates shall comply with the requirements of subsections 5-49(c)(1) through (5) and shall be equipped to accommodate a locking device. Pedestrian access gates shall open outward away from the pool and shall be self-closing and have a self-latching device. Gates other than pedestrian access gates shall have a self-latching device. Where the release mechanism of the self-latching device is located less than 54 inches from the bottom of the gate, the release mechanism shall be located on the pool side of the gate at least three inches below the top of the gate, and the gate and barrier shall have no opening greater than 0.5 inch within 18 inches of the release mechanism. 
(e)	Dwelling wall as a barrier. Where a wall of a dwelling serves as part of the barrier, one of the following shall apply: 
(1)	Doors with direct access to the pool through that wall shall be equipped with an alarm which produces an audible warning when the door and/or its screen, if present, are opened. The alarm shall be listed in accordance with UL 2017. The audible alarm shall activate within seven seconds and sound continuously for a minimum of 30 seconds after the door and/or its screen, if present, are opened and be capable of being heard throughout the house during normal household activities. The alarm shall automatically reset under all conditions. The alarm shall be equipped with a manual means, such as touchpad or switch, to temporarily deactivate the alarm for a single opening. Such deactivation shall last for not more than 15 seconds. In dwellings not required to be Accessible, Type A or Type B units, the deactivation switch shall be located 54 inches above the threshold of the door. In dwellings required to be Accessible, Type A or Type B units, the deactivation switch(es) shall be located at 54 inches maximum and 48 inches minimum above the threshold of the door. 
(2)	The pool shall be equipped with a power safety cover which complies with ASTM F 1346.
(3)	Other means of protection, such as self-closing doors with self-latching devices, which are approved by the administrative authority, shall be accepted so long as the degree of protection afforded is not less than the protection afforded by subsections (e)(1) or (e)(2) above. 
(f)	Pool structure as barrier. Where an above-ground pool structure is used as a barrier or where the barrier is mounted on top of the pool structure, and the means of access is a ladder or steps, then the ladder or steps either shall be capable of being secured, locked or removed to prevent access, or the ladder or steps shall be surrounded by a barrier which meets the requirements of subsections 5-49(b) through (e). When the ladder or steps are secured, locked or removed, any opening created shall not allow the passage of a four-inch-diameter sphere. 
(g)	Indoor swimming pools. Walls surrounding indoor swimming pools shall not be required to comply with subsection 5-49(e). 
(h)	Prohibited locations. Barriers shall be located so as to prohibit permanent structures, equipment or similar objects from being used to climb the barriers. 
(Ord. No. 105, § II, 9-6-2011)
Editor's note— Ord. No. 105, § II, adopted Sept. 6, 2011, repealed the former § 5-49, and enacted a new § 5-49 as set out herein. The former § 5-49 pertained to fences and derived from original codification. 
Sec. 5-50. - Drain. 
All swimming pools hereafter constructed, installed, relocated, or reconstructed shall be so situated that normal surface water will drain away from the pool. No drain of a swimming pool shall be connected with, or permitted to drain into, the sanitary sewer system; nor shall any such pool be physically connected with any storm drain system, but such latter system shall be used, wherever feasible, to receive the drainage. 
Sec. 5-51. - Cleanliness and sanitation of public pools. 
All existing and hereafter constructed, installed, relocated or reconstructed swimming pools used by the public, whether publicly or privately owned, shall be maintained and operated in such manner as to be clean and sanitary at all times. 
Secs. 5-52—5-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - GEORGIA STATE MINIMUM STANDARD CODES 
DIVISION 1. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 5-61. - Codes adopted; enforced. 
(a)	It is the intent of the City of Lake Park to enforce the latest edition of the following Georgia State Minimum Standard Codes, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs: 
International Building Code (ICC); 
National Electrical Code (NFPA); 
International Fuel Gas Code (ICC); 
International Mechanical Code (ICC); 
International Plumbing Code (ICC); 
International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings (ICC); 
International Energy Conservation Code (ICC); and 
International Fire Code (ICC). 
(b)	The following codes, the latest editions as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, are hereby adopted by reference as though they were copied herein fully. It is the intent of the City of Lake Park to enforce the latest edition of the following Georgia State Minimum Standard Codes, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs: 
International Existing Building Code (ICC); and 
International Property Maintenance Code (ICC). 
(Ord. No. 85, 11-2-04)
Secs. 5-62—5-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
Subdivision 1. - Purpose and Scope 

Sec. 5-71. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this division is to provide for the administration and enforcement of the Georgia State Minimum Standard Codes for Construction as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs. Hereinafter, the State Minimum Standard Codes for Construction shall be referred to as "the construction codes." 
(Ord. No. 86, Att. A, 11-2-04)
Sec. 5-72. - Code remedial. 
(a)	General. These construction codes are hereby declared to be remedial, and shall be construed to secure the beneficial interests and purposes thereof—which are public safety, health, and general welfare—through structural strength, stability, sanitation, adequate light and ventilation, and safety to life and property from fire and other hazards attributed to the built environment including alteration, repair, removal, demolition, use and occupancy of buildings, structures, or premises, and by regulating the installation and maintenance of all electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, which may be referred to as service systems. 
(b)	Quality control. Quality control of materials and workmanship is not within the purview of the construction codes except as it relates to the purposes stated therein. 
(c)	Permitting and inspection. The inspection or permitting of any building, system or plan, under the requirements of construction codes shall not be construed in any court as a warranty of the physical condition of such building, system or plan or their adequacy. Neither the City of Lake Park, nor any employee or agent thereof, shall be liable in tort for damages for any defect or hazardous or illegal condition or inadequacy in such building, system or plan, nor for any failure of any component of such, which may occur subsequent to such inspection or permitting. 
(Ord. No. 86, Att. A, 11-2-04)
Sec. 5-73. - Scope. 
(a)	Applicability. 
(1)	General. Where, in any specific case, different sections of these construction codes specify different materials, methods of construction or other requirements, the most restrictive shall govern. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. 
(2)	Building. The provisions of the International Building Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal and demolition, of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures, except in one- and two-family dwellings. 
(3)	Electrical. The provisions of the National Electrical Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall apply to the installation of electrical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances thereto. 
(4)	Gas. The provisions of the International Fuel Gas Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall apply to the installation of consumer's gas piping, gas appliances and related accessories as covered in this Code. 
These requirements apply to gas piping systems extending from the point of delivery to the inlet connections of appliances and the installation and operation of residential and commercial gas appliances and related accessories, except in one- and two-family dwellings. 
(5)	Mechanical. The provisions of the International Mechanical Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall apply to the installation of mechanical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and/or appurtenances, including ventilating, heating, cooling, air conditioning and refrigeration systems, incinerators, and other energy related systems, except in one- and two-family dwellings. 
(6)	Plumbing. The provisions of the International Plumbing Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall apply to every plumbing installation, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances, and when connected to a water or sewerage system. 
(7)	Fire prevention. The provisions of the International Fire Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures. 
(8)	Energy. The provisions of the International Energy Conservation Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall regulate the design of building envelopes for adequate thermal resistance and low air leakage and the design and selection of mechanical, electrical, service water heating and illumination systems and equipment that will enable the effective use of energy in new building construction. 
(9)	CABO one- and two-family dwelling. The provisions of the International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, of every one- or two-family dwelling or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures. 
(10)	Unsafe building abatement. The provisions of the International Existing Building Code and the International Property Maintenance Code shall provide code enforcement personnel with the necessary tools to have dangerous and unsafe buildings repaired or demolished. 
(b)	Federal and state authority. The provisions of the construction codes shall not be held to deprive any federal or state agency, or any applicable governing authority having jurisdiction, of any power or authority which it had on the effective date of the adoption of the construction codes or of any remedy then existing for the enforcement of its orders, nor shall it deprive any individual or corporation of its legal rights as provided by law. 
(c)	Appendices. Appendices referenced in the text of the construction codes shall be considered an integral part of the construction codes. 
(d)	Referenced standards. Standards referenced in the text of the construction codes shall be considered an integral part of the construction codes. If specific portions of a standard are denoted by code text, only those portions of the standard shall be enforced. Where construction code provisions conflict with a standard, the construction code provisions shall be enforced. Permissive and advisory provisions in a standard shall not be construed as mandatory. 
(e)	Maintenance. All buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, both existing and new, and all parts thereof, shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. All devices or safeguards, which are required by the construction codes when constructed, altered, or repaired, shall be maintained in good working order. The owner, or his/her designated agent, shall be responsible for the maintenance of buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems. 
(Ord. No. 86, Att. A, 11-2-04)
Sec. 5-74. - Building department. 
There is hereby established a department to be called the building department and the person in charge shall be known as the building official. The governing body shall establish the qualifications for the building official and other code enforcement personnel. 
(1)	Restrictions on employees. An officer or employee connected with the department, except one whose only connection is as a member of the board established by section 5-121, shall not be financially interested in the furnishing of labor, material, or appliances for the construction, alteration, or maintenance of a building, structure, service, system, or in the making of plans or of specifications thereof, unless he is the owner of such. This officer or employee shall not engage in any other work, which is inconsistent with his duties or conflict with the interests of the department. 
(2)	Records. The building official shall keep, or cause to be kept, a record of the business of the department. The records of the department shall be open to public inspection pursuant to the provisions of the Georgia Open Records Act. 
(3)	Liability. Any officer or employee, or member of the board of adjustments and appeals, charged with the enforcement of the construction codes, acting for the applicable governing authority in the discharge of his duties, shall not thereby render himself/herself personally liable, and is hereby relieved from all personal liability, for any damage that may occur to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his/her duties. Any suit brought against any officer or employee or member because of such act performed by him/her in the enforcement of any provision of the construction codes shall be defended by the governing jurisdiction until the final termination of the proceedings. 
(4)	Reports. The building official shall submit annually a report covering the work of the building department during the preceding year. He/she may incorporate in said report a summary of the decisions of the board of adjustments and appeals during said year. 
(Ord. No. 86, Att. A, 11-2-04)
Sec. 5-75. - Existing buildings. 
(a)	General. Alterations, repairs or rehabilitation work may be made to any existing structure, building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system without requiring the building, structure, plumbing, electrical, mechanical or gas system to comply with all the requirements of the construction codes provided that the alteration, repair or rehabilitation work conforms to the requirements of the construction codes for new construction. The building official shall determine the extent to which the existing system shall be made to conform to the requirements of the construction codes for new construction. 
(b)	Change of occupancy. If the occupancy classification of any existing building or structure is changed, the building, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems shall be made to conform to the intent of the construction codes as required by the building official. 
(Ord. No. 86, Att. A, 11-2-04)
Sec. 5-76. - Special historic buildings. 
The provisions of the construction codes relating to the construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation or moving of buildings or structures shall not be mandatory for existing buildings or structures identified and classified by the state or local jurisdiction as historic buildings when such buildings or structures are judged by the building official to be safe and in the public interest of health, safety and welfare regarding any proposed construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation or moving of buildings within fire districts. 
(Ord. No. 86, Att. A, 11-2-04)
Secs. 5-77—5-80. - Reserved. 
Subdivision 2. - Powers and Duties of the Building Official 

Sec. 5-81. - General. 
The building official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of the construction codes. The building official is further authorized to render interpretations of the construction codes, which are consistent with its intent and purpose. 
(Ord. No. 86, Att. A, 11-2-04)
Sec. 5-82. - Right of entry. 
(a)	Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of the construction codes, or whenever the building official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition or code violation which makes such building, structure, premises, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the building official may enter such building, structure or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the building official by these construction codes, provided that if such building or premises is occupied, he shall first present proper credentials and request entry. If such building, structure, or premises is unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of such and request entry. If entry is refused, the building official shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
(b)	When the building official shall have first obtained a proper inspection warrant or other remedy provided by law to secure entry, no owner or occupant or any other persons having charge, care or control of any building, structure, or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper request is made as herein provided, to promptly permit entry therein by the building official for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to the construction codes. 
(Ord. No. 86, Att. A, 11-2-04)
Sec. 5-83. - Stop work orders. 
Upon notice from the building official, work on any building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system that is being done contrary to the provisions of the construction codes or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, shall immediately case. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or to his agent, or to the person doing the work, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. Where an emergency exists, the building official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work. 
(Ord. No. 86, Att. A, 11-2-04)
Sec. 5-84. - Revocation of permits. 
(a)	Misrepresentation of application. The building official may revoke a permit or approval, issued under the provisions of the construction codes, in case there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to the material fact in the application or plans on which the permit or approval was based. 
(b)	Violation of code provisions. The building official may revoke a permit upon determination by the building official that the construction erection, alteration, repair, moving, demolition, installation or replacement of the building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems for which the permit was issued is in violation of, or not in conformity with, the provisions of the construction codes. 
(Ord. No. 86, Att. A, 11-2-04)
Sec. 5-85. - Unsafe buildings or systems. 
All buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems which are unsafe, unsanitary, or do not provide adequate egress, or which constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to human life, or which in relation to existing use, constitute a hazard to safety or health, are considered unsafe buildings or service systems. All such unsafe buildings, structures or service systems are hereby declared illegal and shall be abated by repair and rehabilitation or by demolition in accordance with the provisions of the International Existing Building Code and the International Property Maintenance Code. 
(Ord. No. 86, Att. A, 11-2-04)
Sec. 5-86. - Requirements not covered by code. 
Any requirements necessary for the strength, stability or proper operation of an existing or proposed building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, or for the public safety, health and general welfare, not specifically covered by or the construction codes, shall be determined by the building official. 
(Ord. No. 86, Att. A, 11-2-04)
Sec. 5-87. - Alternate materials and methods. 
The provisions of the construction codes are not intended to prevent the use of any material or method of construction not specifically prescribed by them, provided any such alternate has been reviewed by the building official. The building official shall approve any such alternate, provided the building official finds that the alternate for the purpose intended is at least the equivalent of that prescribed in the construction codes, in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety. The building official shall require that sufficient evidence or proof be submitted to substantiate any claim made regarding the alternate. 
(Ord. No. 86, Att. A, 11-2-04)
Secs. 5-88—5-90. - Reserved. 
Subdivision 3. - Permits 

Sec. 5-91. - Permit application. 
(a)	When required. Any owner, authorized agent, or contractor who desires to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, or change the occupancy of a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert or replace any electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system, the installation of which is regulated by the construction codes, or to cause any such work to be done, shall first make application to the building official and obtain the required permit for the work. 
EXCEPTION: Permits shall not be required for the following mechanical work: 
(1)	Any portable heating appliance;
(2)	Any portable ventilation equipment;
(3)	Any portable cooling unit;
(4)	Any steam, hot or chilled water piping within any heating or cooling equipment regulated by the construction codes; 
(5)	Replacements of any part which does not alter its approval or make it unsafe;
(6)	Any portable evaporative cooler;
(7)	Any self-contained refrigeration system containing ten lb. (4.54 kg.) or less of refrigerant and actuated by motors of one horsepower (746 W) or less. 
(b)	Work authorized. A building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing permit shall carry with it the right to construct or install the work, provided the same are shown on the drawings and set forth in the specifications filed with the application for the permit. Where these are not shown on the drawings and covered by the specifications submitted with the application, separate permits shall be required. 
(c)	Minor repairs. Ordinary minor repairs may be made with the approval of the building official without a permit, provided that such repairs shall not violate any of the provisions of the construction codes. 
(d)	Information required. Each application for a permit, with the required fee, shall be filed with the building official on a form furnished for that purpose, and shall contain a general description of the proposed work and its location. The application shall be signed by the owner, or his/her authorized agent. The building permit application shall indicate the proposed occupancy of all parts of the building and of that portion of the site or lot, if any, not covered by the building or structure, and shall contain such other information as may be required by the building official. 
(e)	Time limitations. An application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned six months after the date of filing for the permit, unless before then a permit has been issued. One or more extensions of time for periods of not more than 90 days each may be allowed by the building official for the application, provided the extension is requested in writing and justifiable cause is demonstrated. 
(Ord. No. 86, Att. A, 11-2-04)
Sec. 5-92. - Drawings and specifications. 
(a)	Requirements. When required by the building official, two or more copies of specifications and of drawings drawn to scale with sufficient clarity and detail to indicate the nature and character of the work, shall accompany the application for a permit. Such drawings and specifications shall contain information, in the form of notes or otherwise, as to the quality of materials, where quality is essential to conformity with the construction codes. Such information shall be specific, and the construction codes shall not be cited as a whole or in part, nor shall the term "legal" or its equivalent be used, as a substitute for specific information. All information, drawings, specifications and accompanying data shall bear the name and signature of the person responsible for the design. 
(b)	Additional data. The building official may require details, computations, stress diagrams, and other data necessary to describe the construction or installation and the basis of calculations. All drawings, specifications and accompanying data required by the building official to be prepared by an architect or engineer shall be affixed with their official seal. 
(c)	Design professional. The design professional shall be an architect or engineer legally registered under the laws of this state regulating the practice of architecture or engineering and shall affix his official seal to said drawings, specifications and accompanying data, for the following: 
(1)	All Group A, E, and I occupancies.
(2)	Buildings and structures three stories or more high.
(3)	Buildings and structures 5,000 sq. ft. (465 m^2) or more in area.
For all other buildings and structures, the submittal shall bear the certification of the applicant that some specific state law exception permits its preparation by a person not so registered. 
EXCEPTION: Single-family dwellings, regardless of size, shall require neither a registered architect nor engineer, nor a certification that an architect or engineer is not required. 
(d)	Structural and fire resistance integrity. Plans for all buildings shall indicate how required structural and fire resistance integrity will be maintained where a penetration of a required fire resistance wall, floor or partition will be made for electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing, signal and communication conduits, pipes and systems and also indicate in sufficient detail how the fire integrity will be maintained where required fire resistance floors intersect the exterior walls. 
(e)	Site drawings. Drawings shall show the location of the proposed building or structure and of every existing building or structure on the site or lot. The building official may require a boundary line survey prepared by a qualified surveyor. 
(f)	Hazardous occupancies. The building official may require the following: 
(1)	General site plan. A general site plan drawn at a legible scale which shall include, but not be limited to, the location of all buildings, exterior storage facilities, permanent access ways, evacuation routes, parking lots, internal roads, chemical loading areas, equipment cleaning areas, storm and sanitary sewer accesses, emergency equipment and adjacent property uses. The exterior storage areas shall be identified with the hazard classes and the maximum quantities per hazard class of hazardous materials stored. 
(2)	Building floor plan. A building floor plan drawn to a legible scale, which shall include, but not be limited to, all hazardous materials storage facilities within the building and shall indicate rooms, doorways, corridors, exits, fire rated assemblies with their hourly rating, location of liquid tight rooms, and evacuation routes. Each hazardous materials storage facility shall be identified on the plan with the hazard classes and quantity range per hazard class or the hazardous materials stored. 
(Ord. No. 86, Att. A, 11-2-04)
Sec. 5-93. - Examination of documents. 
(a)	Plan review. The building official shall examine or cause to be examined each application for a permit and the accompanying documents, consisting of drawings, specifications, computations, and additional data, and shall ascertain by such examinations whether the construction indicated and described is in accordance with the requirements of the construction codes and all other pertinent laws or ordinances. 
(b)	Affidavits. The building official may accept a sworn affidavit from a registered architect or engineer stating that the plans submitted conform to the construction codes. For buildings and structures the affidavit shall state that the plans conform to the laws as to egress, type of construction and general arrangement and if accompanied by drawings showing the structural design, and by a statement that the plans and design conform to the requirements of the construction codes as to strength, stresses, strains, loads and stability. The building official may without any examination or inspection accept such affidavit, provided the architect or engineer who made such affidavit agrees to submit to the building official, copies of inspection reports as inspections are performed and upon completion of the structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems a certification that the structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system has been erected in accordance with the requirements of the construction codes. Where the building official relies upon such affidavit, the architect or engineer shall assume full responsibility for the compliance with all provisions of the construction codes and other pertinent laws or ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 86, Att. A, 11-2-04)
Sec. 5-94. - Issuing permits. 
(a)	Action on permits. The building official shall act upon an application for a permit without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. If the building official is satisfied that the work described in an application for a permit and the contract documents filed therewith conform to the requirements of the construction codes and other pertinent laws and ordinances, he shall issue a permit to the applicant. 
(b)	Refusal to issue permit. If the application for a permit and the accompanying contract documents describing the work do not conform to the requirements of the construction codes or other pertinent laws or ordinances, the building official shall not issue a permit, but shall return the contract documents to the applicant with his refusal to issue such permit. Such refusal shall, when requested, be in writing and shall contain the reason for refusal. 
(c)	Special foundation permit. When application for permit to erect or enlarge a building has been filed and pending issuance of such permit, the building official may, at his discretion, issue a special permit for the foundation only. The holder of such a special permit is proceeding at his own risk and without assurance that a permit for the remainder of the work will be granted nor that corrections will not be required in order to meet provisions of the construction codes. 
(d)	Public right-of-way. A permit shall not be given by the building official for the construction of any building, or for the alteration of any building where said building is to be changed and such change will affect the exterior walls, bays, balconies, or other appendages or projections fronting on any street, alley or public lane, or for the placing on any lot or premises of any building or structure removed from another lot or premises, unless the applicant has made application at the office of the director of public works for the lines of the public street on which he/she proposes to build, erect or locate said building; and it shall be the duty of the building official to see that the street lines are not encroached upon except as provided for in Chapter 22 of the Standard Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 86, Att. A, 11-2-04)
Sec. 5-95. - Contractor responsibilities. 
It shall be the duty of every contractor who shall make contracts for the installation or repairs of building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, sprinkler or plumbing systems, for which a permit is required, to comply with state or local rules and regulations concerning licensing which the applicable governing authority may have adopted. In such case that the state requires a contractor to have obtained a state license before they are permitted to perform work, the contractor shall supply the local government with their license number before receiving a permit for work to be performed. 
(Ord. No. 86, Att. A, 11-2-04)
Sec. 5-96. - Conditions of the permit. 
(a)	Permit intent. A permit issued shall be construed to be a license to proceed with the work and not as authority to violate, cancel, alter, or set aside any of the provisions of the construction codes, nor shall issuance of a permit prevent the building official from thereafter requiring a correction of errors in plans, construction, or violations of the construction codes. Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced within six months after its issuance, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of six months after the time the worked is commenced. One or more extensions of time, for periods not more than 90 days each, may be allowed for the permit. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. Extensions shall be in writing by the building official. 
(b)	Permit issued on basis of an affidavit. Whenever a permit is issued in reliance upon an affidavit or whenever the work to be covered by a permit involves installation under conditions which, in the opinion of the building official, are hazardous or complex, the building official shall require that the architect or engineer who signed the affidavit or prepared the drawings or computations shall supervise such work. In addition, they shall be responsible for conformity with the permit, provide copies of inspection reports as inspections are performed, and upon completion make and file with the building official written affidavit that the work has been done in conformity with the reviewed plans and with the structural provisions of the construction codes. In the event such architect or engineer is not available, the owner shall employ in his stead a competent person or agency whose qualifications are reviewed by the building official. 
(c)	Plans. When the building official issues a permit, he/she shall enforce, in writing or by stamp, both sets of plans "Reviewed for Code Compliance." One set of drawings so reviewed shall be retained by the building official and the other set shall be returned to the applicant. The permitted drawings shall be kept at the site of work and shall be open to inspection by the building official or his/her authorized representative. 
(Ord. No. 86, Att. A, 11-2-04)
Sec. 5-97. - Fees. 
(a)	Prescribed fees. A permit shall not be issued until the fees prescribed by the governing body have been paid. Nor shall an amendment to a permit be released until the additional fee, if any, due to an increase in the estimated cost of the building, structure, electrical, plumbing, mechanical or gas systems, etc. has been paid. 
(b)	Work commencing before permit issuance. Any person who commences any work on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing, etc. system before obtaining the necessary permits, shall be subject to a penalty of 100 percent of the usual permit fee in addition to the required permit fees. 
(c)	Accounting. The building official shall keep a permanent and accurate accounting of all permit fees and other money collected, the names of all persons upon whose account the same was paid, along with the date and amount thereof. 
(d)	Schedule of permit fees. On all buildings, structures, electrical, plumbing, mechanical and gas systems or alterations requiring a permit, a fee for each permit shall be paid as required at the time of filing application, in accordance with the fee schedules as set by the governing body. 
(e)	Building permit valuations. If, in the opinion of the building official, the valuation of building, alteration, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems appears to be underestimated on the application, permit shall be denied, unless the applicant can show detailed estimates to meet the approval of the building official. Permit valuations shall include total cost, such as electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing equipment and other systems, including materials and labor. 
(Ord. No. 86, Att. A, 11-2-04)
Sec. 5-98. - Inspections. 
(a)	Existing building inspections. Before issuing a permit the building official may examine or cause to be examined any building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems for which an application has been received for a permit to enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, install, or change the occupancy. He shall inspect all buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, from time to time, during and upon completion of the work for which a permit was issued. He shall make a record of every such examination and inspection and of all violations of the construction codes. 
(b)	Manufacturers and fabricators. When deemed necessary by the building official he shall make, or cause to be made, an inspection of materials or assemblies at the point of manufacture or fabrication. A record shall be made of every such examination and inspection and of all violations of the construction codes. 
(c)	Inspection service. The building official may make, or cause to be made, the inspections required by section 5-98(f). He/she may accept reports of inspectors of recognized inspection services provided that after investigation he/she is satisfied as to their qualifications and reliability. A certificate called for by any provision of the construction codes shall not be based on such reports unless the same are in writing and certified by a responsible officer of such service. 
(d)	Inspections prior to issuance of certificate of occupancy or completion. The building official shall inspect or cause to be inspected at various intervals all construction or work for which a permit is required, and a final inspection shall be made of every building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system upon completion, prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy or completion. 
(e)	Posting of permit. Work requiring a permit shall not commence until the permit holder or his/her agent posts the permit card in a conspicuous place on the premises. The permit shall be protected from the weather and located in such position as to permit the building official or representative to conveniently make the required entries thereon. This permit card shall be maintained in such position by the permit holder until the certificate of occupancy or completion is issued by the building official. 
(f)	Required inspections. The building official upon notification from the permit holder or his agent shall make the following inspections and such other inspections as necessary, and shall either release that portion of the construction or shall notify the permit holder or his agent of any violations which must be corrected in order to comply with the technical code: 
(1)	Building. 
a.	Foundation inspection: To be made after trenches are excavated and forms erected.
b.	Frame inspection: To be made after the roof, all framing, fireblocking and bracing are in place, all concealing wiring, all pipes, chimneys, ducts and vents are complete. 
c.	Final inspection: To be made after the building is completed and ready for occupancy.
(2)	Electrical. 
a.	Underground inspection: To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, conduit or cable installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
b.	Rough-in inspection: To be made after the roof, framing, fireblocking and bracing is in place and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
c.	Final inspection: To be made after the building is complete, all required electrical fixtures are in place and properly connected or protected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
(3)	Plumbing. 
a.	Underground inspection: To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, piping installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
b.	Rough-in inspection: To be made after the roof, framing, fireblocking and bracing is in place and all soil, waste and vent piping is complete, and prior to this installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
c.	Final inspection: To be made after the building is complete, all plumbing fixtures are in place and properly connected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
d.	Note: See Section 311 of the Standard Plumbing Code for required tests.
(4)	Mechanical. 
a.	Underground inspection: To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, underground duct and fuel piping installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
b.	Rough-in inspection: To be made after the roof, framing, fire blocking and bracing are in place and all ducting, and other concealed components are complete, and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
c.	Final inspection: To be made after the building is complete, the mechanical system is in place and properly connected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
(5)	Gas. 
a.	Rough piping inspection: To be made after all new piping authorized by the permit has been installed, and before any such piping has been covered or concealed or any fixtures or gas appliances have been connected. 
b.	Final piping inspection: To be made after all piping authorized by the permit has been installed and after all portions which are to be concealed by plastering or otherwise have been so concealed, and before any fixtures or gas appliances have been connected. This inspection shall include a pressure test. 
c.	Final inspection: To be made on all new gas work authorized by the permit and such portions of existing systems as may be affected by new work or any changes in order to insure compliance with all the requirements of the construction codes and to assure that the installation and construction of the gas system is in accordance with reviewed plans. 
(6)	Energy. 
a.	Foundation inspection: [To] be made before slab concrete is poured in place. To verify that perimeter insulation has been installed correctly on any slab on grade foundations, if required. 
b.	Frame inspection: To be made before exterior wall insulation is concealed by wall board to check installation of exterior walls insulation and to inspect that all holes and cracks through the structure envelope have been sealed in an appropriate manner as to restrict air passage. 
c.	Final inspection: To be made after the building is completed and ready for occupancy. To verify installation and R-value of ceiling and floor insulation. To verify correct SEER ratings on appliances. 
(g)	Written release. Work shall not be done on any part of a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining a written release from the building official. Such written release shall be given only after an inspection has been made of each successive step in the construction or installation as indicated by each of the foregoing three inspections. 
(h)	Reinforcing steel, structural frames, insulation, plumbing, mechanical, or electrical systems. Reinforcing steel, structural frame, insulation, plumbing, work of any part of any building or structure shall not be covered or concealed without first obtaining a release from the building official. 
(i)	Plaster fire protection. In all buildings where plaster is used for fire protection purposes, the permit holder or his agent shall notify the building official after all lathing and backing is in place. Plaster shall not be applied until the release from the building official has been received. 
(Ord. No. 86, Att. A, 11-2-04)
Sec. 5-99. - Certificates. 
(a)	Certificate of occupancy. 
(1)	Building occupancy. A new building shall not be occupied or a change made in the occupancy, nature or use of a building or part of a building until after the building official has issued a certificate of occupancy. Said certificate shall not be issued until all required electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing and fire protection systems have been inspected for compliance with the construction codes and other applicable laws and ordinances and released by the building official. 
(2)	Issuing certificate of occupancy. Upon satisfactory completion of construction of a building or structure and installation of electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems in accordance with the construction codes, reviewed plans and specifications, and after the final inspection, the building official shall issue a certificate of occupancy stating the nature of the occupancy permitted, the number of persons for each floor when limited by law, and the allowable load per square foot for each floor in accordance with the provisions of the construction codes. 
(3)	Temporary/partial occupancy. A temporary/partial certificate of occupancy may be issued for a portion of a building, which may safely be occupied prior to final completion of the building. 
(4)	Existing building certificate of occupancy. A certificate of occupancy for any existing building may be obtained by applying to the building official and supplying the information and data necessary to determine compliance with the construction codes for the occupancy intended. Where necessary, in the opinion of the building official, two sets of detailed drawings, or a general inspection, or both, may be required. When, upon examination and inspection, it is found that the building conforms to the provisions of the construction codes and other applicable laws and ordinances for such occupancy, a certificate of occupancy shall be issued. 
(b)	Certificate of completion. Upon satisfactory completion of a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, a certificate of completion may be issued. This certificate is proof that a structure or system is complete and for certain types of permits is released for use and may be connected to a utility system. This certificate does not grant authority to occupy or connect a building, such as a shell building, prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(c)	Service utilities. 
(1)	Connection of service utilities. No person shall make connections from a utility, source of energy, fuel or power to any building or system which is regulated by the construction codes for which a permit is required, until released by the building official and a certificate of occupancy or completion is issued. 
(2)	Temporary connection. The building official may authorize the temporary connection of the building or system to the utility source of energy, fuel or power for the purpose of testing building service systems or for use under a temporary certificate of occupancy. 
(3)	Authority to disconnect service utilities. The building official shall have the power to authorized disconnection of utility service to the building, structure or system regulated by the construction codes, in case of emergency where necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to life or property. The building official shall notify the serving utility, and whenever possible the owner and occupant of the building, structure or service system of the decision to disconnect prior to taking such action. If not notified prior to disconnecting, the owner or occupant of the building, structure or service system shall be notified in writing, as soon as practical thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 86, Att. A, 11-2-04)
Sec. 5-100. - Posting floor loads. 
(a)	Occupancy. An existing or new building shall not be occupied for any purpose, which will cause the floors thereof to be loaded beyond their safe capacity. The building official may permit occupancy of a building for mercantile, commercial or industrial purposes, by a specific business, when he is satisfied that such capacity will not thereby be exceeded. 
(b)	Storage and factory-industrial occupancies. It shall be the responsibility of the owner, agent, proprietor or occupant of Group S and Group F occupancies, or any occupancy where excessive floor loading is likely to occur, to employ a competent architect or engineer in computing the safe load capacity. All such computations shall be accompanied by an affidavit from the architect or engineer stating the safe allowable floor load on each floor in pounds per square foot uniformly distributed. The computations and affidavit shall be filed as a permanent record of the building department. 
(c)	Signs required. In every building or part of a building used for storage, industrial or hazardous purposes, the safe floor loads, as reviewed by the building official on the plan, shall be marked on plates or approved design which shall be supplied and securely affixed by the owner of the building in a conspicuous place in each story to which they relate. Such plates shall not be removed or defaced, and if lost, removed or defaced, shall be replaced by the owner of the building. 
(Ord. No. 86, Att. A, 11-2-04)
Secs. 5-101—5-110. - Reserved. 
Subdivision 4. - Tests 

Sec. 5-111. - Required tests. 
The building official may require tests or test reports as proof of compliance. Required tests are to be made at the expense of the owner, or his/her agent, by an approved testing laboratory or other approved agency. 
(Ord. No. 86, Att. A, 11-2-04)
Secs. 5-112—5-120. - Reserved. 
Subdivision 5. - Construction Board of Adjustment and Appeals 

Sec. 5-121. - Appointment. 
There is hereby established a board to be called the construction board of adjustment and appeals, which shall consist of seven members and two alternates. The governing body shall appoint the board. 
(Ord. No. 86, Att. A, 11-2-04)
Sec. 5-122. - Membership and terms. 
(a)	Membership. The construction board of adjustment and appeals should consist of seven members. Such board members should be composed of individuals serving on the board of commissioners with knowledge and experience in the construction codes, such as design professionals, contractors or building industry representatives. In addition to the regular members, there should be two alternate members, one member at large from the building industry and one member at large from the public. A board member shall not act in a case in which he has a personal or financial interest. 
(b)	Terms. The terms of office of the board member shall be staggered so no more than 1/3 of the board is appointed or replaced in any 12-month period. The two alternates, if appointed, shall serve one-year terms. Vacancies shall be filled for an unexpired term in the manner in which original appointments are required to be made. Continued absence of any member from required meetings of the board shall, at the discretion of the applicable governing body, render any such member subject to immediate removal from office. 
(c)	Quorum and voting. A simple majority of the board shall constitute a quorum. In varying any provision of the construction codes, the affirmative votes of the majority present shall be required. In modifying a decision of the building official, not less than two affirmative votes shall be required. In the event that regular members are unable to attend a meeting, the alternate members, if appointed, shall vote. 
(d)	Secretary of board. The building official shall act as secretary of the board and shall make a detailed record of all its proceedings, which shall set forth the reasons for its decision, the vote of each member, the absence of a member and any failure of a member to vote. 
(Ord. No. 86, Att. A, 11-2-04)
Sec. 5-123. - Powers. 
The construction board of adjustments and appeals shall have the power, as further defined in section 5-124, to hear the appeals of decisions and interpretations of the building official and consider variances of the construction codes. 
(Ord. No. 86, Att. A, 11-2-04)
Sec. 5-124. - Appeals. 
(a)	Decision of the building official. The owner of a building, structure or service system, or his duly authorized agent, may appeal a decision of the building official to the construction board of adjustment and appeals whenever any one of the following conditions are claimed to exist: 
(1)	The building official rejected or refused to approve the mode or manner of construction proposed to be followed or materials to be used in the installation or alteration of a building, structure or service system. 
(2)	The provisions of the construction codes do not apply to this specific case.
(3)	That an equally good or more desirable form of installation can be employed in any specific case. 
(4)	The true intent and meaning of the construction codes or any of the regulations thereunder have been misconstrued or incorrectly interpreted. 
(b)	Variances. The construction board of adjustments and appeals, when so appealed to and after a hearing, may vary the application of any provision of the construction codes to any particular case when, in its opinion, the enforcement thereof would do manifest injustice and would be contrary to the spirit and purpose of this or the construction codes or public interest, and also finds all of the following: 
(1)	That special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the building, structure or service system involved and which are not applicable to others. 
(2)	That the special conditions and circumstances do not result from the action or inaction of the applicant. 
(3)	That granting the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by the construction codes to other buildings, structures or service system. 
(4)	That the variance granted is the minimum variance that will made possible the reasonable use of the building, structure or service system. 
(5)	That the grant of the variance will be in harmony with the general intent and purpose of the construction codes and will not be detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare. 
a.	Condition of variances. In granting the variance, the board may prescribe a reasonable time limit within which the action for which the variance is required shall be commenced or completed or both. In addition, the board may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with the construction codes. Violation of the conditions of a variance shall be deemed a violation of the construction codes. 
(c)	Notice of appeal. Notice of appeal shall be in writing and filed within 30 calendar days after the building official renders the decision. Appeals shall be in a form acceptable to the building official. 
(d)	Unsafe or dangerous buildings or service systems. In the case of a building, structure, or service system, which, in the opinion of the building officials, is unsafe, unsanitary or dangerous, the building official may, in his order, limit the time for such notice of appeals to a shorter period. 
(Ord. No. 86, Att. A, 11-2-04)
Sec. 5-125. - Rules and regulations. 
The board shall establish rules and regulations for its own procedure not inconsistent with the provisions of these procedures. The board shall meet on call of the chairman. The board shall meet within 30 calendar days after notice of appeal has been received. 
(1)	Decisions. The construction board of adjustment and appeals shall, in every case, reach a decision without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. Each decision of the board shall also include the reasons for the decision. If a decision of the board reverses or modifies a refusal, order, or disallowance of the building official or varies the application of any provision of the construction codes, the building official shall immediately take action in accordance with such decision. Every decision shall be promptly filed in writing in the office of the building official and shall be open to public inspection. A certified copy of the decision shall be sent by mail or otherwise to the appellant and a copy shall be kept publicly posted in the office of the building official for two weeks after filing. Every decision of the board shall be final, subject however to such remedy as any aggrieved party might have at law or in equity. 
(Ord. No. 86, Att. A, 11-2-04)
Secs. 5-126—5-130. - Reserved. 
Subdivision 6. - Violations and Penalties 

Sec. 5-131. - Violations; penalties. 
Any person, firm, corporation or agent who shall violate a provision of the construction codes, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall erect, construct, alter, install, demolish or move any structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, or has erected, constructed, altered, repaired, moved or demolished a building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, in violation of a detailed statement or drawing submitted and permitted thereunder, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each such person shall be considered guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of the construction codes is committed or continued, and upon conviction of any such violation such person shall be punished within the limits and as provided by state laws. 
(Ord. No. 86, Att. A, 11-2-04)
Chapter 5.5 - CEMETERIES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 5.5-1—5.5-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LAKE PARK MEMORIAL CEMETERY[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note—Ord. No. 64, adopted Mar. 2, 1993, amended the Code by providing for a new Ch. 15, §§ 15-1—15-10, pertaining to cemeteries. In order to preserve the alphabetical sequence of the Code, such provisions have been redesignated as Ch. 5.5, §§ 5.5-20—5.5-29, at the discretion of the editor.

Sec. 5.5-20. - Trust fund established. 
There is hereby created and established a trust fund to be known as the Lake Park Memorial Cemetery Trust Fund, and all monies received by the city pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be a part of and be deposited in said trust fund, and shall be kept separately and apart from all other funds of the city. 
(Ord. No. 64, 3-2-93)
Sec. 5.5-21. - Sale of lots. 
Proceeds from the sale of cemetery lots beginning at the effective date of this article shall be deposited in the trust fund. 
(Ord. No. 64, 3-2-93)
Sec. 5.5-22. - Power of city as trustee. 
Trust funds shall be held by the city as trustee to provide for improvement, maintenance, and perpetual care for all cemetery lots subject to the uses and purposes and the powers and authority of the city as trustee as set out and provided in the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. Any funds disbursed from the trust fund shall be disbursed based upon the recommendations of the appointed trustees. Any expenses over $500.00 in nature must come before the city council for pre-approval. 
(Ord. No. 64, 3-2-93; Ord. No. 64 Amd. 1, 2-8-2000; Ord. No. 64 Amd. 2, 10-2-2001)
Sec. 5.5-23. - Records; use of income of trust fund. 
The records of the city shall at all times show the amount of principal held in such trust fund and the amount of accumulated income, if any, shall be used for expended to provide the perpetual care and maintenance herein contemplated. Additionally, the city, upon recommendation of the appointed trustees may spend the principal of said fund, but in no event shall said expenditures of principal reduce the principal to less than $10,000.00. 
(Ord. No. 64, 3-2-93; Ord. No. 64 Amd. 1, 2-8-2000)
Sec. 5.5-24. - Premium or discount; treatment by trustee. 
In arriving at the income from any investment, the trustee may treat any premium or discount on such investment as principal or as income, or may apportion the same between principal and income, at its election. 
(Ord. No. 64, 3-2-93)
Sec. 5.5-25. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 64 Amd. 1, adopted Feb. 8, 2000, repealed § 5.5-25, which pertained to contribution from the general budget and derived from Ord. No. 64, 3-2-93. 
Sec. 5.5-26. - Gifts to trust fund. 
Any gifts or donations received by the trust fund from individuals or other entities shall be deposited in the trust fund as an addition to the corpus and only the interest thereon may be expended for capital improvements or for improving, beautifying, or maintaining the streets, parks, and other public portions of the cemetery. In the event the income is not expended each year, the same shall be added to the corpus of the trust. 
(Ord. No. 64, 3-2-93)
Sec. 5.5-27. - Use of excess funds. 
Should the income of such trust at any time prove to be more than is needed to care for and to maintain the lots, the trustee may accumulate the income therefrom and add the same to the corpus, or may use or expend all or a part of such excess income in improving, beautifying, or maintaining the streets, parks, and other public portions of such cemetery. 
(Ord. No. 64, 3-2-93)
Sec. 5.5-28. - Trustees. 
The city shall appoint three individuals who shall serve as the board of trustees for the trust fund. Persons serving in the capacity as board members are not required to be residents of the city. Current board member terms as of the date of this amendment shall expire November 9, 2001. The city shall appoint three individuals as of that date who shall serve for a two-year term, with all terms expiring on the same date two years later. 
(Ord. No. 64, 3-2-93; Ord. No. 64 Amd. 1, 2-8-2000)
Sec. 5.5-29. - Nature of agreement, amendments. 
This article shall constitute a contract and trust agreement between the city as trustee and each person owning a lot in the Lake Park Memorial Cemetery. From time to time, this article may be amended and modified by the mayor and council so long as such amendments do not adversely affect the perpetual care plan. 
Chapter 6 - ELECTIONS 

Sec. 6-1. - Compliance with charter; qualifying fees. 
Pursuant to section 5.11 of the City Charter, the council hereby declares that all municipal elections shall be held in accordance with the City Charter and the Georgia Election Code, OCGA Title 21, Chapter 2, as amended. The qualifying fee for a candidate seeking office shall be in accordance with with OCGA § 21-2-131, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 10, § 1, 1-8-74; Ord. No. 10 Amd. 1, § 1, 3-2-82)
State Law reference— Fixing and publishing of qualification fee, manner of payment, restriction on amount of fee, filing of pauper's affidavit in lieu of payment of fee, OCGA § 21-2-131. 
Sec. 6-2. - Reserved. 
Sec. 6-3. - Method of selecting superintendent; compensation. 
The municipal election superintendent shall be selected by vote of the governing body and shall be paid a sum as set by council from time to time as appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 10, § 3, 1-8-74; Ord. No. 10 Amd. 1, § 2, 3-2-82)
Sec. 6-4. - Managers. 
The governing body shall appoint clerks as necessary to assist the election superintendent in conducting all elections, general or special. Said clerks shall be paid a sum as set from time to time by council as appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 10, § 4, 1-8-74; Ord. No. 10 Amd. 1, § 3, 3-2-82)
State Law reference— Powers, duties, etc., of municipal election superintendents, managers and clerks, OCGA § 21-2-70.1 et seq.; duties of poll managers with respect to absentee ballots, OCGA § 21-2-380 et seq.; preparation for and conduct of municipal elections, OCGA § 21-2-400 et seq. 
Sec. 6-5. - Registrar's appointment; duties. 
The governing authority shall appoint by vote a municipal registrar who shall perform and conduct the duties of this office in accordance with the Georgia Election Code, OCGA Title 21, Chapter 2, as amended, and who shall, under Section 21-3-282, also serve as the absentee ballot clerk and who shall perform these duties as prescribed in the Georgia Election Code, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 10, § 5, 1-8-74)
State Law reference— Selection of municipal registrar by governing authority, OCGA § 21-2-212. 
Chapter 6.2 - ENVIRONMENT 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 6.2-1—6.2-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note—Ord. No. 83, adopted Oct. 5, 2004, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, inclusion herein as superseding former Art. II was at the discretion of the editor. Former Art. II, §§ 6.2-20—6.2-26, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 79, 10-2-2001; Ord. No. 62, 10-6-1992.

Sec. 6.2-20. - Title. 
This article will be known as "The City of Lake Park Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 83, 10-5-04)
Sec. 6.2-21. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article, unless otherwise specifically stated: 
Applicant means a person submitting a request and accompanying materials to the local issuing authority for a permit. 
Best management practices (BMPs) means a collection of structural practices and vegetative measures which, when properly designed, installed and maintained, will provide effective erosion and sedimentation control. The term "properly designed" means designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" specified in OCGA § 12-7-6 subsection (b). 
Board means the Board of Natural Resources. 
Buffer means the area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
Commission means the State Soil and Water Conservation Commission. 
Cut means a portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to excavated surface. Also known as "excavation." 
Department means the Department of Natural Resources. 
Director means the Director of the Environmental Protection Division of the Department of Natural Resources. 
District means the Alapaha Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Division means the Environmental Protection Division of the Department of Natural Resources. 
Drainage structure means a device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for stormwater management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
Erosion means the process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Erosion and sedimentation control plan means a plan for the control of soil erosion and sedimentation resulting from a land-disturbing activity. Also known as the "plan." 
Fill means a portion of land surface to which soil or other solid materials has been added; the depth above the original ground. 
Finished grade means the final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Grading means altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Ground elevation means the original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Land-disturbing activity means any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in subsection 6.2-22(5). 
Larger common plan of development or sale means a contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this paragraph, "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
Local issuing authority means the governing authority of any county or municipality which is certified pursuant to subsection (2) OCGA § 12-7-8. 
Natural ground surface means the ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU) means numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed particles are present. 
Operator means the party or parties that have: 
(1)	Operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or 
(2)	Day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with a stormwater pollution prevention plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the stormwater pollution prevention plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
Permit means the authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this article. 
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of this state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Project means the entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
Qualified personnel means any person who meets or exceeds the education and training requirements of OCGA § 12-7-19. 
Roadway drainage structure means a device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled way consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Sediment means solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation means the process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
Soil and water conservation district approved plan means an erosion and sedimentation control plan approved in writing by the Alapaha Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Stabilization means the process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
State general permit means the National Pollution Discharge Elimination System general permit or permits for stormwater runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. Section 1251, et seq., and subsection (f) of Code Section 12-5-30. 
State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
Structural erosion and sedimentation control practices means practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures, sediment traps and land grading, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia." 
Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures means measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment producing areas by covering the soil with: 
(1)	Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long term vegetative cover; or
(2)	Temporary seeding, producing short term vegetative cover; or
(3)	Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod forming grass.
Such measures can be found in the publication "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia." 
Watercourse means any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Wetlands means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
(Ord. No. 83, 10-5-04; Ord. No. 83 Amd. 1, 11-14-06)
Sec. 6.2-22. - Exemptions. 
This article shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
(1)	Surface mining, as the same is defined in OCGA § 12-4-72, "Mineral Resources and Caves Act;" 
(2)	Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying;
(3)	Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
(4)	The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre and not otherwise exempted under this paragraph; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in section 6.2-23 of this article and this paragraph; 
(5)	Agricultural operations as defined in OCGA § 1-3-3, "definitions," to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; production of livestock, including but not limited to cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including but not limited to chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl or animals; the production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds; 
(6)	Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer as established in paragraph (15) of section 6.2-23(c) of this article, no other land-disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three years after completion of such forestry practices; 
(7)	Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
(8)	Any project involving less than one acre of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre or within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this paragraph, "state waters" excludes channels and drainageways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one acre, which involves land-disturbing activity, and which is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainageway, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the local issuing authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by paragraphs (1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7), (9) or (10) of this section; 
(9)	Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the Department of Transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the State Tollway Authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of Department of Transportation or the State Tollway Authority which disturb one or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of OCGA § 12-7-7.1; except where the Department of Transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the State Road and Tollway Authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the local issuing authority, the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in OCGA § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; 
(10)	Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in OCGA § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in OCGA § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in OCGA § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and 
(11)	Any public water system reservoir.
(Ord. No. 83, 10-5-04)
Sec. 6.2-23. - Minimum requirements for erosion and sedimentation control using best management practices. 
(a)	General provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land-disturbing activities. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities which are not exempted by this article shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion and sedimentation control plans. Soil erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of section 6.2-23(b) and (c) of this article. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion and sedimentation pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity. 
(b)	Minimum requirements/BMPs. 
(1)	Best management practices as set forth in section 6.2-23(b) and (c) of this article shall be required for all land-disturbing activities. Proper design, installation and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with paragraph (2) of this subsection or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of stormwater issued pursuant to subsection (f) of OCGA § 12-5-30, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act." As used in this subsection the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" specified in OCGA § 12-7-6 subsection (b). 
(2)	A discharge of stormwater runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by the local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to subsection (f) of OCGA § 12-5-30, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries. The turbidity of receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. This paragraph shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single-family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sales unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five acres. 
(3)	Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to subsection (f) of Code Section 12-5-30, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," for each day on which such failure occurs. 
(4)	The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land-disturbing activities occur. 
(c)	The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to this chapter for the purpose of governing land-disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit; and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
(1)	Stripping of vegetation, regarding and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; 
(2)	Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum;
(3)	Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practical erosion potential; 
(4)	Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented;
(5)	The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
(6)	Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable, but in no case will bare soil be allowed to be exposed longer than 14 days; 
(7)	Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during all phases of development; this would include but not be limited to slopes, rights-of-way, channels, ditches, parking areas, building pad areas, etc.; 
(8)	Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable. All permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices must be installed before the local issuing authority will accept the improvements and/or give approval hereunder to the project; 
(9)	To the extent necessary, sediment in run off water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this paragraph, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of OCGA § 12-7-1 et seq.; 
(10)	Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills; 
(11)	Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property;
(12)	Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
(13)	Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; 
(14)	Land-disturbing activity plans for erosion and sedimentation control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in section 6.2-23(b)(2) of this article; 
(15)	There is established a 25-foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to OCGA § 12-2-8, or where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; provided, however, the buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to part 6 of Article 5, Chapter 5, Title 12, [of] the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director as provided in this paragraph. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer under this paragraph: 
a.	No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.	The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: 
1.	Stream crossings for water lines; or
2.	Stream crossings for sewer lines; and
(16)	Brush barriers are not acceptable for use as a sediment barrier for any land-disturbing activity other than for a timbering operation. 
(d)	The fact that land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 83, 10-5-04)
Sec. 6.2-24. - Application—Permit process. 
(a)	General. The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall review the general development plans and detailed plans of the City of Lake Park that affect the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it, together with the zoning ordinances, stormwater management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, this article, and other ordinances which regulate the development of land within the City of Lake Park. However, the operator is the only party who may obtain a permit. 
(b)	Application requirements. 
(1)	No person shall conduct land-disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of the City of Lake Park, Georgia, without first obtaining a permit from the Office of Local Issuing Authority, Lowndes County Engineering Department to perform such activity. 
(2)	The application for a permit shall be submitted to the Lowndes County Engineering Department and must include the applicant's erosion and sedimentation control plan with supporting data as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in section 6.2-24(c) of this article. Soil erosion and sedimentation control plans shall conform to the provisions of section 6.2-23(b) and (c) of this article. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by four copies of applicant's soil erosion control plans, drainage calculations, Lowndes County's plan review checklist and any documentation the applicant has submitted in conjunction with a notice of intent (NOI) as required by the state general permit. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan or that such a visit was not required in accordance with rules and regulations established by the board. 
(3)	A plan review and processing fee, in the amount of $125.00 shall be charged for each plan submittal. However, Moody Air Force Base will be exempted from this $125.00 review fee on projects confined to the Air Force Base property. 
(4)	In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will be assessed pursuant to paragraph (5) subsection (a) of OCGA § 12-5-23, provided that such fees shall not exceed $80.00 per acre of land-disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land-disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. To the extent required by applicable state law (including regulations of the department or division), one-half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the division; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to paragraph (9) or (10) of OCGA § 12-7-17 shall be submitted in full to the division. 
(5)	Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the local issuing authority shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion and sedimentation control plan. The district is expected to approve or disapprove a plan within 35 days of receipt. Failure of a district to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variance required by section 6.2-23(c)(15) and bonding if required as per section 6.2-24(b)(7), have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the local issuing authority and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the local issuing authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. 
(6)	When reviewing any application for a land-disturbing activity permit, the local issuing authority shall consider the past record of the permit applicant in complying with previous land-disturbing activity permits issued to it and this article. If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this article section, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975 as amended, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq., as amended, within three years prior to the date of filing of the application under consideration, the local issuing authority may deny the permit application. 
(7)	The local issuing authority may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land-disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this article or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an article or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the local issuing authority with respect to alleged permit violations. 
(c)	Plan requirements. 
(1)	Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in section 6.2-23(b) and (c) of this article. Conformance with the minimum requirements may be attained through the use of design criteria in the current issue of the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia," published by the State Soil and Water Conservation Commission as a guide; or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" is hereby incorporated by reference into this article. The plan for the land-disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and stormwater management facilities, local ordinances and state laws. 
(2)	Data required for site plan:
a.	Narrative or notes, and other information: Notes or narrative to be located on the site plan in general notes or in erosion and sediment control notes. 
b.	Description of existing land use at project site and description of proposed project.
c.	Name, address, and phone number of the property owner and of the party responsible for preparing the plan. 
d.	Name and phone number of 24-hour local contact for the property owner who is responsible for erosion and sedimentation controls. 
e.	Size of project, or phase under construction, in acres.
f.	Activity schedule showing anticipated starting and completion dates for the project. Include the statement in bold letters, that "the installation of erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices shall occur prior to or concurrent with land-disturbing activities." 
g.	Stormwater and sedimentation management systems-storage capacity, hydrologic study, and calculations, including off-site drainage areas. 
h.	Vegetative plan for all temporary and permanent vegetative measures, including species, planting dates, and seeding, fertilizer, lime, and mulching rates. The vegetative plan should show options for year-round seeding. 
i.	Detail drawings for all structural practices. Specifications may follow guidelines set forth in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia." 
j.	Maintenance statement—"Erosion and sedimentation control measures will be maintained at all times. If full implementation of the approved plan does not provide for effective erosion and sediment control, additional erosion and sediment control measures shall be implemented to control or treat the sediment source." 
(3)	Maps, drawings, and supportive computations shall bear the signature/seal of a registered professional in engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, land surveying, or a certified professional in erosion and sediment control. After December 31, 2006, all persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements as developed by the commission pursuant to OCGA § 12-7-20. The certified plans shall contain: 
a.	Graphic scale and north point or arrow indicating magnetic north.
b.	Vicinity maps showing location of project and existing streets.
c.	Boundary line survey.
d.	Delineation of disturbed areas within project boundary.
e.	Existing and planned contours, with an interval in accordance with the following:

 
f.	Adjacent areas and feature areas such as streams, lakes, residential areas, etc. which might be affected should be indicated on the plan. 
g.	Proposed structures or additions to existing structures and paved areas.
h.	Delineate the 25-foot undisturbed horizontal buffer adjacent to state waters.
i.	Location of erosion control measures and practices using coding symbols from the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia," Chapter 6. 
(4)	Maintenance of all soil erosion and sedimentation control practices, whether temporary or permanent, shall be at all times the responsibility of the property owner. 
(d)	Permits. 
(1)	Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than 45 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary. 
(2)	No permit shall be issued by the local issuing authority unless the erosion and sedimentation control plan has been approved by the district as required, and the local issuing authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this article, any variance required by section 6.2-23(c)(15) are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per section 6.2-24(b)(7) are met, and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(3)	If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase which separate permit shall be issued before work may begin in a subsequent phase. 
(4)	The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the local issuing authority, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this article. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
(5)	If the land disturbance activity and related work to which the permit relates has not begun within six months of the issuance of the permit, then the permit shall expire. If the land disturbance activity and related work to which the permit relates has not been completed and approved within 24 months of the issuance of the permit, then the permit shall expire; provided, however, the primary permittee will remain responsible for all erosion and sediment control compliance, until the primary permittee has successfully submitted a NOT (notice of termination) as required by the state general permit to the Georgia DNR and copies submitted to the Lowndes County Engineering Department at which time the permit will also be terminated. 
(Ord. No. 83, 10-5-04; Ord. No. 83 Amd. 1, 11-14-06)
Sec. 6.2-25. - Inspection and enforcement. 
(a)	The Lowndes County Engineering Department will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, the local issuing authority shall regulate both primary and secondary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this article, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article. 
(b)	The Lowndes County Engineering Department shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land-disturbing activities. 
(c)	No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the local issuing authority, the commission, the district, or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(d)	The districts or the commission or both may provide technical assistance to the local issuing authority for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of its erosion and sedimentation control program. The district or the commission shall notify the division (with a copy to the local issuing authority) and request investigation by the division if any material deficient or ineffective local program hereunder is found. 
(Ord. No. 83, 10-5-04; Ord. No. 83 Amd. 1, 11-14-06)
Sec. 6.2-26. - Penalties and incentives. 
(a)	Failure to obtain a permit for land-disturbing activity. If any person commences any land-disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbance permit as prescribed in this article without first obtaining a permit hereunder, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the City of Lake Park. 
(b)	Stop work orders. 
(1)	For the first violation of the provisions of this article, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five days, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a stop-work order requiring that land-disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land-disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order in lieu of a warning. 
(2)	For a second and each subsequent violation, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order; and 
(3)	All stop-work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. 
(4)	When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop-work order shall be issued by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee. All such stop-work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop-work orders shall apply to all land-disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. 
(c)	Bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of section 6.2-24(b)(7). The local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(d)	Monetary penalties. Any person who violates any provisions of this article, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this article, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director issued as provided in this article shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per day, per violation. Each day during which a violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 83, 10-5-04; Ord. No. 83 Amd. 1, 11-14-06)
Sec. 6.2-27. - Education and certification. 
After December 31, 2006, all persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land-disturbing activity within the City of Lake Park shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to OCGA § 12-7-20. 
(Ord. No. 83, 10-5-04)
Sec. 6.2-28. - Administrative appeal judicial review. 
(a)	The denial of a permit by the Local Issuing Authority upon proper and complete application under this Ordinance; or the suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the Local Issuing Authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved Erosion and Sediment Control Plan; or upon finding that the holder of a permit is in violation of the permit's conditions; or upon finding that the holder is in violation of this ordinance; shall in each case entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to an appeal hearing before the Lowndes County Board of Commissioners within (30) thirty days after receipt by the Local Issuing Authority of written notice of appeal of the foregoing. 
(b)	Judicial review. Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the local issuing authority, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal de novo to the Superior Court of Lowndes County. 
(c)	Effectivity. This article shall become effective immediately upon adoption by the City Council of the City of Lake Park. 
(d)	Validity. If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase, or provision of this article shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, such decisions shall not effect the remaining portions of this article. 
(e)	Liability. 
(1)	Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this article, nor the compliance with provisions of this article shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the local issuing authority or district for damage to any person or property. 
(2)	The fact that a land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or terms of the permit. 
(3)	No provision of this article shall permit any person to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975 as amended, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act as amended, or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved in each case thereunder, or to pollute any waters of the state as defined thereby. 
(Ord. No. 83, 10-5-04; Ord. No. 83 Amd. 1, 11-14-06)
Secs. 6.2-29—6.2-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note—Ord. No. 101, adopted Sept. 7, 2010, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, inclusion herein as Art. III, §§ 6.2-41—6.2-64, was at the discretion of the editor.

DIVISION 1. - STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES 

Sec. 6.2-41. - Authorization. 
Article IX, Section II of the Constitution of the State of Georgia and OCGA § 36-1-20(a) have delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the Mayor and Council of the City of Lake Park, Georgia, do ordain as follows. 
(Ord. No. 101, 9-7-2010)
Sec. 6.2-42. - Findings of fact. 
(a)	Flood hazard areas may be subject to periodic inundation with the potential for damage to property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)	These flood losses can be minimized by regulation of uses within areas vulnerable to floods, which are inadequately elevated, flood-proofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages, and by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities. 
(Ord. No. 101, 9-7-2010)
Sec. 6.2-43. - Statement of purpose. 
It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)	Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities, which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)	Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
(3)	Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion, and; 
(4)	Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters. 
(Ord. No. 101, 9-7-2010)
Sec. 6.2-44. - Objectives. 
The objectives of this article are: 
(1)	To protect human life and health;
(2)	To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(3)	To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood prone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas; 
(4)	To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
(5)	To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(6)	To minimize prolonged business interruptions; and
(7)	To insure that potential homebuyers are notified that property is in a flood area.
(Ord. No. 101, 9-7-2010)
DIVISION 2. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 6.2-45. - Lands to which this article applies. 
This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of Lake Park, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 101, 9-7-2010)
Sec. 6.2-46. - Basis for area of special flood hazard. 
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its Flood Insurance Study (FIS), dated September 26, 2008, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared a part of this article. 
For those land areas acquired by a municipality through annexation, the current effective FIS dated September 26, 2008, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, for unincorporated Lowndes County, Georgia are hereby adopted by reference. 
Areas of special flood hazard may also include those areas known to have flooded historically or defined through standard engineering analysis by governmental agencies or private parties but not yet incorporated in a FIS. 
The repository for public inspection of the Flood Insurance Study (FIS), accompanying maps and other supporting data is located: Lake Park City Hall, 120 Essa Street, Lake Park, Georgia 31636. 
(Ord. No. 101, 9-7-2010)
Sec. 6.2-47. - Establishment of development permit. 
A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this article PRIOR to the commencement of any development activities. 
(Ord. No. 101, 9-7-2010)
Sec. 6.2-48. - Compliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. No. 101, 9-7-2010)
Sec. 6.2-49. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing ordinance, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this article and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 101, 9-7-2010)
Sec. 6.2-50. - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this article all provisions shall be: (1) considered as minimum requirements; (2) liberally construed in favor of the governing body, and; (3) deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 101, 9-7-2010)
Sec. 6.2-51. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the City of Lake Park or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 101, 9-7-2010)
Sec. 6.2-52. - Penalties for violation. 
Failure to comply with the provisions of this article or with any of its requirements, including conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions shall constitute a violation. Any person who violates this article or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $500.00 or imprisoned for not more than 90 days, or both, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of Lake Park from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. No. 101, 9-7-2010)
DIVISION 3. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 6.2-53. - Designation of article administrator. 
The city building inspector is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 101, 9-7-2010)
Sec. 6.2-54. - Permit procedures. 
Application for a development permit shall be made to the city building inspector on forms furnished by the community PRIOR to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to the following: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the elevations of the area in question and the nature, location, dimensions, of existing or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, storage of materials or equipment, and drainage facilities. 
Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)	Application stage.
(a)	Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
(b)	Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-residential structure will be flood-proofed; 
(c)	Design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any proposed non-residential flood-proofed structure will meet the flood-proofing criteria of subsection 6.2-57(2); 
(d)	Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of a proposed development; and 
(2)	Construction stage. For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit holder shall provide to the administrator an as-built certification of the regulatory floor elevation or flood-proofing level immediately after the lowest floor or flood-proofing is completed. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When flood-proofing is utilized for non-residential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. 
Any work undertaken prior to submission of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. 
The city building inspector shall review the above referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make said corrections required hereby, shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project. 
(Ord. No. 101, 9-7-2010)
Sec. 6.2-55. - Duties and responsibilities of the administrator. 
Duties of the city building inspector shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)	Review proposed development to assure that the permit requirements of this article have been satisfied. 
(2)	Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been received from governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334. Require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file. 
(3)	Review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(4)	When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 6.2-46, then the city building inspector shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other sources in order to administer the provisions of division 4. 
(5)	Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures in accordance with subsection 6.2-54(2). 
(6)	Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any new or substantially improved structures have been flood-proofed, in accordance with subsection 6.2-54(2). 
(7)	When flood-proofing is utilized for a structure, the city building inspector shall obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect in accordance with subsection 6.2-54(1)(c) and subsection 6.2-57(2) or 6.2-59(2). 
(8)	Make substantial damage determinations following a flood event or any other event that causes damage to structures in flood hazard areas. 
(9)	Notify adjacent communities and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
(10)	For any altered or relocated watercourse, submit engineering data/analysis within six months to the FEMA to ensure accuracy of community flood maps through the letter of map revision process. Assure flood carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse is maintained. 
(11)	Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the city building inspector shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this article. 
(12)	All records pertaining to the provisions of this article shall be maintained in the office of the city building inspector and shall be open for public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 101, 9-7-2010)
DIVISION 4. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

Sec. 6.2-56. - General standards. 
In ALL areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)	New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 
(2)	New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(3)	New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(4)	Elevated buildings. All new construction or substantial improvements of existing structures that include ANY fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. 
(a)	Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
(i)	Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
(ii)	The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and
(iii)	Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both direction. 
(b)	So as not to violate the "lowest floor" criteria of this article, the unfinished or flood resistant enclosure shall only be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; and 
(c)	The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
(5)	All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
(6)	Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces. 
(7)	New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system; 
(8)	New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters; 
(9)	On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding; and 
(10)	Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure, which is not compliant with the provisions of this article, shall be undertaken only if the non-conformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. 
(Ord. No. 101, 9-7-2010)
Sec. 6.2-57. - Specific standards. 
In ALL areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)	New construction and/or substantial improvements. Where base flood elevation data are available, new construction and/or substantial improvement of any structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate equalization of flood hydrostatic forces on both sides of exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 6.2-56(4), "Elevated buildings." 
(a)	All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated at or above one foot above the base flood elevation. 
(2)	Non-residential construction. New construction and/or the substantial improvement of any structure located in A1-30, AE, or AH zones, may be flood-proofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to one foot above the base flood elevation, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and in subsection 6.2-55(6). 
(3)	Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. Where base flood elevation data are available: 
(a)	All manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved on: (1) individual lots or parcels; (2) in new and/or substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions; (3) in expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions; or (4) on a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision where a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, must have the lowest floor including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. 
(b)	Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision may be elevated so that either: 
(i)	The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than one foot above the level of the base flood elevation; or 
(ii)	The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
(c)	All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. (Ref. subsection 6.2-56(6) above.) 
(d)	All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either:
(i)	Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days.
(ii)	Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions), or 
(iii)	The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for "new construction," including the anchoring and elevation requirements of subsection 6.2-57(3)(a)—(c), above. 
(4)	Floodway. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 6.2-46, are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, the area must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
(a)	Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway. Development may be permitted however, provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels or floodway widths during a base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof. 
(b)	ONLY if subsection 6.2-57(4)(a) above is satisfied, then any new construction or substantial improvement shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of division 4. 
(Ord. No. 101, 9-7-2010)
Sec. 6.2-58. - Building standards for streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodway (A Zones). 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 6.2-46, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A Zones), OR where base flood data have been provided but a floodway has not been delineated, the following provisions apply: 
(1)	When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 6.2-46, then the city building inspector shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any scientific or historic base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of division 4. ONLY if data are not available from these sources, then the following provisions (2) and (3) shall apply: 
(2)	No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to the width of the stream or 20 feet, whichever is greater, measured from the top of the stream bank, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in more than a one foot increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(3)	In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. (NOTE: Require the lowest floor to be elevated one foot above the estimated base flood elevation in A-Zone areas where a limited detail study has been completed.) Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 6.2-56(4), "Elevated buildings." 
(a)	All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. 
The city building inspector shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(Ord. No. 101, 9-7-2010)
Sec. 6.2-59. - Standards for areas of special flood hazard (Zones AE) with established base flood elevations without designated floodways. 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 6.2-46, where streams with base flood elevations are provided but no floodways have been designated, (Zones AE) the following provisions apply: 
(1)	No encroachments, including fill material, new structures or substantial improvements shall be located within areas of special flood hazard, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. The engineering certification should be supported by technical data that conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles. 
(2)	New construction or substantial improvements of buildings shall be elevated or flood-proofed to elevations established in accordance with section 6.2-57. 
(Ord. No. 101, 9-7-2010)
Sec. 6.2-60. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO Zones). 
Areas of special flood hazard established in section 6.2-46 may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. The following provisions apply: 
(1)	All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and non-residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the flood depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 6.2-56(4), "Elevated buildings." 
The city building inspector shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(2)	New construction or the substantial improvement of a non-residential structure may be flood-proofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one foot, above highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and as required in subsection 6.2-54(1)(c) and (2). 
(3)	Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(Ord. No. 101, 9-7-2010)
Sec. 6.2-61. - Standards for subdivisions. 
(1)	All subdivision and/or development proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
(2)	All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
(3)	All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; and 
(4)	For subdivisions and/or developments greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is less, base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision and all other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions. Any changes or revisions to the flood data adopted herein and shown on the FIRM shall be submitted to FEMA for review as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. Upon completion of the project, the developer is responsible for submitting the "as-built" data to FEMA in order to obtain the final LOMR. 
(Ord. No. 101, 9-7-2010)
Sec. 6.2-62. - Standards for critical facilities. 
(1)	Critical facilities shall not be located in the 100-year floodplain or the 500-year floodplain. 
(2)	All ingress and egress from any critical facility must be protected to the 500-year flood elevation. 
(Ord. No. 101, 9-7-2010)
DIVISION 5. - VARIANCE PROCEDURES 

Sec. 6.2-63. - Variance procedures. 
(a)	The Lake Park Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear and decide requests for appeals or variance from the requirements of this article. 
(b)	The board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision, or determination is made by the city building inspector in the enforcement or administration of this article. 
(c)	Any person aggrieved by the decision of the zoning board of appeals may appeal such decision to the Superior Court of Lowndes County, as provided in OCGA § 5-4-1. 
(d)	Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(e)	Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this article are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(f)	Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if ANY increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(g)	In reviewing such requests, the zoning board of appeals shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this article. 
(h)	Conditions for variances:
(1)	A variance shall be issued ONLY when there is:
(i)	A finding of good and sufficient cause;
(ii)	A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
(iii)	A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(2)	The provisions of this article are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of an historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
(3)	Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(4)	The city clerk shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(i)	Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this article, the zoning board of appeals may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this article. 
(Ord. No. 101, 9-7-2010)
DIVISION 6. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 6.2-64. - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this article its most reasonable application. 
Accessory structure means structure having minimal value and used for parking, storage and other non-habitable uses, such as garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns, hay sheds and the like. 
Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition, which is connected by a firewall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall, shall be considered "new construction." 
Appeal means a request for a review of the city building inspector's interpretation of any provision of this article. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH Zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of special flood hazard means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. In the absence of official designation by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, areas of special flood hazard shall be those designated by the local community and referenced in section 6.2-46. 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Base flood elevation (BFE) means the elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map for Zones AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, AR/A, AR/AE, AR/A1-A30, AR/AH, AR/AO, V1-V30, and VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year. 
Basement means that portion of a building having its floor sub grade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Building means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. 
Critical facility means any public or private facility, which, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the disaster or would increase the hazard to life and health. Critical facilities include: 
(1)	Structures or facilities that produce, use, or store highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic, or water-reactive materials; 
(2)	Hospitals and nursing homes, and housing for the elderly, which are likely to contain occupants who may not be sufficiently mobile to avoid the loss of life or injury during flood and storm events; 
(3)	Emergency operation centers or data storage centers which contain records or services that may become lost or inoperative during flood and storm events; and 
(4)	Generating plants, and other principal points of utility lines.
Development means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, and storage of materials or equipment. 
Elevated building means a non-basement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
Existing construction means for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before the initial FIRM date of September 26, 2008. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of this ordinance [the effective date of the FIRST floodplain management regulations adopted by a community]. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)	The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or
(2)	The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as Zone A. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study means the official report by the Federal Insurance Administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
Flood-proofing, means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Freeboard means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed foundation of a building. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)	Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)	Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)	Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)	Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.	By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or
b.	Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this code. 
Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) as corrected in 1929 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
New construction means, for the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced after September 26, 2008 [the effective date of the initial FIRM] and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced after the effective date of this ordinance [the effective date of the FIRST floodplain management ordinance adopted by the community] and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed after the effective date of this ordinance [the effective date of the first floodplain management regulations adopted by a community]. 
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) has replaced the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 in existing and future FEMA Flood Modernization Maps. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle, which is: 
(1)	Built on a single chassis;
(2)	Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;
(3)	Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and
(4)	Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Start of construction means the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. (NOTE: Accessory structures are NOT exempt from any ordinance requirements.) For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank. 
Subdivision means the division of a single lot into two or more lots for the purpose of sale or development. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, taking place during a five-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure prior to the "start of construction" of the improvement. The "market value" of the structure means (1) the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement; or (2) in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. This term includes structures, which have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. 
For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term does not, however, include (1) those improvements of a structure required to comply with existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions and which have been identified by the code enforcement official, and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project; or (2) any alteration of a "historic structure" provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure." 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions is where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Variance means a grant of relief from the requirements of this article, which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this article. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, or other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this article is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Ord. No. 101, 9-7-2010)
Secs. 6.2-64—6.2-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - WATER RESOURCE PROTECTION DISTRICTS 
DIVISION 1. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6.2-71. - Purpose. 
The intent of this section is to establish minimum development standards and criteria which will afford reasonable protection of environmentally sensitive natural resources found throughout the City of Lake Park. Based on the Department of Natural Resources Part V Environmental Planning Standards and the findings of the 2010 Greater Lowndes County Comprehensive Plan, it has been determined that the wise management of these resources as defined in this section is essential to maintaining the health, safety, welfare and economic well being of the public, and to provide a guide for future growth and development in the water resource districts as defined. 
(Ord. No. 82, Exh. A, 7-6-04)
Sec. 6.2-72. - Establishment of water resource protection districts. 
The City of Lake Park's Water Resource Protection Districts shall include the following: 
•  Groundwater recharge area protection districts. 
•  Wetlands protection districts. 
The boundaries of these water resource protection districts are shown on a map designated as "Water Resource Protection Districts Overlay Map" and are included as part of the City of Lake Park Zoning Ordinance which is on file with the zoning administrator's and/or his designee's office located in the city administration building. The map is hereby incorporated into and made a part of this article by reference. 
(Ord. No. 82, Exh. A, 7-6-04)
Sec. 6.2-73. - Definitions. 
Water resource district is a mapped area, which imposes a set of requirements and/or specific development standards or use restrictions. 
Aquifer means any stratum or zone of rock beneath the surface of the earth capable of containing or producing water from a well. 
Drastic means the standardized system for evaluating groundwater pollution potential using the hydrogeologic settings (parameters) described in U.S. Environmental Protection Agency document EPA-600-2-87-035. (Note: the DRASTIC methodology is the most widely used technique for evaluating pollution susceptibility.) 
Pollution susceptibility means the relative vulnerability of an aquifer to being polluted from spills, discharges, leaks, impoundments, applications of chemicals, injections and other human activities in the recharge area. 
Pollution susceptibility map means the relative vulnerability to pollution prepared by the Department of Natural Resources, using the DRASTIC methodology. (Georgia Department of Natural Resources Hydrologic Atlas 20: Groundwater Pollution Susceptibility Map of Georgia.) 
Recharge area means any portion of the earth's surface where water infiltrates into the ground to replenish an aquifer. 
Significant recharge areas means those areas mapped by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources in Hydrologic Atlas 18 (1989 edition). 
Wetlands means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. The ecological parameters for designating wetlands include hydric soils, hydrophytic vegetation, and hydrological conditions that involve a temporary or permanent source of water to cause soil saturation. 
Generalized wetlands means the data sets contained on the current U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service National Wetlands Inventory maps, which are utilized to develop the water resource protection districts overlay map for the City of Lake Park, Georgia. 
Jurisdictional wetland means an area that meets the definitional requirements for wetlands as determined by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
Jurisdictional wetland determination means a delineation of jurisdictional wetlands boundaries by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, as required by Section 404 of the Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. Subscript 1344, as amended. 
Regulated activity means any activity, which will, or which may reasonably be expected to, result in the discharge of dredged or fill material into waters of the U.S. excepting those activities exempted in Section 404 of the Federal Clean Water Act. 
(Ord. No. 82, Exh. A, 7-6-04)
DIVISION 2. - GROUNDWATER RECHARGE AREA PROTECTION DISTRICTS 

Sec. 6.2-74. - Purpose. 
In order to provide for the health, safety, and welfare of the public and a healthy economic climate within the City of Lake Park and surrounding communities, it is essential that the quality of public drinking water be ensured. For this reason, it is necessary to protect the subsurface water resources that the City of Lake Park and surrounding communities rely on as sources of public water. 
Groundwater resources are contained within underground reservoirs known as aquifers. These aquifers are zones of rock beneath the earth's surface capable of containing or producing water from a well. They occupy vast regions of the subsurface and are replenished by infiltration of surface water runoff in zones of the surface known as groundwater recharge areas. Groundwater is susceptible to contamination when unrestricted development occurs within significant groundwater recharge areas. 
Groundwater recharge areas are vulnerable to urban development activities as well as agricultural activities. Development usually means an increase in the amount of land covered with impervious surfaces. Paving land in recharge areas can alter or impair their recharge characteristics thereby decreasing groundwater supplies. Pesticides, herbicides sprayed on crops, animal waste and septic tank effluents contribute to a deterioration in the groundwater quality and can threaten the health of residents relying on well water. It is, therefore, necessary to intelligently manage land use within groundwater recharge areas in order to ensure that pollution threats are minimized. 
(Ord. No. 82, Exh. A, 7-6-04)
Sec. 6.2-75. - Establishment of the groundwater recharge area protection districts. 
The groundwater recharge area protection district is hereby established which shall correspond to all lands within the jurisdiction of the City of Lake Park, Georgia that are mapped as significant recharge areas by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources in Hydrologic Atlas 18, 1989 edition. Said map is hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this article. 
Determination of pollution susceptibility. Each recharge area shall be determined to have a pollution susceptibility of high, medium, or low based on the Georgia Pollution Susceptibility Map, Hydrologic Atlas 20, 1992 edition. Said map is hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this article. 
(Ord. No. 82, Exh. A, 7-6-04)
Sec. 6.2-76. - Protection criteria. 
(a)	No construction may proceed on a building, manufactured home, or mobile home to be served by a septic tank unless the Lowndes County Health Department first approves the proposed septic tank installations as meeting the requirements of the Georgia Department of Human Resources for On-Site Sewage Management (hereinafter DHR manual), and subsections (b) and (c) below. 
(b)	New homes served by a septic tank/drain field system shall be on lots having minimum size limitations as follows, based on application of Table MT-1 of the DHR Manual (hereinafter DHR Table MT-1). The minimums set forth in Table MT-1 may be increased further based on consideration of other factors (set forth in Section A—F) of the DHR Manual. 
(1)	150% of the subdivision minimum lot size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-1 if they are within a high pollution susceptibility area; 
(2)	125% of the subdivision minimum lot size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-1 if they are within a medium pollution susceptibility area; 
(3)	110% of the subdivision minimum lot size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-1 if they are within a low pollution susceptibility area. 
(c)	New mobile (manufactured) home parks served by septic tank/drain field systems shall have lots or spaces having minimum size limitations as follows, based on application of Table MT-2 of the DHR Manual (hereinafter DHR Table MT-2). The minimums set forth in Table MT-2 may be increased further based on consideration of other factors (set forth in Section A—F) of the DHR Manual. 
(1)	150% of the subdivision minimum lot or space size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-2 if they are within a high pollution susceptibility area; 
(2)	125% of the subdivision minimum lot or space size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-2 if they are within a medium pollution susceptibility area; 
(3)	110% of the subdivision minimum lot or space size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-2 if they are within a low pollution susceptibility area. 
(d)	New agricultural waste impoundment sites shall be lined if they are within a high pollution susceptibility area; a medium pollution susceptibility area and exceed 15 acre-feet; or a low pollution susceptibility area and exceed 50 acre-feet. As a minimum, the liner shall be constructed of compacted clay having a thickness of one-foot and a vertical hydraulic conductivity of less than 5 × 10 -7 cm/sec or other criteria established by the Natural Resource and Conservation Service. 
(e)	New above-ground chemical or petroleum storage tanks, having a minimum volume of 1320 gallons, shall have secondary containment for 110% of the volume of such tanks or 110% of the volume of the largest tank in a cluster of tanks. Such tanks used for agricultural purposes are exempt, provided they comply with all federal requirements. 
(f)	New facilities that handle hazardous materials of the types listed in section 312 of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (excluding underground storage tanks) and in amounts of 10,000 pounds or more on any one day, shall perform their operations on impervious surfaces and in conformance with any applicable federal spill prevention requirements and local fire code requirements. 
(g)	Permanent storm water infiltration basins shall not be constructed in areas having high pollution susceptibility. 
(h)	Any new wastewater treatment basin shall have an impermeable liner.
(Ord. No. 82, Exh. A, 7-6-04)
Sec. 6.2-77. - Exemptions. 
Any lot of record approved and recorded prior to the adoption of these standards is exempt from the minimum lot size requirements contained in subsections 6.2-76(b) and (c) of this article section. 
(Ord. No. 82, Exh. A, 7-6-04)
DIVISION 3. - WETLANDS PROTECTION DISTRICTS 

Sec. 6.2-78. - Purpose. 
The wetlands in the City of Lake Park are indispensable and fragile natural resources with significant development constraints due to flooding, erosion, and soils limitations. In their natural state, wetlands serve man and nature. They provide habitat areas for fish, wildlife and vegetation; water quality maintenance and pollution control; flood control; erosion control; natural resource education; scientific study; and open space and recreational opportunities. In addition, the wise management of forested wetlands is essential to the economic well being of many communities within the State of Georgia. 
Nationally, a considerable number of these important natural resources have been lost or impaired by draining, dredging, filling, excavating, building, pollution and other acts. 
Piecemeal or cumulative losses will, over time, destroy additional wetlands. Damaging or destroying wetlands threatens public safety and the general welfare. 
The purpose of this article is to promote wetlands protection, while taking into account varying ecological, economic development, recreational and aesthetic values. Activities that may damage wetlands should be located on upland sites to the greatest degree practicable as determined through a permitting process. 
(Ord. No. 82, Exh. A, 7-6-04)
Sec. 6.2-79. - Establishment of the wetlands protection district. 
The wetlands protection district is hereby established which shall correspond to all lands within the jurisdiction of the City of Lake Park, Georgia that are mapped as wetland areas by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service National Wetlands Inventory Maps. These wetlands areas are depicted on the water resources protection districts overlay map. 
The generalized wetland areas depicted on the water resources protection districts overlay map do not necessarily represent the boundaries of jurisdictional wetlands within the City of Lake Park, Georgia and cannot serve as a substitute for a delineation of wetland boundaries by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, as required by Section 404 of the Clean Water Act, as amended. Any local government action under this article does not relieve the landowner from federal or state permitting requirements. 
(Ord. No. 82, Exh. A, 7-6-04)
Sec. 6.2-80. - Protection criteria. 
Requirement for local permit or permission. No regulated activity will be permitted within the wetlands protection district without written permission or a permit from the City of Lake Park, Georgia. If the area proposed for development is located within 50 feet of a wetlands protection district boundary, as determined by the zoning administrator and/or his designee using the water resource protection districts overlay map, a U.S. Army Corps of Engineers determination shall be required. If the Corps determines that wetlands are present on the proposed development site, the local permit or permission will not be granted until a Section 404 Permit or Letter of Permission is issued. 
(Ord. No. 82, Exh. A, 7-6-04)
Sec. 6.2-81. - Permitted uses. 
The following uses shall be allowed as of right within the wetlands protection districts to the extent that they are not prohibited by any other ordinance or law, including laws of trespass, and provided they do not require structures, grading, fill, draining, or dredging except as provided herein. [The activities listed in this section are exempted from Section 404 regulations provided they do not have impacts on a navigable waterway that would necessitate acquisition of an individual 404 permit. However, under Section 10 of the Rivers and Harbors Act, a permit may be required in some circumstances.] 
(1)	Conservation or preservation of soil, water, vegetation, fish and other wildlife, provided it does not affect waters of Georgia or of the United States in such a way that would require an individual 404 Permit. 
(2)	Outdoor passive recreation activities, including fishing, bird watching, hiking, boating, horseback riding, and canoeing. 
(3)	Forestry practices applied in accordance with best management practices (BMP's) approved by the Georgia Forestry Commission and as specified in Section 404 of the Clean Water Act. 
(4)	The cultivation of agricultural crops. Agricultural activities shall be subject to best management practices (BMP's) approved by the Georgia Department of Agriculture. 
(5)	The pasturing of livestock, provided that riparian wetlands are protected, that soil profiles are not disturbed and that approved agricultural best management practices (BMP's) are followed. 
(6)	Education, scientific research, and nature trails.
(Ord. No. 82, Exh. A, 7-6-04)
Sec. 6.2-82. - Prohibited uses. 
The following uses are not permitted within the wetlands protection district. 
(1)	Receiving areas for toxic or hazardous waste or other contaminants; and
(2)	Hazardous or sanitary waste landfills.
(Ord. No. 82, Exh. A, 7-6-04)
DIVISION 4. - SPECIAL ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES 

Sec. 6.2-83. - Special administration and enforcement procedures for water resource protection districts. 
(a)	Site plans. Application for a local development permit within the City of Lake Park shall include a site plan, drawn at a scale of 1" = 50', with the following information: 
(1)	A map of all planned excavation and fill, including calculations of the volume of cut and fill involved, cross-sectional drawings showing existing and proposed grades. Elevations, horizontal scale and vertical scale must be shown on the cross-sectional drawings. 
(2)	A map of any wetland boundaries occurring within the site must be provided. This boundary may be included on other maps provided by the applicant. 
(3)	Location, dimensions and area of all impervious surfaces, both existing and proposed, on the site and adjacent to the site for a distance of 200 feet. 
(4)	Elevations of the site and adjacent lands within 200 feet of the site at contour intervals of no greater than two feet; and no greater than one foot slopes less than or equal to two percent. 
(5)	Location and detailed design of any spill and leak collection systems designed for the purpose of containing accidentally released hazardous or toxic materials. 
(6)	All proposed temporary disruptions or diversions of local hydrology.
(b)	Activities to comply with state [site] plan. All development activities or site work conducted after approval of the site plan shall conform with the specifications of said site plan. Significant changes to the site plan that would alter the amount and velocity of stormwater runoff from the site, increase the amount of impervious surface within the development, alter the overall density of development, result in a considerable increase in the amount of excavation, fill or removal of the overall appearance of the development as proposed, can be amended only with the approval of the zoning administrator and/or his designee. 
(c)	Exemptions to site plan requirements. The following activities and developments are exempt from the requirement for detailed site plans. 
(1)	Single-family detached homes constructed within a subdivision of fewer than five parcels.
(2)	Repairs to a facility that is part of a previously approved and permitted development.
(3)	Construction of minor structures, such as sheds or additions to single-family residences.
(d)	Review procedures. The application shall be made to the zoning administrator and/or his designee and will be reviewed within 15 days. At the time of the application, the applicant shall pay a filing fee as specified by the City of Lake Park. Filing fees shall be as set from time to time by the City of Lake Park Mayor and Council. The review period shall include the preparation of findings (approval, approval with conditions, or disapproval) by the zoning administrator and/or his designee. the applicant will receive written notification of the zoning administrator and/or his designee. Decisions of the zoning administrator and/or his designee may be appealed to the City of Lake Park after review and recommendation by the Greater Lowndes Planning Commission. 
(e)	Duration of permit validity. 
(1)	If construction described in the development permit has not commenced within six months from the date of issuance, the permit shall expire. 
(2)	If construction described in the development permit is suspended or abandoned after work has commenced, the permit shall expire six months after the date that work ceased. 
(f)	Penalties. 
(1)	When a building or other structure has been constructed in violation of this article, the violator may be required to remove the structure at the discretion of the zoning administrator and/or his designee. 
(2)	When removal of vegetative cover, excavation or fill has taken place in violation of this article, the violator may be required to restore the affected land to its original contours and to restore vegetation, as far as practicable, at the discretion of the zoning administrator and/or his designee. Such actions shall be closely coordinated with the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers' supervision. 
(3)	If the zoning administrator and/or his designee discover a violation of this article that also constitutes a violation of provisions of the Clean Water Act as amended, the zoning administrator and/or his designee shall issue written notification of the violation to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, and the landowner. 
(g)	Suspension, revocation. The zoning administrator and/or his designee may suspend or revoke a permit if he finds that the applicant has not complied with the conditions or limitations set forth in the permit or has exceeded the scope of the work set forth in the permit. The zoning administrator and/or his designee may cause notice of denial, issuance, conditional issuance, revocation or suspension of a permit to be published in a daily newspaper having a broad circulation in the area where the affected water resource protection districts are located. 
(h)	Judicial review. 
Jurisdiction. All final decisions of the City of Lake Park concerning denial, approval, or conditional approval of a permit shall be re-viewable in the proper courts as provided by Georgia Law. 
(i)	Amendments. This article section and the water resources protection districts overlay map may from time to time be amended in accordance with procedures and requirements in the general statues and as new information concerning the protected environmentally sensitive areas become available. 
(j)	Relief assessment. Assessors and boards of assessors should consider requirements of these regulations in determining the fair market value of land. 
(k)	Separability and abrogation. All subsections of this water resources protection districts section are considered separate and distinct. Should any subsection, paragraph, or part of this section be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid for any reason, it shall not invalidate any subsection, paragraph, or part of these requirements. 
(Ord. No. 82, Exh. A, 7-6-04)
Chapter 6.5 - FIRE PREVENTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings, Ch. 5; tampering with fire department equipment, §§ 9-3—9-5; police department, § 10-20 et seq.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6.5-1. - Adoption of Fire Prevention Code. 
A certain document, a copy of which is on file in the office of the clerk, being marked and designated as the Fire Prevention Code, 1970, abbreviated edition, as recommended by the American Insurance Association, is hereby adopted as the Fire Prevention Code of the city, prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire as therein set forth. Each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of that code are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as though fully set out in this section, with any additions, insertions, deletions, and changes prescribed in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 43, § 10, 7-1-86)
Sec. 6.5-2. - Notification of fire. 
Upon notification of a fire, a member of the fire department shall immediately telephone the suppliers of the city of water, gas and electricity. 
(Ord. No. 43, § 8, 7-1-86)
Secs. 6.5-3—6.5-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - VOLUNTEER FIRE DEPARTMENT 

Sec. 6.5-21. - Composition. 
The fire department shall consist of a volunteer fire company, including a fire chief and a training officer, appointed by the council. The fire chief shall have the control, direction and management of the company when on duty. 
(Ord. No. 43, § 1, 7-1-86)
Sec. 6.5-22. - Regulations. 
The fire chief may make and enforce such regulations as he shall deem necessary to the efficient training of the company, provided any such regulation shall not in any way conflict with the City Charter or city ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 43, § 2, 7-1-86)
Sec. 6.5-23. - Reports by fire chief. 
The fire chief shall keep himself informed as to the condition of the fire department and of the apparatus and shall report to the council any repairs that need to be made in the apparatus and when replacements are necessary. 
(Ord. No. 43, § 4, 7-1-86)
Sec. 6.5-24. - Voluntary firemen covered under workmen's compensation insurance. 
(a)	All voluntary firemen of the city, as are presently listed and as may be hereafter listed of record in the office of the city clerk, are deemed to be covered by the policy of workmen's compensation insurance presently in force and effect for city employees. 
(b)	This policy of including all voluntary firemen listed in the files of the city clerk's office under coverage of workmen's compensation insurance shall be deemed continuing and of full force and effect, regardless of whether the present insurance policy is continued or another insurance policy secured, until such time as the city, by majority action, reverses or discontinues this policy of covering voluntary firemen. 
(Ord. No. 43, § 9, 7-1-86)
Sec. 6.5-25. - Apparatus. 
The reels, fire hose and all fire apparatus shall be under the management and control of the fire chief, and he shall be responsible for their care, protection and safekeeping. 
(Ord. No. 43, § 3, 7-1-86)
Chapter 7 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority to provide for, §§ 1.12(c), 2.16(b), 2.35, 6.14, 6.16.
State Law reference— Prevention, control, etc., of air pollution, OCGA § 12-9-1 et seq.; firing of woodlands, brush, fields, etc., destruction of or damage to material or device used in detection or suppression of wildfires, OCGA § 16-7-28; health, OCGA Title 31.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note—Ord. No. 81, adopted Aug. 5, 2003, repealed former §§ 7-1—7-6, which pertained to noise control and derived from Ord. No. 71, 4-1-97. For purposes of classification, and at the editor's discretion, the new noise control ordinance can be found in Ch. 9, Art. II, §§ 9-21—9-36.

Secs. 7-1—7-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CLEANLINESS OF PREMISES; LITTERING[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Dead Animal Disposal Act, OCGA § 4-5-1 et seq.; waste management, OCGA § 12-8-1 et seq.; Litter Control Law, OCGA § 16-7-40 et seq.; control of junkyards, OCGA § 32-6-240 et seq.; abandoned vehicles, OCGA § 40-11-1 et seq.

Sec. 7-20. - Weeds, rubbish, etc., on private property—Removal required; punishment for violation. 
(a)	Every person, whether owner, tenant, agent or employee, owning, holding or occupying property in the city shall at all times maintain such property, whether a vacant lot or otherwise, in a clean and sanitary condition, keeping all waste and under-growth on said property cut and keeping all waste material, dead animals, trash and other rubbish of every sort cleaned off of said property. 
(b)	If any such person shall fail or refuse to cut and remove weeds and undergrowth or shall fail or refuse to clean up all such waste from such property within ten days after such notice by an official or employee of the city, such person shall be punished as provided in section 1-8. 
(c)	The growth of grass, weeds or undergrowth to a height in excess of 18 inches above the ground shall be in violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2, § 1, 8-7-73)
Sec. 7-21. - Same—Declaration of nuisance. 
Any person who permits or allows any weeds, undergrowth, rubbish, filth, dead animals or any other offensive matter, refuse material or other substance to remain on or upon any premises in the city in such a condition that it provides a breeding place for flies, a feeding place or sanctuary for rats or other vermin or a source of obnoxious odors shall be deemed to have created a nuisance. 
Sec. 7-22. - Same—Abatement by city. 
If the owner of any property shall refuse or fail to comply with section 7-20 after ten days written notice addressed to the owner of said property and delivered to said property by a city official or employee, the city shall remove said offensive matter and/or cut such weeds and undergrowth on said property. Such work shall be done at the expense of the owner of said property. Upon completion of such work, execution shall be issued by the clerk against said owner and against said property for such expense and all costs. The person returning such property for taxation in the city, or the person against whom said property may be assessed in the event there has been no return of such property by the owner of same, shall be deemed to be the true owner of such property. Said execution shall issue and be enforced as provided by the charter or by law. 
(Ord. No. 2, § 2, 8-7-73)
Charter reference— Abatement authority of municipal court, § 4.13(g). 
State Law reference— Authorization and procedure for abatement of nuisances in cities, OCGA § 41-2-5. 
Sec. 7-23. - Junked, wrecked, discarded, etc., personal property—Maximum period of storage. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any furniture, appliance, machinery or equipment to remain on the premises of any dwelling, dwelling unit, place of business or vacant lot for a period in excess of 30 days. 
Sec. 7-24. - Same—Duty of owner and occupant. 
It shall be the duty of owners, occupants and inhabitants of any building, dwelling or dwelling unit to keep the exterior of such building, dwelling or dwelling unit including its premises, yards, lawns, courts and alleys, clean, clear and free of any accumulation or any deposits of the above specified items; provided, the owner of a dwelling or building containing two or more dwelling units, tenants or occupants shall be responsible for maintaining the shared or public area of the dwelling or building and premises thereof. The same duty under this section shall rest upon the owner of any vacant lot. 
Sec. 7-25. - Same—Exemptions. 
Sections 7-23 and 7-24 shall not apply to any person who holds a valid business license for dealing in the above specified items in the condition herein referred to, provided such business is not operated in an unlawful manner. 
Sec. 7-26. - Same—Abatement. 
Conditions prohibited by section 7-23 may be abated by the city as provided in section 7-22. 
(Ord. No. 2, § 2, 8-7-73)
Sec. 7-27. - Litter—Declaration of intent. 
It is the intention of the governing body to prohibit all littering on public or private property, and to curb thereby the desecration of the beauty of the city and harm to the health, welfare and safety of its citizens caused by individuals who litter. 
State Law reference— Litter Control Law, OCGA § 16-7-40 et seq. 
Sec. 7-28. - Same—Definitions. 
As used in sections 7-27 through 7-30, unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the following words or phrases shall have the following meanings: 
Litter means all sand, gravel, slag, brickbats, rubbish, waste material, metal cans, refuse, garbage, trash, debris, dead animals or discarded materials of every kind and description, including loose or scattered handbills, newspapers, posters and other such items which may be carried by the wind or water. 
Public or private property means the right-of-way of any road or highway; any body of water or watercourse or the shores or beaches thereof; any park, playground, refuge or conservation or recreation area or building; and residential, business or farm properties, timberlands or forest. 
Sec. 7-29. - Same—Unlawful activities. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to dump, deposit, place, throw or leave, or to cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing or leaving of litter on any public or private property in the city, unless: 
(1)	Such property is designated by the city for the disposal of such litter, and such person is authorized by the proper public authority to use such property; 
(2)	Such litter is placed into a closed litter receptacle or container installed on such property; 
(3)	Such person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, or has first obtained consent of the owner or tenant in lawful possession, or unless the act is done under the personal direction of said owner or tenant, all in a manner so that the same may not be scattered or carried by wind or water, and otherwise consistent with the public welfare. 
(Ord. No. 13, § 1, 2-5-74; Ord. No. 22, § 1, 2-5-74)
Sec. 7-30. - Same—Prima facie evidence. 
Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, placed, dropped or dumped from any motor vehicle, boat, airplane or other conveyance in violation of section 7-29, it shall be prima facie evidence that the operator of said conveyance shall have violated said section 7-29. 
Secs. 7-31—7-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SEWAGE DISPOSAL[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Water service, § 14-20 et seq.
State Law reference— Control of water pollution and surface-water use, OCGA § 12-5-20 et seq.; fluoridation of public water systems, OCGA § 12-5-175.

Sec. 7-40. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them: 
Human excreta means the bowel and kidney discharges of human beings. 
Sanitary water closet means any flush toilet properly connected with the city sanitary sewer system, or a septic tank of approved construction and condition. 
Septic tank means an underground cavity with watertight walls into which flows the effluent of sanitary water closets and from which effluent does not come to the surface of the ground. 
Sec. 7-41. - Disposal by acceptable methods only. 
It shall be unlawful to dispose of any human excreta within the city except in a sanitary water closet connected with the city sewer system, or connected with a septic tank of type approved by the county board of health. 
Sec. 7-42. - Acceptable methods of disposal; connection to system. 
Every dwelling and building of any character within the city occupied by human beings either as a dwelling or place of business, shall be equipped with a sanitary water closet or flush toilet that is connected with either the public sewer system of the city or an approved septic tank with the necessary drainage field so as to conform with the requirements prescribed therefor by the county board of health; provided, however, if such improved property abuts upon a public street or public easement having therein an available sanitary sewer line of the public sewer system, the owner of such property, at his expense, shall connect the sanitary water closets or flush toilets on such property to the public sewer line for disposal of all sewage through the public facilities. In case of new installation of sewer lines, the sewer connection shall be accomplished within 12 months after the sewer lines become available. 
Sec. 7-43. - Facilities in leased or rented premises. 
It shall be unlawful for any person leasing to another any premises in the city to permit the disposal of any human excreta on any property leased or rented by such person, or by his agent, except in a sanitary water closet connected with the city sewer system or connected with a septic tank of the type approved by the county board of health. 
Cross reference— Housing code, § 5-20. 
Sec. 7-44. - Approved septic tanks only, permitted. 
No septic tank other than of type approved by the county board of health shall be constructed or maintained within the city. 
Sec. 7-45. - Privies prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful to erect, have or maintain dry closets or privies within the city. 
Secs. 7-46—7-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - YARD TRIMMINGS DISPOSAL[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note—Ord. No. 68, adopted 11-5-96, amended the Code, but did not specify the manner thereof; hence, inclusion of §§ 1.1—4.1 of such ordinance as Ch. 7, Art. IV, §§ 7-51—7-54, was at the discretion of the editor.

Sec. 7-51. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, as used in this article, shall have the following meanings: 
Commercial solid waste means all types of solid waste generated by stores, offices, restaurants, warehouses and other nonmanufacturing activities, excluding residential and industrial wastes. 
Composting means the controlled biological decomposition of organic matter into a stable, odor-free humus. 
Leachate collection system means a system at a landfill for collection of the leachate which may percolate through the waste and into the soils surrounding the landfill. 
Municipal solid waste means any solid waste derived from households, including garbage, trash and sanitary waste in septic tanks and includes solid waste from single-family and multifamily residences, hotels and motels, bunkhouses, campgrounds, picnic grounds, and day use recreation areas. The term includes yard trimmings and commercial solid waste but does not include solid waste from mining, agricultural or silvicultural operations or industrial processes or operations. 
Municipal solid waste disposal facility means any facility or location where the final deposition of any amount of municipal solid waste occurs, whether or not mixed with or including commercial or industrial solid waste, including but not limited to municipal solid waste landfills. 
Municipal solid waste landfill means a disposal facility where any amount of municipal solid waste, whether or not mixed with or including commercial waste, industrial waste, nonhazardous sludges or small quantity generator hazardous waste, is disposed of by means of placing an approved cover thereon. 
Yard trimmings means leaves, brush, grass clippings, shrub and tree prunings, discarded Christmas trees, nursery and greenhouse vegetative residuals, and vegetative matter resulting from landscaping development and maintenance, other than mining, agricultural and silvicultural operations. 
(Ord. No. 68, § 1.1, 11-5-96)
Sec. 7-52. - Placement and disposal of yard trimmings; prohibitions. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful to place or mix yard trimmings with municipal solid waste within the city. 
(b)	Yard trimmings shall not be disposed of at any municipal solid waste disposal facility having a liner and leachate collection system or requiring vertical expansion located within the city. 
(Ord. No. 68, § 2.1, 11-5-96)
Sec. 7-53. - Sorting, storing, composting, collecting yard trimmings. 
Yard trimmings shall be stored and sorted in the following manner: 
(1)	All yard trimmings shall be collected and brought to the city hall, where a facility or bin shall be provided for their placement. The city will dispose of said yard trimmings in a proper manner. 
(2)	The city shall not be responsible for the pickup of yard trimmings; therefore, each property owner or their lessee shall bring such yard trimmings to the city bin as instructed in subsection (1) hereinbefore. 
(Ord. No. 68, § 3.1, 11-5-96)
Sec. 7-54. - Penalties. 
Any person violating section 7-52 or section 7-53 shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $50.00, by imprisonment for a term not to exceed five days, or a combination of such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. No. 68, § 4.1, 11-5-96)
Secs. 7-55—7-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - CODE OF ENFORCEMENT OF HEALTH RULES AND REGULATIONS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note—Ord. No. 69, adopted 11-5-96, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, inclusion of the substantive provisions of such ordinance as Ch. 7, Art. V, §§ 7-61—7-64, was at the discretion of the editor.

Sec. 7-61. - Rules and regulations. 
There are currently in existence certain rules and regulations adopted by the Lowndes County Board of Health and the Georgia Department of Human Resources with the purpose of preserving the public health, safety and welfare of citizens of Lake Park, Georgia. This article specifically incorporates by reference the provisions of the following rules and regulations which are in force at the time of the adoption of this ordinance and as amended: 
(1)	Rabies control rules and regulations of Lowndes County Board of Health;
(2)	Rules and regulations for on-site sewage management systems (adopted by Department of Human Resources and Lowndes County Board of Health and being Chapter 290-5-26); 
(3)	Rules and regulations for water supply of Lowndes County Board of Health;
(4)	Rules and regulations pertaining to food service (adopted by the Department of Human Resources and Lowndes County Board of Health and being Chapter 290-5-14); 
(5)	Rules and regulations for public swimming pools, spas, and natural beaches of Lowndes County Board of Health; and 
(6)	Rules and regulations for tourist courts (adopted by the Department of Human Resources and Lowndes County Board of Health and being Chapter 290-5-18). 
(Ord. No. 69, 11-5-96)
Sec. 7-62. - Implementation and enforcement. 
The duty of implementation and enforcement of these regulations rests with the city council, and by virtue of this article is hereby expressly delegated to the Lowndes County Board of Health who is hereby charged with promulgation of sufficient procedures for insuring compliance with these rules and regulations by the citizens of Lake Park, Georgia. The Lowndes County Board of Health is directed to implement procedures which will insure that the citizens of Lake Park will receive all procedural rights to which they are entitled under the laws of the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 69, 11-5-96)
Sec. 7-63. - Penalties. 
Any violation of the rules and regulations hereby referenced shall be a violation of this article and shall be a misdemeanor offense. Any violator shall be subject to the imposition of a fine not to exceed $500.00 and/or imprisonment for a period not to exceed 60 days. 
(Ord. No. 69, 11-5-96)
Sec. 7-64. - Jurisdiction. 
The city municipal court shall have jurisdiction over violators of this article and all procedures for enforcement of such article shall be as provided in Article 4, Chapter 10 of Title 15, Official Code of Georgia. Complaints of violation of any provision of this article shall be brought before the municipal court by a designated representative of the Lowndes County Board of Health and shall be prosecuted through that court. 
(Ord. No. 69, 11-5-96)
Chapter 8 - OCCUPATIONAL LICENSES, TAXES AND REGULATIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note—Ord. No. 66, adopted Jan. 3, 1995, repealed Ord. No. 24, adopted Feb. 5, 1974, pertaining to license taxes, and enacted new license tax provisions as set out in §§ 8-1—8-3.20. Formerly, the provisions of Ord. No. 24 had been set out in this Code as §§ 3-7 and 8-1—8-3.

Sec. 8-1. - Definitions. 
As used in this division the term: 
Administrative fee means a component of an occupation tax which approximates the reasonable cost of handling and processing the occupation tax. 
Dominant line means the type of business, within a multiple-line business, that the greater amount of income is derived from. 
Gross receipts shall mean the total revenue of the business or practitioner for the period, including without being limited to the following: 
(1)	Gain from trading in stocks, bonds, capital assets, or instruments of indebtedness;
(2)	Proceeds from commissions on the sale of property, goods, or services;
(3)	Proceeds from rent, interest, royalty, or dividend income; and
(4)	Proceeds from fees charged for services rendered.
Gross receipts shall not include the following: 
(1)	Sales, use, or excise tax;
(2)	Sales returns, allowances, and discounts;
(3)	Interorganizational sales or transfers between or among the units of a parent-subsidiary controlled group of corporations as defined by 26 U.S.C. Section 1563(a)(1), or between or among the units of a brother-sister controlled group of corporations as defined by 26 U.S.C. Section 1563(a)(2), or between or among wholly owned partnership or other wholly owned entities; 
(4)	Payments made to a subcontractor or an independent agent;
(5)	Governmental and foundation grants, charitable contributions, or the interest income derived from such funds received by a nonprofit organization which employs salaried practitioners otherwise covered by this division, if such funds constitute 80 percent or more of the organization's receipts; 
(6)	Proceeds from sales to customers outside the state.
Location or office shall include any structure or vehicle where a business, profession, or occupation is conducted, but shall not include a temporary or construction work site which serves a single customer or project, or a vehicle used for sales or delivery by a business or practitioner of a profession. 
Occupation tax means a tax levied on persons, partnerships, corporations, or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession, or business and enacted by a local government as a revenue-raising ordinance or resolution. 
Occupation tax certificate means a document issued by the city acknowledging payment of the occupation tax and administrative fee. 
Person shall be held to include sole proprietors, corporations, nonprofit, or any other form of business organization. 
Practitioner of profession or occupation is one who by state law requires state licensure regulating such profession or occupation. Practitioner of professions and occupations shall not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business if the business pays an occupation tax. 
Profitability class shall the mean the category into which an occupation is placed for occupation tax purposes in accordance with section 8-3 of this Code. 
Regulatory fee certificate means a document issued by the city acknowledging payment of regulatory fee. 
Regulatory fees means payments, whether designated as license fees, permit fees, or by another name, which are required by a local government as an exercise of its police power and as a part of or as an aid to regulation of an occupation, profession, or business. The amount of a regulatory fee shall approximate the reasonable cost of the actual regulatory activity performed by the local government. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee. Regulatory fees do not include development impact fees as defined by paragraph (8) of OCGA § 36-71-2 or other costs or conditions of zoning or land developments. 
Standard industrial classification shall mean categories of occupations and industries established by and promulgated by the Office of Management and Budget of the United States of America and found in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual of 1987. 
(Ord. No. 66, § 1.1, 1-3-95; Ord. No. 66 Amd. 1, § 1.1, 1-16-96)
Sec. 8-2. - Administrative fee. 
A non-prorated, nonrefundable administrative fee of $60.00 is required on all occupation tax accounts for the initial registration, annual renewal or reopening of such accounts. 
(Ord. No. 66, § 1.2, 1-3-95)
Sec. 8-3. - Occupation tax levied. 
(a)	An occupation tax shall be levied upon those persons and practitioners of professions and occupations with one or more locations or offices in the city and/or upon the applicable out-of-state businesses with no location or office in Georgia pursuant to OCGA § 48-13-7 based upon the following criteria: 
(1)	Persons and practitioners of professions may report and pay by pre-established ranges:

 
(2)	Gross receipts of a person or practitioner in combination with the profitability ratio for the type of business, profession, or occupation as measured by nationwide averages derived from statistics, classifications, or other information published by the U.S. Office of Management and Budget, the U.S. Internal Revenue Service, or successor agencies of the United States. The tax shall be calculated as follows: 

 
(b)	A person shall be placed in the profitability class based on the dominant line of business or service of the person and profitability ratios as measured by nationwide averages derived from statistics, classifications, or other information published by the U.S. Office of Management and Budget, the U.S. Internal Revenue Service, or successor agencies of the United States shall be used to classify the dominant line of business by tax class. 
(c)	Persons with no physical location in the city, but which perform services or sell products within the corporate limits of the city, shall be subject to the occupation tax if such person has more than nominal business activity within the city, including: 
(1)	One or more employees who exert effort within the jurisdiction of the city for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients; or 
(2)	Owns real or personal property which is located within the jurisdiction of the city and which generate income or is used to generate income. 
(Ord. No. 66, § 1.3, 1-3-95)
Charter reference— Authority to regulate and license, §§ 6.14, 7.20. 
State Law reference— Levy of license, occupation or professional tax, limitation of amount, exemption, OCGA § 48-13-5. 
Sec. 8-3.1. - Occupation tax limitations. 
(a)	The city shall not require the payment of more than one occupation tax for each location of a person. 
(1)	If a person with no location or office in the city provides to the city proof of payment of a local business or occupation tax in another state which purports to tax the person's gross receipts in this state, then the person shall be exempt from the occupation tax levied by this division. 
(2)	A person who has locations or offices elsewhere in Georgia who is subject to occupation tax by more than one local government in Georgia shall be subject to occupation tax by the city, unless the person provides documentation to the city of current payment of an occupation tax, measured by the gross receipts of the person, to the other Georgia local governments. 
(b)	Persons from out of state with no office or location in Georgia subject to an occupation tax under this division shall be required to pay an occupation tax to only one local government in Georgia. Such local government shall be the government of the municipal corporation or county in which the largest dollar volume of business is done or services are performed by the person. Such persons submitting documentation to the city showing payment of a local business or occupation tax to another local government in Georgia shall be exempt from the occupation tax levied by this division. 
(c)	If a person commences business in the city on or after July 1 in any year, the occupation tax for the remaining portion of the year shall be 50 percent of the tax imposed for the entire year. The administrative fee shall not be reduced. 
(d)	(1)	Real estate brokers shall be subject to the occupation tax imposed by this division only if they maintain a principal or branch office in the city. 
(2)	Real estate brokers whose offices are located outside the city and who sell property inside the city shall be subject to the occupation tax based upon the gross receipts from sales of property located within the city. 
(e)	(1)	No person shall be required to pay more than one occupation tax for each of its locations.
(2)	No occupation tax will be required upon more than 100 percent of a business's gross receipts. 
(3)	No occupation tax will be required on receipts on which such tax has been levied in other localities or states. 
(4)	An occupation tax shall not be levied in any other manner except as described in this section. 
(5)	Out-of-state businesses with no location in Georgia shall be assessed occupation taxes based on the gross receipts of the business as defined in OCGA § 14-13-7 which are reasonably attributed to sales or services in the state. 
(Ord. No. 66, § 1.4, 1-3-95)
Sec. 8-3.2. - Registration of line of business. 
The registration by each person shall identify the dominant line of business, profession or occupation conducted. 
(Ord. No. 66, § 1.5, 1-3-95)
Sec. 8-3.3. - Multiple locations. 
Wherever a business or occupation is conducted at more than one location or place within the city, each such location shall be considered a separate business for the purpose of the occupation tax imposed by this division. 
(Ord. No. 66, § 1.6, 1-3-95)
Sec. 8-3.4. - Gross receipts at multiple locations. 
For those businesses that have multiple locations inside and outside of the city where the gross receipts can be allocated to each location, the gross receipts used to determine the occupation tax assessed will be those gross receipts generated by each city location. Where the dollar amount of gross receipts cannot be allocated among multiple locations, the total gross receipts will be divided by the total number of locations in the city and elsewhere and an equal percentage of such gross receipts shall be allotted to each location. Upon request, the business or practitioner with a location or office situated in more than one jurisdiction shall provide to the city the following: 
(1)	Financial information necessary to allocate the gross receipts of the business or practitioner; and 
(2)	Information relating to the allocation of the business's or practitioner's gross receipts by other local governments. 
Where the business has locations outside of the city and taxation is levied for a criteria other than gross receipts in the other local governments, the city shall not assess more than the allotted share of gross receipts for the local operation. 
(Ord. No. 66, § 1.7, 1-3-95)
Sec. 8-3.5. - Taxation of professionals. 
(a)	Practitioners of professions, as defined in section 8-1, shall elect for their occupation tax either: 
(1)	The occupation tax as set forth in section 8-3; or 
(2)	A tax of $200.00 for each practitioner who is licensed to provide the service, such tax to be paid at the practitioner's office or location. 
(b)	Such election shall be made on or before February 1, 1995. Such election shall be changed for subsequent calendar years only by a written request filed by the professional on or before February 1 of the year in which the election is to be changed. 
(Ord. No. 66, § 1.8, 1-3-95)
Sec. 8-3.6. - Due date of fees. 
Each administrative fee, regulatory fee and occupation tax, as applicable, shall be for the calendar year. Any administrative fee, regulatory fee or occupation tax shall be payable January 1 of each year and shall be delinquent if not paid by April 1 of each year. Any amounts owed which are not paid by April 1 shall be subject to the penalties for delinquency as described in this division. For any new profession, occupation or business begun in the city after January 1 of any year the administrative fee, regulatory fee and occupation tax, as applicable, shall be obtained immediately upon beginning business, and if not so obtained shall be delinquent. Occupation tax certificate indicating that the profession, occupation or business has paid the fees and taxes owed shall be issued by the city clerk. Any person practicing a profession, occupation or business without having valid certificates issued to him or her shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 8-3.14 of this division. In addition to the above remedies, the city clerk may proceed to collect the delinquencies in the same manner as provided by law for tax executions. 
(Ord. No. 66, § 1.9, 1-3-95)
Sec. 8-3.7. - Occupation tax certificate. 
Every person subject to payment of the occupation tax amended by this division shall display a current occupation tax certificate in a conspicuous place at the location for which such certificate was issued if the taxpayer does not have a permanent location within the city, the occupation tax certificate shall be shown to any police officer (or any other person charged with enforcing this division) upon request. 
(Ord. No. 66, § 1.10, 1-3-95)
Sec. 8-3.8. - Exemptions. 
(a)	No occupation tax shall be levied upon the following:
(1)	Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, or instrumentality of the United States, of the state or a municipality or county of the state; 
(2)	Those businesses regulated by the Georgia Public Service Commission;
(3)	Those electrical service businesses organized under OCGA Chapter 3 of Title 46; 
(4)	Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including any agribusiness; 
(5)	Nonprofit agricultural product cooperative marketing associations pursuant to OCGA § 2-10-105; 
(6)	Motor common carriers pursuant to OCGA § 46-7-15;
(7)	Persons purchasing guano, meats, meal, flour, bran, cotton seed or cotton seed meal or hulls in carload lots for distribution among the purchasers for use and not sale pursuant to OCGA § 48-5-355; 
(8)	Persons selling or introducing into the city agricultural products or livestock, including animal products, raised in the state when the sale and introduction are made by the producer of the product and the sale is made within 90 days of the introduction of the product into the city (See OCGA § 48-5-356); 
(9)	Depository institutions pursuant to OCGA § 48-6-93 (See this statute regarding the collection on occupation tax from banks and other financial institutions); or 
(10)	Any business where the levy of such occupation tax is prohibited by the laws of the State of Georgia or the United States. 
(b)	The exemptions and limitations contained in this division shall not be construed to repeal or otherwise affect in any way franchise fees, business taxes, or other fees or taxes otherwise permitted by law. 
(Ord. No. 66, § 1.11, 1-3-95)
Sec. 8-3.9. - Occupation taxes levied on business to be transacted during current calendar year; filing of returns showing gross receipts during preceding calendar year. 
(a)	All occupation taxes levied under this division are levied on the amount of business to be transacted during the current calendar year. However, for convenience of both city and the taxpayer, each business subject to the occupation tax shall, on or before the dates hereinafter set forth, file with the city the return hereinafter specifically provided for, showing the gross receipts of that business during the preceding calendar year. This return shall be used as the basis for making estimated payments on the occupation tax for the current calendar year. The actual and final amount of tax levied for business transacted in the current calendar year shall be paid in accordance with a final return to be made after the end of the year, in accordance with the procedure set forth here. 
(b)	The person subject to said occupation tax of the current calendar year shall, at the end of the preceding year, and on or before April 1 of the current calendar year, file with the city, on a form furnished by the city, a signed return setting forth the amount of gross receipts of such business for the entire preceding calendar year. This return will be used to determine the final tax for the calendar year just completed and as an estimate of the gross receipts and occupation tax for the current calendar year. 
(c)	Where a business subject to the occupation tax for the calendar year has been conducted for only a part of the preceding year, the amount of gross receipts for such part shall be reported in said return. Said return shall also show a figure putting the receipts for such part of a year on an annual basis with the part-year receipts bearing the same ratio to the whole-year gross receipts as the part year bears to the whole year. Said figure shall be used as the estimate of the gross receipts of the business for the current calendar year in establishing the business tax liability. 
(Ord. No. 66, § 1.12, 1-3-95)
Sec. 8-3.10. - Filing of return showing actual gross receipts during calendar year; procedure where taxes overpaid or underpaid. 
(a)	On or before April 1 of each year, the owner, proprietor, manager, or executive officer of the business liable for said occupation tax levied for the year shall file with the city, on a form furnished by the city, a signed return setting forth the actual amount of the gross receipts of such business during the preceding calendar year. 
(b)	If the amount of the occupation tax for the preceding year based on the return provided for in this section and on the rate of said tax provided for in this division, is less than the amount of occupation tax theretofore paid by said business based on the estimate filed by the business, the difference in said amount shall be due and payable by the taxpayer to the city on April 1 of the current year and delinquent if not paid on or before said date. 
(c)	If the amount of the occupation tax for the preceding year based on the return provided for in this section and on the rate of said tax provided for in this division, exceeds the amount of occupation tax theretofore paid by said business based on the estimate filed by the business, the difference in said amount shall be refunded by city to the taxpayer; or if said business continues to be conducted in city during the current year, such difference in amount may be credited by the city on the amount of occupation tax to be paid to the city by said business for the current year. 
(Ord. No. 66, § 1.13, 1-3-95)
Sec. 8-3.11. - Confidentiality. 
Information provided by a person to the city for the purpose of determining the applicability and the amount of the occupation tax or the levy or collection occupation tax levied pursuant to this division is confidential and exempt from disclosure (See OCGA § 48-13-15 which exempts such information from discovery under the Georgia Open Records Statute). Such information may be provided by the governing authority of another local government for occupation tax purposes or pursuant to court order or for the purpose of collecting occupation tax or prosecution for failure or refusal to pay an occupation tax. 
(Ord. No. 66, § 1.14, 1-3-95)
Sec. 8-3.12. - Evidence of state registration; other qualifications. 
(a)	Each person who is licensed under OCGA Title 43 by the examining boards of secretary of state's office shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before any city regulatory fee certificate may be issued. 
(b)	Any person required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency or any other regulatory matter shall first, before the issuance of a city registration, show evidence of such qualification. 
(c)	Any person required to submit an annual application for continuance of that business shall do so before the registration is issued. 
(Ord. No. 66, § 1.15, 1-3-95)
Sec. 8-3.13. - Liability of officers and agents; registration required; failure to obtain. 
All persons subject to the occupation tax required in this division shall be required to take out the necessary registration for said business prescribed in this division. In default thereof the officer or agents soliciting for or obtaining business shall be subject to the same penalty as other persons who fail to obtain a certificate. Each person commencing business in the city after January 1 of each year shall likewise obtain the registration provided herein before commencing such business. Any person transacting or offering to transact in the city any of the kinds of business, profession or occupation without having first obtained such registration shall be subject to the penalties provided herein and upon conviction shall be punished as provided in section 8-3.14. 
(Ord. No. 66, § 1.16, 1-3-95)
Sec. 8-3.14. - Due date; court penalty and interest. 
A penalty is imposed on each business and practitioner of an occupation which or who fails to apply for and obtain appropriate registration and to pay any and all regulatory and administrative fees and occupation taxes required by this division prior to April 1 of each year. Said penalty shall be in the amount of ten percent of the regulatory and administrative fee and occupational tax determined to be due and owing under the provisions of this division. Such delinquency shall also bear interest at the rate of one percent for each month or partial month of such delinquency. Penalties provided herein shall be in addition to any other penalties, civil or criminal, which may be applicable. 
(Ord. No. 66, § 1.17, 1-3-95)
Sec. 8-3.15. - Criminal penalty for violation. 
Any person violating any provision of this division shall upon conviction be punished as provided in section 8-3.14 of this Code; provided, however, practitioners of professions and any other persons whose qualification to practice their profession is determined by the general laws of the State of Georgia and who fail to pay an occupation tax as provided in this division shall be subject only to the civil penalty and interest provisions as provided in section 8-3.14. 
(Ord. No. 66, § 1.18, 1-3-95)
Sec. 8-3.16. - Inspection of records. 
The city, through its employees, officers or agents, may inspect the books of any person subject to an occupation tax to determine the accuracy of the documents and information submitted by a business or practitioner to the city. Failure to submit such books or records within 30 days shall be grounds for revocation of the regulatory fee certificate and right to do business in the city. Adequate records shall be kept in the city or made available in the city for examination by the designated city agents. If after examination of the books or records it is determined that a deficiency exists as a result of improper designation of a dominant line of a business, profession or occupation, a penalty of ten percent of the deficiency and an additional interest of one percent per month of the amount of the deficiency shall be assessed. 
(Ord. No. 66, § 1.19, 1-3-95)
Sec. 8-3.17. - Revocation. 
Failure of any person to pay an applicable administrative fee, regulatory fee or occupation tax or any part thereof before it becomes delinquent or upon failure to permit inspection of books as required, shall result in any business tax certificate or regulatory fee certificate granted by the city under this division permitting such person to do business in the city for the current year being automatically revoked without any further action required of the city. No new occupation tax certificate or regulatory fee certificate shall be granted by the city for the operation of a business for which any part of the occupation tax or fees herein required are unpaid nor shall such certificates be issued to a person who has failed to submit adequate records for inspection as required by section 8-3.9 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 66, § 1.20, 1-3-95)
Sec. 8-3.18. - Execution, liens. 
(a)	The city clerk, or his or her designee, upon any tax or installment of any tax become a delinquent and remaining unpaid, shall issue an execution for the amount of said tax against the person liable for said tax, including interest at the rate of one percent per month accruing thereon. The lien shall cover the property of the person liable for said tax as provided by the Code of Ordinances, Charter of the city and the laws of Georgia. The lien for said occupation tax shall become fixed on and date from the time that such tax or installment thereof becomes delinquent. The execution shall be levied by the appropriate city agent upon the property of the person liable for said tax and sufficient property shall be advertised and sold to pay the amount of said execution, with interest and cost allowed by law. All other proceedings in relation thereto shall be as provided by the Code and Charter of the city and the laws of Georgia. The defendants at execution shall have the rights of defense, by affidavit of illegality of the tax or otherwise as provided by the Charter of the city and the laws of Georgia in regard to tax executions. 
(b)	When a nulla bona entry has been entered by the proper authority upon execution issued by the city against any person defaulting on an occupation tax, the person against whom the entry was made shall not be allowed or entitled to have or collect any fees or charges whatsoever for services rendered after the entry of the nulla bona. If at any time after the entry of the nulla bona has been made, the person against whom the execution pays the tax in full, together with all interest penalties and costs accrued on the tax, the person may collect any fees and charges for services and goods due the person as though the person had never defaulted in the payment of the taxes. 
(Ord. No. 66, § 1.21, 1-3-95)
Sec. 8-3.19. - Application to prior delinquencies. 
This division does not repeal or affect the enforcement of any ordinance or part of any ordinance heretofore passed for fees and taxes levied when such fees and taxes have not been paid in full. Such ordinances and parts of ordinances heretofore passed providing for the issuing and enforcing execution for taxes or assessments required by such ordinances or that imposed fines or penalties for nonpayment of such tax, or for failure to pay regulatory fees pursuant to such ordinances, or failure to comply with the other provisions thereof, shall continue and remain in force until such tax, regulatory fee or assessment shall be fully paid. 
(Ord. No. 66, § 1.22, 1-3-95)
Sec. 8-3.20. - Public hearing before future tax changes. 
Prior to adopting any ordinance, subsequent to January 1, 1996, regarding the occupation tax as set forth in this division, the mayor and council shall conduct at least one public hearing. 
(Ord. No. 66, § 1.23, 1-3-95; Ord. No. 66 Amd. 1, § 1.23, 1-16-96)
DIVISION 2. - TELEPHONE COMPANIES 

Sec. 8-4. - Telephone company license fees—Levy. 
There is hereby levied for each year an annual license fee upon each telephone company operating and serving customers with telephones and other communication services within the city, in the amount of $160.00 for each separate business location operated and maintained by such company within the city. 
(Ord. No. 20, § 1, 2-5-74)
State Law reference— Franchise tax collectible by state and payable to city, OCGA § 48-5-420 et seq. 
Sec. 8-5. - Same—Due and delinquent dates; delinquency penalty and interest. 
The license fees levied by section 8-4 are due and payable on February 1 of each year. Any such license fee not paid by March 1 for each respective year shall be delinquent. The penalty for such delinquency shall be the amount of ten percent of such license fee plus the sum of seven percent interest per annum. 
(Ord. No. 20, § 2, 2-5-74)
Sec. 8-6. - Same—Reports. 
(a)	Every telephone company operating and serving customers with telephones and other communications services within the city and subject to the fees imposed shall file with the city clerk on or before January 15 of each year a report showing the number of customers of such telephone company or other company furnishing telephone service as of the close of business on December 31 of the next preceding calendar year, and in addition shall furnish such other reasonable information as may be required from time to time. Such report shall be made over affidavit of an officer of the company reporting. It is hereby declared to be a violation of this Code for any person or agent to knowingly give false or incomplete information on any such report. 
(b)	All reports required to be filed hereunder shall be confidential and the information contained therein shall be solely for use of the officers of the city responsible for the administration of section 8-4. 
(Ord. No. 20, §§ 3, 4, 2-5-74)
Sec. 8-7. - Same—Enforcement. 
The fees and taxes levied in section 8-4 may be enforced by execution in the same manner as other taxes of the city. Violation shall be grounds for refusing or revoking a license, and the person responsible may be punished as for any other violation of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 20, § 5, 2-5-74)
Sec. 8-7.1. - Due compensation for telephone companies with end user retail customers within the city. 
(a)	The city hereby requires due compensation of three percent of actual recurring local service revenues, as defined in paragraphs (8) and (9) of subsection (b) of OCGS § 46-5-1; provided, however, that any company which pays in excess of three percent of actual recurring local service revenues pursuant to an existing franchise agreement shall continue to pay in accordance with the agreement until the expiration of the franchise agreement or December 31, 2012, whichever occurs first, and any company which pays in excess of three percent of actual recurring local service revenues in accordance with an occupational license tax arrangement shall continue to pay in accordance with such payment schedule until December 31, 2012. 
(b)	Regarding any telephone company that does not have retail, end user customers located within the city's municipal boundaries, the payment by such company to a municipal authority in accordance with the rates set by regulations promulgated by the department of transportation for the use of its rights-of-way shall be considered the payment of due compensation. 
(Ord. No. 95, § 1, 1-6-09)
Editor's note— Ord. No. 95, § 1, adopted Jan. 6, 2009, set out provisions intended for use as Ch. 1. For purposes of classification, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as § 8-7.1. 
Sec. 8-7.2. - Authorized designee. 
The city clerk or their designee, shall, on behalf of the city, exercise day-to-day administrative duties necessary to fulfill the regulatory authority of the city under OCGA § 46-5-1 et seq. and shall perform the following duties: 
(1)	Review application information submitted by a telephone company to the city and, if an application is incomplete, notify the telegraph or telephone company within 15 business days of the receipt of such application, identifying in such notice all application deficiencies. 
(2)	Report the receipt of a completed application to the council within 60 calendar days of the receipt of such completed application. 
(3)	Review payments of due compensation submitted by the company to ensure compliance with the provisions of the amended law and this section. 
(4)	Provide a coordination function between a telephone company and all city departments on any matter relating to the amended law and this section. 
(5)	Arrange and evaluate, no more than once a year, a comprehensive review of the records of a company which is reasonably related to the calculation and payment of due compensation. 
(6)	Provide to all telegraph and telephone companies located in its rights-of-way written notice of annexations and changes in municipal corporate boundaries. 
(Ord. No. 95, § 2, 1-6-09)
Editor's note— Ord. No. 95, § 2, adopted Jan. 6, 2009, set out provisions intended for use as § 2-2009. For purposes of classification, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as § 8-7.2. 
DIVISION 2.1. - CABLE OR VIDEO FRANCHISES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note—Ord. No. 94, § 2, adopted and effective Jan. 6, 2009, set out provisions intended for use as § 2008-10. For purposes of classification, and at the city's request, sections 1 and 2 of said ordinance have been included as Div. 2.1, §§ 8-7.3, 8-7.4.

Sec. 8-7.3. - Cable or video franchise fee established. 
The city hereby requires a franchise fee of 3% of gross revenues generated within the city for any cable or video state franchise issued in its corporate boundaries by the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 94, § 1, 1-6-09)
Sec. 8-7.4. - Authorized designee. 
The city hereby authorizes the city clerk, upon receipt of notice to the city of its right to designate a franchise fee for an applicant for or holder of an existing state franchise, to provide written notice to the Secretary of State and each applicant for or holder of a state franchise within a service area that is wholly or partially located within the city limits of the 3% franchise fee rate applicable to such applicant or holder of a state franchise. 
(Ord. No. 94, § 2, 1-6-09)
DIVISION 3. - INSURANCE COMPANIES 
Subdivision 1. - Life, Accident and Sickness Insurers 

Sec. 8-8. - Life, accident and sickness insurance license fees and taxes—Levy of license fee. 
(a)	Life insurers' license fees. There is hereby levied for the year 1984 and for each year thereafter an annual license fee upon each life insurer doing business within the city in the amount of $15.00. For each separate business location in excess of one not covered by subsection (b) which is operated on behalf of such insurers within the city there is hereby levied a license fee in the amount of $15.00. For the purposes of this subdivision, the term "insurer" means a company which is authorized to transact business in the class of insurance designated in subsection 1 of OCGA § 33-3-5. 
(b)	License fee for life insurers insuring certain risks at additional business locations. For each separate business location, not otherwise subject to a license fee hereunder, operated and maintained by a business organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing and, in connection with such loans or sales, offers, solicits or takes application for insurance through a licensed agent of a life insurer for life insurance, said insurer shall pay an additional license fee of $10.00 per location for the year 1984 and for each year thereafter. 
(c)	Life insurance agency license fees; independent life insurance agencies, brokers, etc. not otherwise licensed. There is hereby levied for the year 1984 and for each year thereafter an annual license fee upon independent agencies and brokers for each separate business location from which a life insurance business is conducted and which is not subject to the company license fee imposed by subsection (a) hereof, in the amount of $15.00 for each location within the city. 
(Ord. No. 25, § 1, 2-5-74; Ord. No. 38, § 3, 11-1-83)
Sec. 8-9. - Same—Levy of gross premium percentage tax. 
(a)	Gross premiums tax imposed on life insurers. There is hereby levied for the year 1984 and for each year thereafter an annual tax based solely upon the gross direct premiums upon each insurer writing life, accident and sickness insurance within the city in an amount equal to one percent of gross direct premiums received during the calendar year in accordance with OCGA § 33-8-8.1. Gross direct premiums as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in OCGA § 33-84. Premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 8-8. 
(b)	Gross premiums tax all other insurers. There is hereby levied for the year 1984 and for each year thereafter an annual tax upon each insurer, other than an insurer transacting business in the class of insurance designated in subsection 1 of OCGA § 33-3-5 doing business within the city in an amount equal to two and one-half percent of the gross direct premiums received during the calendar year, in accordance with OCGA § 33-8-8.2. Gross direct premiums as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in OCGA § 33-8-8.2(a). 
(Ord. No. 25, § 2, 2-5-74; Ord. No. 38, §§ 4, 5, 11-1-83)
Sec. 8-10. - Same—Due and delinquent dates. 
(a)	The license fees levied by section 8-8 are due and payable on February 1 of each succeeding year. Any such license fee not paid by March 1 for each respective year shall be delinquent. 
(b)	The premium taxes levied by section 8-9 are due and payable on the first day of February of each year. Any company not reporting and paying the premium tax on or before 30 days from the due date shall be delinquent. 
(Ord. No. 25, § 3(A), (B), 2-5-74; Ord. No. 38, § 6, 11-1-83)
Sec. 8-11. - Same—Reports. 
(a)	Every insurance company doing business within the city as specified in section 8-9 and subject to the fees and taxes herein imposed shall file with the city clerk, on forms prescribed, a report showing the names and addresses of its agents representing such company in the city; the location and person in charge of each business location operated and maintained by such company within the city; the classes of insurance written; and such other reasonable information as may be required, and in addition, shall furnish complete information regarding the premium received from policies written on risks residing within the city. Such report shall be made over affidavit of an officer of such company. It is hereby declared to be a violation of this Code for any person or agent to knowingly give false or incomplete information on any such report. Said report shall be filed at the time of paying the license fee and premium tax. 
(b)	All reports required to be filed herein shall be confidential and the information contained therein shall be solely for use of the officers of the city responsible for administering sections 8-8 through 8-12. 
(Ord. No. 25, § 3(C), (D), 2-5-74)
Sec. 8-12. - Same—Enforcement. 
The fees and taxes levied by sections 8-8 and 8-11 may be enforced by execution in the same manner as other taxes of the city. Violation shall be grounds for refusing or revoking a license, and the person responsible may be punished as for any other violation of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 25, § 4, 2-5-74)
Subdivision 2. - Property, Marine, Transportation, Casualty, Title and HMO Insurers[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note—Ord. No. 65, §§ 1—5, adopted Nov. 2, 1993, did not specifically amend the Code; such provisions have been included as amendatory of §§ 8-13—8-15, at the discretion of the editor.

Sec. 8-13. - Property, marine, etc., insurance license fees and taxes—Levy of license fee. 
(a)	Insurer license fees. There is hereby levied for the year 1994 and for each year thereafter an annual license fee upon each insurer doing business within the city in the amount of $15.00. For each separate business location in excess of one not covered by subsection (b) which is operated on behalf of such insurers within the city there is hereby levied a license fee in the amount of $15.00. For the purposes of this subdivision, the term "insurer" means a company which is authorized to transact business in classes of insurance (2) through (6) as designated in OCGA § 33-3-5, including, but not limited to: (1) property, marine, and transportation; (2) casualty; (3) surety; (4) title; and (5) health maintenance organization. 
(b)	License fee for insurers insuring certain risks at additional business locations. For each separate business location, not otherwise subject to a license fee hereunder, operated and maintained by a business organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing and, in connection with such loans or sales, offers, solicits or takes application for insurance through a licensed agent of an insurer for insurance, said insurer shall pay an additional license fee of $10.00 per location for the year 1994 and for each year thereafter. 
(c)	Insurance agency license fees; Independent insurance agencies, brokers, etc., not otherwise licensed. There is hereby levied for the year 1994 and for each year thereafter an annual license fee upon independent agencies and brokers for each separate business location from which an insurance business is conducted and which is not subject to the company license fee imposed by subsection (a) hereof, in the amount of $15.00 for each location within the city. 
(Ord. No. 65, §§ 1—3, 11-2-93)
Sec. 8-14. - Due date for license fees. 
License fees imposed by section 8-13 of this subdivision shall be due and payable on the first day of February, 1994 and on the first day of February of each succeeding year. Any such license fee not paid by March 1 for each respective year shall be delinquent. 
(Ord. No. 65, § 4, 11-2-93)
Sec. 8-15. - Enforcement. 
The fees levied by this subdivision may be enforced by execution in the same manner as other fees and taxes of the city. Violation of this subdivision shall be grounds for the refusing or revoking of a license, and the person responsible may be punished as for violation of any other city ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 65, § 5, 11-2-93)
Secs. 8-16—8-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS 

Sec. 8-20. - Definition. 
An "itinerant merchant" or an "itinerant vendor" or a "peddler," as the terms are used in this article, shall be held to be any person, as defined in section 1-2, engaged in any activity mentioned in section 8-23. 
Sec. 8-21. - Liberal construction. 
This entire article is and shall be deemed an exercise of the police power of the state and the city for the public safety, comfort, convenience and protection of the city and citizens of the city, and all of the provisions hereof shall be construed for the accomplishment of that purpose. 
Sec. 8-22. - License—Required; carrying. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to go from house to house or from place to place in the city, soliciting, selling or taking orders or offering to sell or take orders for any goods, wares, merchandise, services, photographs, newspapers, magazines or subscriptions to newspapers or magazines, without having first applied for and obtained a license to do so from the city clerk. It shall also be unlawful to sell or solicit as aforesaid without carrying such license while engaged in soliciting or selling. 
Sec. 8-23. - Same—Application. 
Any person desiring to go from house to house or from place to place in the city to sell or solicit orders for goods, wares, merchandise, services, photographs, newspapers, magazines or subscriptions to newspapers or magazines, shall make written application to the city clerk for a license to do so, which application shall show the name and address of the person, if any, that he represents and the kind of goods offered for sale, and whether such applicant upon any such sale or order shall demand, accept or receive payment or deposit of money in advance of final delivery, and the period of time such applicant wishes to sell or solicit in the city. 
Sec. 8-24. - Same—Bond. 
The application for license shall be accompanied by a bond in the sum of $1,000.00, signed by applicant and signed, as surety, by some surety company authorized to do business in the state, conditioned for the final delivery of goods, wares, merchandise, services, photographs, magazines and newspapers in accordance with the terms of any order obtained prior to delivery and also conditioned to indemnify any and all defects in material or workmanship that may exist in the article sold by the principal of said bond, at the time of delivery, and which bond shall be for the use and benefit of all persons who may make any purchase or give any order to the principal on said bond, or to an agent or employee of the principal. Defect discovered within 30 days of delivery will be considered as occurring at time of delivery. 
In case applicant is a person engaging in any such activity through one or more agents or employees, such applicant shall be required to enter into only one bond, in the above specified sum, which bond shall be made to cover the activities of all such agents or employees. 
Sec. 8-25. - Same—Fees; term; nontransferable. 
The license fee for an itinerant merchant or vendor shall be $50.00. However, when any person engaged in any such activity through one or more agents or employees, such person shall, in addition to said fee above mentioned, pay a license fee of $10.00 for each agent or employee so engaged, all of which licenses shall be valid for one year from the date of their issuance. The fees herein provided for shall be used for the purpose of defraying expenses incident to the issuing of said license. The license herein provided for shall not be transferable from any such person to any other person, nor shall any of the additional license fee payments be transferable to any agent or employee other than the one designated on said license. 
Sec. 8-26. - Same—Exemptions. 
The licensing provisions of this article shall not apply to sales made to dealers by commercial travelers or sales agents in the usual course of business, nor to sales made under authority and by order of law, nor to vendors of farm products. 
Sec. 8-27. - Hours of operation. 
The hours that itinerant merchants or itinerant vendors may take orders for or offer for sale goods, wares, services, photographs, subscriptions to newspapers or magazines shall be from 8:00 a.m. until sunset and it shall be unlawful for any itinerant merchant or itinerant vendor to sell or offer the same for sale before or after such period of time. 
Sec. 8-28. - Peddling on streets. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to peddle any goods, wares or merchandise on the public sidewalks, streets, alleys or grounds within the city; provided, however, this section shall not apply to any person who offers for sale any products raised or grown upon the property owned, rented or under the control of such person. 
Sec. 8-29. - Going uninvited on residential premises. 
It shall be unlawful for any solicitor, peddler, itinerant merchant or transient vendor to go in and upon the premises of a private residence in the city unless requested or invited to do so by the owner or occupant of said private residence, for the purpose of soliciting orders for the sale of goods, wares or merchandise, or for the purpose of peddling the same. 
Secs. 8-30—8-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note—Ord. No. 63, adopted Jan. 5, 1993, amended the Code, but did not specify the manner thereof; hence, inclusion of §§ 1—20 of such ordinance as Ch. 8, Art. III, §§ 8-40—8-59, superseding §§ 8-40—8-48, was at the discretion of the editor. Former Art. III pertained to similar subject matter as derived from Ord. No. 32, § 1, adopted Oct. 5, 1976.

Sec. 8-40. - Findings; public purpose. 
The city council finds that it is in the best interest of the health, welfare, safety and morals of the community to enact regulations to reduce the possible adverse impacts of adult entertainment establishments. However, the mayor and council also find that the outright prohibition of such establishments could improperly infringe upon protected forms of expression. Therefore, the purpose of this article is to reasonably regulate adult entertainment establishments in a manner that serves the legitimate governmental interest of reducing criminal activity and protecting property values without unreasonably infringing upon the protected rights of adult entertainment establishments and their patrons. 
(Ord. No. 63, § 1, 1-5-93)
Sec. 8-41. - Definitions. 
The following terms used in this article shall have the meanings indicated below: 
Adult entertainment means performances by topless and/or bottomless dancers, strippers or similar entertainers, where such performances are characterized by the display or exposure of specified anatomical areas. 
Adult entertainment establishment means a nightclub, cabaret or other establishment which features adult entertainment. Any commercial establishment, which has as its primary purposes or business the offer for sale of any book publication or film which depicts nudity or sexual conduct or engages in services such as bath houses, massage parlors, wrestling parlors or like activity. 
Church means a building in which persons regularly assemble for religious worship intended primarily for purposes connected with such worship, or for propagating a particular form of religious belief. 
Good moral character means a person is of good moral character if that person has not been convicted of a drug-related or alcohol-related felony or sex-related crime in the past five years. 
Licensed day care center means a day care center licensed by the state and/or city that provides care, training, education, custody, treatment or supervision for children under 14 years of age, where such children are not related by blood, marriage or adoption to an owner or operator of the facility. 
Minor means any person under 18 years of age. 
Operator means the manager or other person principally in charge of an adult entertainment establishment. 
Owner(s) means, if a sole proprietorship, the proprietor; if a partnership, all partners (general and limited); if a corporation, all officers, directors and persons holding at least ten percent of the outstanding shares. 
Residential, pertaining to the use of land, means premises such as homes, townhomes, patio homes, mobile homes, duplexes, condominiums or apartment complexes, which contain habitable rooms for nontransient occupancy and which are designed primarily for living, sleeping, cooking, and eating therein. 
School means a facility where persons regularly assemble for the purpose of instruction or education including any playgrounds, stadiums, or other structures and grounds used in conjunction therewith. This shall include but not be limited to public and private schools used for primary, secondary, or post-secondary education. 
Specified anatomical areas shall include any of the following: 
(1)	Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region; buttock; or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola. 
(2)	Human male genitalia in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
(Ord. No. 63, § 2, 1-5-93)
Sec. 8-42. - License required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, association, firm, partnership, or corporation to engage in, conduct or carry on, in or upon any premises within the city, an adult entertainment establishment without a valid adult entertainment license to do so. The issuance of such license shall not be deemed to authorize, condone, or make legal any activity or conduct that is illegal or unlawful under the laws of the State of Georgia or the United States. The annual license fee for an adult entertainment establishment shall be established from time to time by resolution of the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 63, § 3, 1-5-93)
Sec. 8-43. - On-premises operator required. 
An adult entertainment establishment shall have a designated person(s) to serve as an on-premises operator. The operator(s) shall be principally in charge of the establishment and shall be located on the premises during operating hours. 
(Ord. No. 63, § 4, 1-5-93)
Sec. 8-44. - Employee permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to be employed by an adult entertainment establishment without a permit issued under the terms of this article. For the purposes of this section, the term "employee" includes an independent contractor. 
(Ord. No. 63, § 5, 1-5-93)
Sec. 8-45. - Admission of minors unlawful. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful to allow a person younger than 18 years of age to enter an adult entertainment establishment. 
(b)	It shall be the duty of the operator to ensure that an attendant is stationed at each public entrance to the establishment at all times during the establishments operating hours. It shall be the duty of the attendants to not allow any person under the age of 18 years to enter the establishment. It shall be presumed that an attendant knew a person was under the age of 18 unless such attendant asked for and was furnished: 
(1)	A valid operator's, commercial operator's or chauffeur's driver's license; or
(2)	A valid personal identification certificate issued by the Georgia Department of Public Safety reflecting that such person is 18 years of age or older. 
(Ord. No. 63, § 6, 1-5-93)
Sec. 8-46. - Location; development standards. 
(a)	Adult entertainment establishments shall only be located within an adult commercial (C-A) zoning district. 
(b)	No adult entertainment establishment shall be located within 750 feet of any of the following: 
(1)	Any parcel of land which is zoned for residential uses or purposes.
(2)	Any parcel of land upon which a church, school, licensed day care center, governmental building simultaneously owned and occupied by such government, library, civic center, neighborhood public park or neighborhood playground is located. 
(3)	Any parcel of land upon which another adult entertainment establishment is located.
For purposes of this section, measurement of distances shall be from property line to property line along the shortest possible straight line, regardless of any customary or common route or path of travel (i.e. "as the crow flies"). The term "parcel of land" shall mean any quantity of land capable of being described by location and boundary, designated and used or to be used as a unit, and duly recorded in Lowndes County, Georgia. 
(c)	The minimum lot area for an adult entertainment establishment shall be one acre with a minimum 150 feet of road frontage on a public right-of-way. 
(d)	Buildings and structures established in connection with an adult entertainment establishment shall be set back at least 40 feet from any property line. 
(e)	A minimum of one parking space shall be provided for every 100 square feet of gross building area, or for every three customer seats, whichever is greater. 
(f)	Merchandise or activities of the establishment shall not be visible from any point outside the establishment. 
(g)	Signage shall be limited to one freestanding sign not to exceed 50 square feet of copy area (total of all sides), one wall sign not to exceed 50 square feet. Maximum sign height shall not exceed ten feet from ground level to highest point of the sign. Minimum sign setbacks shall be eight feet from any property line or street right-of-way line. 
(Ord. No. 63, § 7, 1-5-93)
Sec. 8-47. - Employees. 
(a)	Employees of an adult entertainment establishment shall not be less than 18 years of age. Every employee must be of good moral character as defined in this article. Any employee who is convicted of a sex-related crime, or drug-related or alcohol-related felony while employed as an adult entertainment establishment employee, shall not thereafter be employed by any adult entertainment establishment licensed under this article for a period of five years from the date of such conviction, unless a longer time is ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction. The term "convicted" shall include an adjudication of guilt or a plea of guilty. The term "while employed as an adult entertainment establishment employee" shall include all work done or services performed while in the scope of employment elsewhere than on the licensed premises. 
(b)	Before any person may be employed by an adult entertainment establishment, he or she shall file an application for an adult entertainment establishment employee permit with the city clerk and receive approval. An investigation fee of $50.00 shall accompany the application. Each applicant shall provide a signed and notarized consent, on forms prescribed by the Georgia Crime Information Center, authorizing the release of the applicant's criminal records to the city police department. The city shall have 15 days to investigate information contained in the application. If the prospective employee is found to be of good moral character, the city clerk shall approve the permit and the prospective employee may begin working on the licensed premises. If approval is denied, the prospective employee may, within ten days of said denial, make appeal to the city council. 
(c)	No patron, dancer, or other employee of an adult entertainment establishment shall, while on the premises of an adult entertainment establishment, commit the offense of public indecency as defined in OCGA § 16-6-8. For purposes of this section, the term "employee" shall include an independent contractor. 
(d)	The employee permit of any employee who violates laws and regulations of the state or any provision of this article or any other ordinance or regulation of the city, shall be subject to suspension or revocation. 
(e)	For the purpose of this article, independent contractors shall be considered employees and shall be permitted as such, regardless of the business relationship with the owner or licensee of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(Ord. No. 63, § 8, 1-5-93)
Sec. 8-48. - Application for license. 
(a)	Any person, association, firm, partnership, or corporation desiring to obtain a license to operate, engage in, conduct or carry on any adult entertainment establishment shall make application to the city clerk or designated representative. The application must be made in the name of the adult entertainment establishment and include the names of the operator and each owner as defined in this article. The application shall be accompanied by a non-refundable fee, established from time to time by resolution of the city, to defray, in part, the cost of investigation and report required by this article. 
(b)	The license application does not authorize the engaging in, operation of, conduct of or carrying on of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(Ord. No. 63, § 9, 1-5-93)
Sec. 8-49. - Application contents. 
Each application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall contain the following information and documentation: 
(1)	The proposed establishment's name, street address (and mailing address if different), and telephone number. 
(2)	The name and street address (and mailing address if different) of the owner(s). The name, street address (and mailing address if different), and Georgia driver's license number of the intended operator. 
(3)	A general description of services and entertainment to be provided.
(4)	The legal description of the parcel of land on which the establishment is to be located.
(5)	The business, occupation and employment history of each owner and operator for five years immediately preceding the date of application. 
(6)	If any owner or operator has had an adult entertainment establishment license or similar type of license denied, revoked or suspended, then the violation(s) that led to the denial, suspension or revocation as well as the date(s) and disposition of such, including any fine or sentence imposed, and whether or not the terms of the disposition have been completed. 
(7)	If any owner or operator has been convicted of any crime involving good moral character in the past five years, a complete description of such crime including date of violation, date of conviction, jurisdiction and any disposition, including fines or sentences imposed and whether the terms of disposition have been fully completed. 
(8)	If the establishment does or proposes to do business under a trade name, then a copy of the trade name as properly recorded. 
(9)	If the establishment is a Georgia corporation, then a certified copy of the articles of incorporation, together with all amendments thereto, and the most recent annual report. 
(10)	If the establishment is a foreign corporation, then a certified copy of the certificate of authority to transact business in the state, together with all amendments thereto, and the most recent annual report. 
(11)	If the establishment is a limited partnership formed under the laws of Georgia, then a certified copy of the certificate of limited partnership, together with all amendments thereto, filed in the office of the city clerk. 
(12)	If the establishment is a foreign limited partnership, a certified copy of the certificate of limited partnership and the qualification documents, together with all amendments thereto. 
(13)	A plat by a registered engineer or surveyor, licensed by the State of Georgia, certifying the location of the proposed premises is not inconsistent with the provisions contained in section 8-46 of this article respecting location and development standards. 
(14)	The application shall contain a statement under oath that:
a.	The person(s) signing the application have personal knowledge of the information contained in the application and that the information contained therein is true and correct; and 
b.	The person(s) signing the application have read the provisions of this article.
(15)	The application shall be signed by the operator and each owner.
(16)	The operator and each owner shall provide a signed and notarized consent, on forms prescribed by the Georgia Crime Information Center, authorizing the release of their criminal records to the city police department. 
(17)	The written consent of a registered agent as required by section 8-56(a) of this article. 
(18)	Items (8) through (12) above shall not be required for a renewal application if the applicant states that documents previously furnished with the original application or previous renewals thereof remain correct and current. 
(Ord. No. 63, § 10, 1-5-93)
Sec. 8-50. - Owner and operator to appear. 
The operator and at least one owner, as defined in this article, shall personally appear at the public hearing for consideration of the application, scheduled pursuant to section 8-51 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 63, § 11, 1-5-93)
Sec. 8-51. - Application; investigation. 
(a)	Within 15 days of receipt of the application, the city clerk or designee shall review the application and send a copy to all affected departments of Lowndes County to determine compliance with county laws and regulations, and to the city police department to investigate the character and reputation of each owner and operator. Each notified department shall submit a report within 15 days to the city clerk. If no report is received, it shall be concluded that there is no objection. 
(b)	The city clerk shall prepare and cause to be published a notice of public hearing for each pending application. Such notice shall include the date, time, and place of the public hearing; the location or street number of the proposed adult entertainment establishment, and the name of each owner and operator. The applicant shall pay all publication costs. The notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the city, and shall appear once a week for two consecutive weeks immediately preceding the public hearing. The city clerk, or designee, shall post a notice of public hearing sign on the subject property during this advertisement period. 
(c)	The city may approve the license at the public hearing upon finding that:
(1)	The required fee has been paid.
(2)	The application conforms in all respects to the provisions of this article.
(3)	No owner or operator knowingly made a material misrepresentation in the application.
(4)	Each owner and operator has fully cooperated in the investigation of his application.
(5)	Each owner and operator is of good moral character as defined in this article.
(6)	No owner or operator has had an adult entertainment establishment license or other similar license or permit denied, suspended or revoked for cause involving moral character by this city or any other unit of government located in or out of this state prior to the date of application. 
(7)	The building, structure, equipment, or location of the proposed adult entertainment establishment will comply with all applicable city zoning and development standards. 
(8)	Each owner and operator is at least 21 years of age.
(9)	No owner or operator is a city employee, an elected or appointed city official, or a spouse of an elected or appointed city official. 
(10)	No owner or operator has within five years of the date of application, committed or knowingly allowed another to commit the crime of public indecency, as defined in OCGA § 16-6-6, upon the premises of an adult entertainment establishment or similar business. 
(11)	The location of the proposed adult entertainment establishment is not inconsistent with the provisions of section 8-46 of this article respecting location and development standards. 
(12)	The approval of such license will not cause a violation of this or any other ordinance or regulation of the city, state, or the United States. 
(13)	The registered agent's written consent has been provided.
(d)	If the license is approved, it shall be issued jointly in the name of the establishment and each owner and operator. 
(e)	The issuance of an adult entertainment establishment license shall not authorize any other conduct or activity regulated by other city ordinances, including but not limited to the Alcoholic Beverage Ordinance. 
(f)	The licensee shall post with the city clerk a $10,000.00 cash bond or surety bond payable to the city subject to the licensee's faithful performance of the provisions of this article. All surety bonds shall be issued by a surety licensed to do business in the State of Georgia and listed on the U.S. Treasury list as an approved surety. 
(Ord. No. 63, § 12, 1-5-93)
Sec. 8-52. - License renewal. 
Licenses for adult entertainment establishments may be renewed on a calendar year basis provided that licensees continue to meet the requirements set out in this article. The renewal fee for an adult entertainment establishment license shall be established from time to time by resolution of the mayor/council of the city. Renewal applications shall be submitted by November 15 of each year prior to January 1 of the year for which such permit is requested. The form for renewal applications shall be furnished by the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 63, § 13, 1-5-93)
Sec. 8-53. - Licenses nontransferable. 
No adult entertainment establishment license may be sold, transferred or assigned by a licensee, or by operation of law, to any other person or persons. Any such sale, transfer or assignment, or attempted sale, transfer or assignment, shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of such license and such license shall thereafter be null and void; provided and excepting however, that if the licensee is a partnership and one or more of the partners should die, one or more of the surviving partners may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, the interest of the deceased partner or partners without effecting a surrender or termination of such license. In such case, upon notification to the city, the license shall be placed in the name of the surviving partner. An adult entertainment establishment license issued to a corporation shall be deemed terminated and void when either any outstanding stock of the corporation is sold, transferred or assigned after the issuance of a license, or any stock not issued at the time of the granting of a license is thereafter issued. 
(Ord. No. 63, § 14, 1-5-93)
Sec. 8-54. - Change of location or name. 
(a)	No adult entertainment establishment shall move from the location specified on its license until a change of location fee, established by resolution of the city council, has been deposited with the city, and approval has been obtained from the city. Such approval shall not be given unless all applicable requirements and regulations have been met. 
(b)	No licensee shall operate, conduct, manage, engage in, or carry on an adult entertainment establishment under any name other than the name of the business and his name as specified on the license. 
(c)	Any application for an extension or expansion of a building or other place of business where an adult entertainment establishment is located shall require inspection and compliance with the provisions and regulations of this article. 
(Ord. No. 63, § 15, 1-5-93)
Sec. 8-55. - Revocation and appeal. 
(a)	The city clerk shall be authorized to suspend or revoke an adult entertainment establishment license under the conditions set forth in this section. In the event the city clerk seeks to suspend or revoke a license, the city clerk shall give written notification to the licensee of such action and such notice shall contain a specification of the violation(s). 
(b)	The city clerk may suspend or revoke a license in the event of any of the following:
(1)	A licensee gave false or misleading information in the application or renewal process.
(2)	A licensee knowingly allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises, or the licensee did not make a reasonable effort to prevent such occurrence(s). 
(3)	A licensee violated or knowingly allowed violation of this adult entertainment establishment article, any other ordinance of the city, or any criminal law of the state to occur on the premises; or the licensee did not make a reasonable effort to prevent such violation(s). 
(4)	A licensee has been convicted of any drug-related, alcohol-related, or sex-related crime by the state or city regarding any offense which was committed on the premises, or which would otherwise violate the provisions of this article. 
(5)	A licensee failed to pay any fee, license fee, fine or other amount of money due to the city under this article or any other ordinance of the city. 
(c)	In the event that the city clerk determines that a license violation has occurred, such license shall be suspended for 30 days for the first violation. For a second violation, the license shall be suspended for 60 days. For a third and all subsequent violation(s), the license shall be suspended for 90 days. Any license that has been suspended three or more times in any consecutive 12-month period shall be revoked. In addition, any licensee found to be in violation of sections 8-45(a) and 8-47(c) of this article shall be subject to immediate license revocation. Provided however, that the licensee shall be allowed to continue business operations until the date of the hearing scheduled in accordance with subsection (e) hereafter. No licensee or any other applicant may apply for a license for the same premises during any period of suspension or revocation. 
(d)	In the event of license suspension or revocation by the city clerk, the licensee may appeal the decision of the city clerk to the city council by filing a written notice of appeal with the city clerk within ten days from the effective date of written notice received by licensee in accordance with subsection (a) of this section. The notice of appeal shall be accompanied by a memorandum or other writing, setting out fully the grounds for such appeal and all arguments in support thereof. The city clerk may submit a memorandum in response to the memorandum filed by the licensee upon appeal to the city council. The city clerk's decision shall be final unless an appeal is timely filed. An appeal shall stay the city clerk's decision until the appeal is heard or withdrawn. The city clerk shall place the appeal on the agenda of the next regular city council meeting occurring not less than five, nor more than 30 days after receipt of the appeal. 
(e)	When an appeal is placed on the city council agenda, the council may take either of the following actions: 
(1)	Set a hearing date before the city council and instruct the city clerk to give such notice of hearing as may be required by law; or 
(2)	Appoint a hearing officer and fix the time and place for hearing. The hearing officer may or may not be a city employee, and may be appointed for an extended period of time. The city clerk shall assume responsibility for such publication of notice of the hearing as may be required by law. If a hearing officer is appointed, the hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures set out in this article. 
In either event, the hearing shall be held within 30 days of the city council's action, unless a continuance of such date is agreed to by the licensee and the city clerk. 
(f)	At any hearing, the hearing officer (or the city council if a hearing officer is not appointed) shall receive oral and written testimony regarding the appeal. Hearings shall be conducted under rules issued by the hearing officer or city council, which shall be consistent with rules applied in administrative proceedings, and shall ensure that each party may present evidence, cross-examine witnesses, and be represented by legal counsel. 
(g)	If the hearing is held before the city council, the council may sustain, overrule, or modify the action of the city clerk. Appeals from the decision of the city council shall be to the Superior Court of Lowndes County, and filed within 30 days of the city council's decision. The decision of the city council shall otherwise be final. 
(h)	If the hearing is held before a hearing officer, the hearing officer shall, within a reasonable time not exceeding 15 days from the termination date of such hearing, submit a written report to the city council. Such report shall contain a brief summary of the evidence considered, and state the findings, conclusions and recommendation. The report shall recommend that the city council sustain, overrule, or modify the action of the city clerk. The report shall be filed with the city clerk and shall be considered public record. A copy of such report shall be forwarded by certified mail to the appellant on the same day it is filed with the city clerk. An additional copy shall be furnished to the city police department. The city clerk shall place the hearing officer's report on the agenda of the next regular city council meeting occurring not less than ten days after the report is filed. The city clerk shall also notify the appellant of the date of such meeting at least ten days prior to the meeting unless the appellant stipulates to a shorter notice period. 
(i)	The city council may adopt or reject the hearing officer's decision in its entirety or may modify the proposed recommendation. The city council shall base its determination on the hearing officer's report and other evidence in the record. No additional evidence or arguments shall be permitted at the council meeting. If the council does not adopt the hearing officer's recommendation, it may: 
(1)	Refer the matter to the same or another hearing officer for a de novo hearing, or for the taking of additional evidence on specific points, and in either of such cases the hearing officer shall proceed as provided in this article; or 
(2)	Decide the case upon a review of the entire record before the hearing officer, with or without taking additional evidence. 
(Ord. No. 63, § 16, 1-5-93)
Sec. 8-56. - Criminal penalties. 
(a)	Any person, firm or corporation operating an adult entertainment establishment within the city without having obtained a license as provided in this article, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor as found by a court of competent jurisdiction, and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in an amount of not less than $500.00 nor more than $2,000.00. Each day the adult entertainment establishment is operated without a license, it shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such. 
(b)	Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction, shall be fined in an amount not less than $50.00 nor more than $2,000.00. Each violation thereof shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such. 
(Ord. No. 63, § 17, 1-5-93)
Sec. 8-57. - Unlawful operation declared nuisance. 
Any adult entertainment establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this article shall be and the same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The city may, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence action(s) or proceeding(s) for abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof, in a manner provided by law. It shall take such other steps and shall apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such adult entertainment establishment and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining an adult entertainment establishment contrary to the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 63, § 18, 1-5-93)
Sec. 8-58. - Notices; registered agent; jurisdiction. 
(a)	All licensed establishments must have and continuously maintain in Lowndes County a registered agent upon whom any process, notice or demand required or permitted by law or under this article to be served upon the licensee, may be served. This person shall act as registered agent for the operator and each owner collectively. This person must be a resident of Lowndes County. The operator may be appointed as the registered agent if he or she is a resident of Lowndes County. The licensee shall file the name of such agent, along with the written consent of such agent, with the city clerk as part of the license application. By appointing such registered agent, and as a condition of the issuance of a license pursuant to the terms of this article, the licensee agrees that any legal action brought by the city against the adult entertainment establishment or the licensee (which includes the operator or any owner) to enforce the provisions of the article, may be filed in any court of competent jurisdiction in Lowndes County. 
(b)	Any notice required or permitted to be given by the city clerk or any office, division, department or other agency under this article to any licensee, operator or owner of an adult entertainment establishment, may be given by either: (1) personal delivery; or (2) by certified United States mail addressed to licensee's registered agent at the most recent address specified in the agent's written consent form received by the city clerk, or any notice of address change which has been received by the city clerk. If personally delivered, the notice's effective date shall be the date of delivery. If mailed, the notice's effective date shall be two days after the notice is placed in the mail. 
(Ord. No. 63, § 19, 1-5-93)
Sec. 8-59. - Conditions of approval. 
(a)	All adult entertainment establishments shall be kept in a clean, sanitary condition, and shall be in full compliance with all applicable ordinances and regulations of the city, Lowndes County, and State of Georgia. 
(b)	The Lowndes County Health Department shall have the authority to regularly inspect adult entertainment establishments to determine compliance with all applicable health rules and regulations and report any violation to the city clerk. 
(c)	The city fire department shall have the authority to regularly inspect adult entertainment establishments to determine compliance with all applicable fire regulations and report any violations to the city clerk. 
(d)	The building inspector or designee shall have the authority to regularly inspect adult entertainment establishments to determine compliance with all applicable building and other technical codes of the city. 
(e)	The city police department shall have the authority to periodically inspect adult entertainment establishments to determine compliance with all provisions of this article or other applicable laws and report any violations to the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 63, § 20, 1-5-93)
Secs. 8-60—8-69. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS 

Sec. 8-70. - Financial institutions tax. 
(a)	Pursuant to OCGA § 48-6-93, there is hereby levied an annual business license tax upon depository financial institutions located within the jurisdiction of the city at the rate of 0.25 percent of the gross receipts of said institutions as the same is defined in OCGA § 48-6-93(b), as amended. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, the minimum amount of business license tax due from any depository financial institution pursuant to this section shall be $1,000.00 per year. 
(b)	Each depository financial institution within the city shall file a return of its gross receipts with the city by March 1 of the year following the year in which such gross receipts were measured. Said returns shall be in the manner and in the form prescribed by the commissioner of the department of banking and shall be based upon the allocation method set forth in subsection (d) of OCGA § 48-6-93. The tax levied pursuant to this section shall be assessed and collected based upon the information provided in said return. 
(c)	The due dates of taxes levied by this section shall be April 1 of each year.
(d)	All other ordinances in direct conflict with the provisions of this section are hereby repealed. 
(e)	The effective date of this section [Ordinance No. 67] is February 10, 1995.
(Ord. No. 67, § 1.1, 2-7-95)
Editor's note— Ord. No. 67, adopted Feb. 7, 1995, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, inclusion of § 1.1 of such ordinance as § 8-70 was at the discretion of the editor. 
State Law reference— Taxation of financial institutions, OCGA § 48-6-90 et seq. 
Chapter 9 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Crimes and offenses, OCGA Title 16; "misdemeanor" defined, OCGA § 16-1-3(9); Georgia Controlled Substances Act, OCGA § 16-13-20 et seq.; sale, possession, etc., of model glue, OCGA § 16-13-90 et seq.; motor vehicles and traffic, OCGA Title 40.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 9-1. - Discharge of weapons. 
The voluntary and willful discharges of a firearm, BB gun, pellet gun, sling shot, bow and arrow, crossbow or any other missile or projectile that is propelled through the air from force that the sender can not control the destination, which would inflict danger or harm to any homo sapien or any form of lower animal, or damage the property of any citizen within the city shall be deemed and declared illegal. Violators shall be subject to punishment as provided in Code section 1-8. 
(Ord. No. 12, §§ 1, 2, 2-5-74; Ord. No. 12 Amd. 1, 2-5-91)
State Law reference— Reckless conduct causing harm to or endangering the bodily safety of another, OCGA § 16-5-60; discharge of gun or pistol near public highway or street, OCGA § 16-11-103; discharge of firearms on property of another, OCGA § 16-11-104; carrying a concealed weapon, OCGA § 16-11-126. 
Sec. 9-2. - Disorderly conduct. 
Acts prohibited. No person shall engage in disorderly conduct. Any person who shall do any of the following shall be guilty of disorderly conduct: 
(1)	Any person who shall act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another, where any person is placed in fear of safety of his life, limb, or health; 
(2)	Any person who shall act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another, where property of any person is placed in danger of being destroyed or damaged; 
(3)	Any person who shall endanger lawful pursuits of another by acts of violence, angry threats, and abusive conduct; 
(4)	Any person who shall cause, provoke, or engage in any fight, brawl, or riotous conduct so as to endanger the life, limb, health, or property of another; 
(5)	Any person who shall assemble or congregate with another for the purpose of causing, provoking, or engaging in any fight or brawl; 
(6)	Any person who shall be found jostling or roughly crowding or pushing any person in any public place; 
(7)	Any person who shall solicit funds in crowds for unlawful purposes;
(8)	Any person who shall assemble or congregate with another for the purpose of or with the intent to engage in gaming; 
(9)	Any person who shall frequent any public place with intent to obtain money from another by an illegal and fraudulent scheme, trick, artifice, or device; 
(10)	Any person who assembles with another for the purpose of engaging in any fraudulent scheme, device, or trick to obtain any valuable thing in any place or from any person in the town, or who shall aid or abet such person; 
(11)	Any person who utters, while in a state of anger, in the presence of another, any lewd or obscene words or epithets; 
(12)	Any person who frequents any establishment where gaming or the illegal sale or possession of alcoholic beverages or narcotics or dangerous drugs is allowed or tolerated; 
(13)	Any person who shall act in such a manner as to cause another person to reasonably be in fear of bodily harm or injury; 
(14)	Any person who shall use "fighting words" directed towards any person who becomes outraged and thus creates turmoil; 
(15)	Any person who shall assemble or congregate with another for the purpose of doing bodily harm to another; 
(16)	Any person who shall, by acts of violence, interfere with another's pursuit of a lawful occupation; 
(17)	Any person who shall congregate with another in or on any public way, so as to halt the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic, and refuses to clear any public way when ordered to do so. 
(Ord. No. 46, 10-7-86; Ord. No. 108, § I, 10-7-2014)
State Law reference— Abusive or obscene language, OCGA § 16-11-39. 
Sec. 9-3. - Interfering with fire department. 
No person shall interfere with the work or impede the progress of the fire department. 
(Ord. No. 43, § 7, 7-1-86)
Cross reference— Fire department, § 6.5-21 et seq. 
Sec. 9-4. - Tampering with fire department equipment. 
It shall be unlawful for any person wilfully to interfere with any cistern, hose, hose cart, truck, hook, ladder, or other apparatus, implement or material of any kind connected with or belonging to the fire department. 
(Ord. No. 43, § 5, 7-1-86)
Sec. 9-5. - Removing fire department apparatus. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to take from the place of storage any instrument, tool, ladder, or other apparatus belonging to the fire department, without the consent of the mayor, except in case of fire, or when a fire alarm is given. 
(Ord. No. 43, § 6, 7-1-86)
Sec. 9-6. - Blasting and explosives. 
(a)	[Generally]. It shall be unlawful to engage in blasting operations, or in any other activity in which explosives are used, or to store or keep in the city any black powder in excess of five pounds, guncotton, giant powder, dynamite, nitroglycerine, fulminate of mercury, or any other explosive or substance, compound, mixture or article having properties of such a character that alone or in combination or contiguity with other substances or compounds, may decompose suddenly and generate sufficient heat, gas, or pressure to produce rapid flaming combustion or administer a destructive blow to persons or property, without having secured a license therefor and complied fully with the provisions of this section. 
(b)	Application; fee. Applications for such license shall be made in writing to the clerk and shall conform to the provisions of the ordinances relative to license applications. Each application shall set forth the location at which such explosives are to be kept and shall state whether such explosives are to be in bulk, barrels, canisters, cartridges, or other manner, and the maximum amount to be kept on hand at any one time. The annual fee for such license shall be $100.00; provided, that where such license is applied for by any persons, firm or corporation licensed to operate a quarry in accordance with the ordinances applicable thereto, no fee shall be required. 
(c)	[Storage.] No such explosives shall be stored in any building other than a fireproof building in full compliance with the building ordinances of the city. 
(d)	[Handlers designated.] No such license shall be issued unless the licensee shall file with the clerk the name of the person or persons designated by him or it to handle such explosives or to load holes or to discharge explosives or to have charge of magazines. 
No person shall be so designated unless he/she is: 
(1)	At least 21 years of age;
(2)	Able to understand, read and write the English language;
(3)	Of temperate habits;
(4)	Familiar with the laws and provisions of the ordinances governing the storage and use of explosives; 
(5)	Capable of performing the duties incidental to his work without unnecessary hazard to himself/herself or others. 
A certificate of fitness shall be issued to any qualified person so designated by any licensee or applicant for a license; and it shall be unlawful to engage in any of the activities described in subsection (a) of this section unless each person designated in accordance with this section shall have first received a certificate of fitness from the clerk. 
(e)	Labeling, packaging. No explosive shall be stored anywhere in the city unless such explosive is properly labeled and packaged. All boxes or containers in which explosives containing nitroglycerine are packaged must be lined with suitable material that is impervious to liquid nitroglycerine. No explosive shall be kept or stored in the city unless it is packed in the manner prescribed by the regulations of the interstate commerce commission for packing of such explosives for shipment on common carriers. No unpackaged or loose dynamite, not in cartridges, shall be stored or kept in the city unless the nitroglycerine content of such dynamite is less than ten percent by weight. 
(f)	Limit on explosive charge. It shall be unlawful to set off or discharge more than three sticks or three pounds of 60 percent dynamite, or any charge containing or releasing a disruptive force greater than three sticks or three pounds of 60 percent dynamite, in any one blasting operation. 
(g)	Blasting. It shall be unlawful to do any blasting in the city without notifying the clerk at least 24 hours in advance of the time and place at which such blasting will be done. Such notice shall describe the location, the number and size of holes to be blasted, and the amount of charge to be used. Secondary shots may be fired in accordance with good practice, provided adequate protection is taken to prevent flying debris. No adobe or mud-capped shots shall be used. 
(h)	Enforcement. It shall be the duty of the fire marshal, chief of police, and any other person designated by the city council to see to the enforcement of the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 59, §§ 1—8, 10-2-90)
Editor's note— Ord. No. 59, adopted Oct. 2, 1990, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, inclusion of §§ 1—8 of such ordinance as § 9-6 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Cross reference— Fire prevention, Ch. 6.5. 
Sec. 9-7. - Obstructing city officer in discharge of duties. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to hinder, delay or obstruct or prevent any officer employed by the city, or any person acting for or under the direction of such officer, from performing any act which by reason of his office or position may devolve upon such officer or person. 
(Ord. No. 108, § II, 10-7-2014)
Sec. 9-8. - Drunkenness. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to be found on the streets in a state of intoxication or significantly under the influence of intoxicants, or acting in a disorderly, riotous or tumultuous manner, or to commit any other act against the public peace, safety, morality or decency. 
(Ord. No. 108, § III, 10-7-2014)
State Law reference— Public drunkenness, OCGA § 16-10-54. 
Secs. 9-9—9-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NOISE CONTROL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note—Ord. No. 81, adopted Aug. 5, 2003, set out provisions intended for Ch. 7, Art. I. For purposes of classification, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as Ch. 9, Art. II, §§ 9-21—9-36, as set out herein. See also the editor's note at Ch. 7, Art. I, regarding former noise control sections, repealed by said ordinance.

Sec. 9-21. - Title. 
This article shall be known as the "Noise Control Ordinance for the City of Lake Park, Georgia." 
(Ord. No. 81, 8-5-03)
Sec. 9-22. - Declaration of necessity and purpose. 
It is found and declared that: 
(1)	The making, creation or maintenance of excessive, unnecessary, or unusually loud noises which are prolonged, unusual or unnatural in their time, place and use occurring within the limits of the city is a condition which has existed for some time and the sources of noise, the extent of and volume of such noises is increasing; and 
(2)	The necessity in the public interest for the provisions and prohibitions hereinafter contained in sections 9-23 through 9-33 is declared as a matter of legislative determination and public policy, and it is further declared that such provisions and prohibitions are in pursuance of and for the purpose of securing and promoting the public health, comfort convenience, safety, welfare, prosperity, peace and quiet of the city and its inhabitants. 
(Ord. No. 81, 8-5-03)
Sec. 9-23. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article, unless otherwise specifically stated. Definitions of technical terms used, which are not herein defined, shall be obtained from publications of acoustical terminology issued by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) or its successor body. 
Ambient sound level means the noise associated with a given environment, exclusive of a particular noise being tested, being usually a composite of sounds from many sources, near and far, exclusive of intruding noises from isolated identifiable sources. 
A-weighted sound level means the sound pressure level in decibels as measured on a sound level meter using the A-weighting network. The level is designated dB(A) or dBA. 
Construction means any site preparation, assembly, erection, substantial repair, alteration or similar action, for or of public or private rights-of-way, structures, utilities or similar property. 
Decibel (dB) means a logarithmic and dimensionless unit of measure used in describing the relative loudness or level of sounds. 
Demolition means any dismantling, intentional destruction or removal of structures, utilities, public or private right-of-way surfaces, or similar property. 
Emergency means any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual or imminent physical or psychological trauma or property damage, which demands immediate action. 
Emergency work means any work performed for the purpose of alleviating or resolving an emergency. 
Impulsive sound means a sound of short duration, usually less than one second, with an abrupt onset and rapid decay. Examples of sources of impulsive sound include explosions, drop forge impacts and the discharge of firearms. 
Motorboat means any vessel which operates on water and which is propelled by a motor, including but not limited to boats, barges, amphibious craft, water ski towing devices and hovercraft. 
Motorcycle means any motor vehicle having a saddle or seat for the use of the rider and designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with the ground. The term shall include motorized bicycles and motor scooters. 
Motor vehicle means any motor-operated vehicle licensed for use on the public highways, but not including a motorcycle. 
Noise means any sound which disturbs humans, or which causes or tends to cause an adverse psychological or physiological effect on humans. 
Noise disturbance means any sound which endangers or injures the welfare, safety or health of human beings, or disturbs a reasonable person of normal sensitivities, or devalues or injures personal or real property, or as hereinafter defined. 
Noise-sensitive activities means activities which should be conducted under conditions of exceptional quiet, including but not limited to operation of schools, libraries open to the public, churches, hospitals and nursing homes. 
Noise-sensitive area means any area designated for the purpose of ensuring exceptional quiet and clearly posted with "Noise-Sensitive Area" signs, because of the noise-sensitive activities conducted therein. 
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, operative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivisions of this state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Officer on duty means any law enforcement officer, zoning inspector, housing inspector or other person duly authorized by the city council to enforce the provisions of this article. 
Powered model vehicle means any self-propelled airborne, water-borne or land-borne model plane, vessel or vehicle which is not designed to carry persons, including but not limited to any model airplane, boat, car or rocket. 
Public right-of-way means any street, avenue, boulevard, highway, sidewalk, lane or similar place, which is owned or controlled by a governmental entity. 
Public space means any real property, including any structure thereon, which is owned or controlled by a governmental entity. 
Pure tone means any sound, which can be distinctly heard as a single pitch or a set of single pitches. 
Real property boundary means an imaginary line along the ground surface, and its vertical extension, which separates the real property owned by one person from that owned by another person, but not including intrabuilding real property divisions. 
Receiving land use means the use or occupancy of the property, which receives the transmission of sound as hereinafter, defined. 
Recreational vehicle means any racecar, motorcycle or any other motorized vehicle equipped for use in racing or other recreational events or uses off of public right-of-way on public or private property. 
Residential means any property on which is located a building or structure used wholly or partially for living or sleeping purposes. 
Sound means an oscillation in pressure, particle displacement, particle velocity or other physical parameter, in a medium with internal forces that cause compression and rarefaction of that medium. The description of sound may include any characteristic of such sound, including duration, intensity and frequency. 
Sound level means the weighted sound pressure level obtained by the use of a sound level meter and frequency weighting network, such as A, B or C as specified in American National Standards Institute specifications for sound level meters (ANSI 51.41971, or the latest approved revision thereof). If the frequency weighting employed is not indicated, the A-weighting shall apply. 
Sound level meter means an instrument, which includes a microphone, amplifier, RMS detector, integrator or time averager, output or display meter, and weighting networks used to measure sound pressure levels, which complies with American National Standards Institute Standard 1.4-1-71 as revised. 
Sound pressure means the instantaneous difference between the actual pressure and the average or barometric pressure at a given point in space, as produced by sound energy. 
Used or occupied. Either word shall be deemed to include the words "intended, designed or arranged to be used or occupied." 
(Ord. No. 81, 8-5-03)
Sec. 9-24. - Exceptions. 
The provisions of this article shall not apply to: 
(1)	The emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to the existence of an emergency.
(2)	The emission of sound in the performance of emergency work.
(3)	Agricultural activities, exclusive of those involving the ownership or possession of animals or birds. 
(4)	Rail and air transportation and public mass transportation vehicles.
(5)	Church or clock carillons, bells or chimes.
(6)	The emission of sound in the discharge of weapons or in fireworks displays for which a permit has been issued. 
(Ord. No. 81, 8-5-03)
Sec. 9-25. - Noise disturbance prohibited. 
(a)	No person shall make, continue or cause to be made or continued, except as permitted, any noise disturbance, or any noise in excess of the limits for such noise established in this section. 
(1)	Maximum permissible sound levels. With the exception of sound levels elsewhere specifically authorized by this article, Table I sets forth the maximum permissible sound levels allowed at or within the real property boundary of a receiving land use. Any activity or use that produces a sound in excess of such noise levels for a receiving land use shall be deemed a "noise disturbance" and is in violation of this article. 
(2)	Measurement of sound. The measurement of sound or noise shall be made with a sound level meter meeting the standards prescribed by the American National Standards Institute or its successor body. The instrument shall be maintained in calibration and good working order. 
Octave band corrections may be employed in meeting the response specification. A calibration check shall be made of the system at the time of any noise measurement. Measurements recorded shall be taken so as to provide a proper representation of the noise source. The microphone during measurement shall be positioned so as not to create any unnatural enhancement or diminution of the measured noise. A windscreen for the microphone shall be used when required. Traffic, aircraft and other transportation noise sources and other background noises shall not be considered in taking measurements except where such background noise interferes with the primary noise being measured. 
The measurement of all sound levels shall be made as close to the property line of the receiving land use as is practical. The measurement period shall not be less than ten minutes, and the sound levels measured shall not exceed the sound levels set forth in Table I by more than ten percent of any measurement period. 
TABLE I  SOUND LEVELS BY RECEIVING LAND USE 

 
sz;8q   As set forth in the Zoning Ordinance for the City of Lake Park.
sz;8q   Any zoning district containing the letter "R."
sz;8q   Unless otherwise stated in the article.
sz;8q   For any source of sound, which emits a pure tone, the maximum sound level limits set shall be reduced by 5 dBA. 
(b)	The provisions of this section shall not apply to the operation of the following domestic power tools or equipment between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.: 
(1)	Electrical power tools.
(2)	Motor-powered, muffler-equipped lawn, garden, and tree-trimming equipment.
(Ord. No. 81, 8-5-03)
Sec. 9-26. - Specific activities prohibited. 
(a)	Emergency signaling devices. No person shall operate or permit the intentional sounding outdoors of any fire, burglar or civil defense alarm, siren, whistle or similar stationary emergency signaling device except for emergency purposes or for testing. Such devices shall be equipped with an automatic cutoff terminating the signal 15 minutes after activation. 
(b)	Sales by "hawking" or "barking." No person shall offer for sale or sell anything by shouting or outcry within any residential or business area unless authorized by the City of Lake Park. 
(c)	Loading and unloading. No person shall so load, unload, open, close or handle boxes, crates, containers, building materials, refuse, garbage cans, motor vehicles, or similar objects between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day as to create a noise disturbance across a residential real property boundary or within a noise-sensitive area. 
(d)	Vehicle or motorboat repairs and testing. No person shall repair, rebuild, modify or test any motor vehicle, motorcycle or motorboat in such a manner as to create a noise disturbance across a residential real property boundary or outdoors within a noise-sensitive area. 
(e)	Powered model vehicles. No person shall operate or permit the operation of powered model vehicles in a public or private space out-of-doors within 150 feet of a residential or noise-sensitive real property boundary or between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. the following day. 
(f)	Musical instruments and similar devices. No person shall operate, play or permit the operation or playing of any drum, musical instrument or similar device which produces sound in such a manner as to create a noise disturbance across a residential real property boundary or within a noise-sensitive area. 
(Ord. No. 81, 8-5-03)
Sec. 9-27. - Regulation of sound equipment and sound-amplifying equipment. 
(a)	Regulations. Except for activities for which a permit has been issued by the city under this section, no person shall so operate, play or permit the operation or playing of any radio, television, phonograph, amplifier, loudspeaker, or similar device so as to: 
(1)	Create a noise disturbance across a real property boundary or within a noise-sensitive area. However, bars, taverns, lounges, nightclubs, dance halls, game rooms and similar activities which produce a noise that is plainly audible beyond the premises shall be deemed a noise disturbance in violation of this article. 
(2)	Create a noise, which is plainly audible other than to the occupants, when such device is operated in or on a private motor vehicle on a public right-of-way or public space, or in a private boat on public waters. 
(3)	Create a noise, which is plainly audible to any person other than the operator of the device, when operated on a common carrier, or public right-of-way or public place or space. 
(b)	Sound equipment permitted. Except as hereafter provided, no person shall use, operate or cause to be used or operated any radio, record player, tape deck or player, loudspeaker, amplifier, sound track or other device for producing, reproducing, or amplifying sounds, hereinafter referred to as "sound equipment," upon the public streets or in any building or upon any premises, public or private, so as to produce a noise disturbance. However, the following activities where authorized by the City of Lake Park may use sound equipment which produces a sound not to exceed 90 dB(A)'s when measured at a distance of 50 feet from equipment. Where the receiving land is residential such equipment may be used only from 9:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. 
(1)	Public health and safety purposes;
(2)	Fairs, carnivals and similar activities;
(3)	Parades, processions, excursions and associated festivities;
(4)	Outdoor concerts and theatrical performances;
(5)	Outdoor neighborhood functions such as lawn and pool parties, street dances and similar activities; 
(6)	Civic and religious celebrations;
(7)	Recreational and athletic activities.
(c)	Commercial advertising—Sound equipment prohibited. No sound equipment shall be permitted to be used on public streets or public places, or in any building or upon any premises if the sound there from may be plainly audible from any public street or public place when any such use is for commercial advertising purposes or for the purpose of attracting the attention of the public to any building or structure for monetary gain. 
(Ord. No. 81, 8-5-03)
Sec. 9-28. - Motorized vehicles. 
The following provisions shall apply to all motor vehicles requiring registration by the State of Georgia Department of Public Safety: 
(1)	No person shall operate the engine providing motive power, or an auxiliary engine, of a motor vehicle with a manufacturer's gross vehicle weight rating of 10,000 pounds or more for a consecutive period longer than 20 minutes while such vehicle is standing and located within 150 feet of property zoned and used for residential purposes except where such vehicle is standing within a completely enclosed structure. 
This section shall not apply to delivery or pickup vehicles that require the operation of the engine to unload or load their vending loads. 
(2)	No person shall drive or move or cause or knowingly permit to be driven or moved a motor vehicle or combination of vehicles at any time in such a manner as to exceed the following noise limits for the category of motor vehicle shown below. Noise shall be measured at a distance of at least 25 feet (7.5 meters) from the near side of the nearest lane(s) being monitored and at a height of at least four feet above the immediate surrounding surface. 

 
a.	This section shall apply to the total noise from a vehicle or combination of vehicles and shall not be construed as limiting or precluding the enforcement of any other provisions of this article relating to motor vehicle mufflers for noise control. 
b.	No person shall operate or cause to be operated any motor vehicle unless the exhaust system of such vehicle is: 
1.	Free from defects, which affect sound reduction;
2.	Equipped with a muffler or other noise-dissipative device; and
3.	Not equipped with any cutout, bypass or similar device.
(Ord. No. 81, 8-5-03)
Sec. 9-29. - Construction. 
(a)	No person shall operate or permit the operation of any tools or equipment in construction, drilling, demolition work, or in preventive maintenance work for public service utilities: 
(1)	Between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., in any manner which creates a noise disturbance across a residential real property boundary or within a noise-sensitive area. 
(2)	At any other time, in any manner which creates a noise disturbance across a real property boundary or within a noise-sensitive area; for purposes of this subparagraph, a sound level at or across a real property boundary or within a noise-sensitive area in excess of 85 dBA shall be deemed a noise disturbance. 
(b)	The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
(1)	Emergency work or repair work performed by or for governmental entities or public service utilities. 
(2)	The use of domestic power tools or equipment as set forth in section 9-25(b) of this article. 
(3)	Construction equipment that has attached in good operative condition the best noise-attenuating device as recommended by the manufacturer. 
(Ord. No. 81, 8-5-03)
Sec. 9-30. - Animals and birds. 
No person shall own, possess or harbor any animal or fowl which howls, barks or emits audible sounds that are unreasonably loud or disturbing and which are of such character, intensity and duration as to disturb the peace and quiet of the neighborhood. 
For purposes of this article, "barking dog" shall mean a dog that barks, bays, cries, howls or makes any other noise continuously and/or incessantly for a period of ten minutes or barks intermittently for one-half hour or more to the disturbance of any person at any time of day or night regardless of whether the dog is physically situated in or upon private property; provided, however, that a dog shall not be deemed a "barking dog" for purposes of this regulation, if, at the time the dog is barking or making any either noise, a person is trespassing or threatening to trespass upon private property in or upon which the dog is situated or for any other legitimate cause which teased or provoked the dog. 
(Ord. No. 81, 8-5-03)
Sec. 9-31. - Variance. 
(a)	Variance permit. A variance permit to cause or create a noise at sound levels which would otherwise be in violation of this article may be granted by the city council if: 
(1)	Additional time is necessary for the applicant to alter or modify the activity in order to comply with the provisions of this article; or 
(2)	The activity, operation or noise source will be of a temporary duration and cannot be done in a manner that would comply with the provisions of this article; and 
(3)	No reasonable alternative is available to the applicant.
(b)	Conditions. Any permit granted pursuant to this section shall contain thereon all conditions upon which said permit has been granted, including but not limited to the effective date, time of day, location, sound level limit or equipment limitation. Application for such a permit shall be made through the city clerk's office. 
(Ord. No. 81, 8-5-03)
Sec. 9-32. - Jake brakes. 
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any motor vehicle to use an engine brake within the city limits of Lake Park during the hours from 9:00 p.m. until 7:00 a.m., except in case of emergency. For purposes of this section, an "engine brake" is a braking mechanism, which is powered by the exhaust of the vehicle's engine, typically by means of a device to divert the exhaust from the vehicle's engine from its non-braking exhaust system for use in braking. Such a device is commonly referred to as a "Jake brake," and is recognizable by the sudden, loud roar from an engine upon braking when the "Jake brake" is engaged. Observation, upon the braking of a vehicle, of a sudden, loud, engine-centered, braking noise, uncharacteristic when wheel brakes are utilized, shall be prima facie evidence that an engine brake was utilized by the driver of the vehicle. 
(1)	It shall be unlawful to use a retarder (commonly known as a Jake brake or compression brake) on any truck, bus, automobile or other vehicle within the City of Lake Park. 
(2)	This provision shall not restrict the use of a retarder in an emergency.
(3)	Any person violating this section shall be subject to a fine in an amount as set forth in a schedule of fines and penalties adopted by the governing authority, as may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 81, 8-5-03)
Sec. 9-33. - Administration, appeals and penalties. 
(a)	The officer on duty shall implement, administer and enforce the provisions of this article and shall issue citations, orders requiring the abatement of all violations and the revocation of permits issued. 
(b)	Any person aggrieved by a decision or order rendered by the officer on duty, after exhausting all administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal to the Superior Court of Lowndes County. 
(c)	Any person in violation of this article, upon conviction, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to such penalties as are provided by law for other misdemeanors. Each and every day a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 81, 8-5-03)
Sec. 9-34. - Additional remedy; injunction. 
As an additional remedy, the operation or maintenance of any device, instrument, vehicle or machinery in violation of any provision hereof and which causes discomfort or annoyance to reasonable persons of normal sensitiveness or which endangers the comfort, quiet, repose, health or peace of persons in the vicinity shall be deemed, and is declared to be, a public nuisance and may be subject to abatement by a restraining order or injunction issued by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 81, 8-5-03)
State Law reference— Injunctions and restraining orders, OCGA § 9-11-65. 
Cross reference— General penalty, § 1-8. 
Sec. 9-35. - Severability. 
It is the intention of the city council that each provision of this article shall be deemed independent of all other provisions herein, and it is further the intention of the city council that if any provision of this article be declared to be invalid, all other provisions thereof shall remain valid and enforceable. 
(Ord. No. 81, 8-5-03)
Secs. 9-36—9-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - IDENTITY THEFT PREVENTION PROGRAM[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note—Ord. No. 97, § 1, adopted Jan. 6, 2009, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, inclusion herein as Art. III, §§ 9-51—9-62, was at the discretion of the editor.

Sec. 9-51. - Short title. 
This article shall be known as the "Identity Theft Prevention Program." 
(Ord. No. 97, § 1, 1-6-09)
Sec. 9-52. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to comply with 16 CFR § 681.2 in order to detect, prevent and mitigate identity theft by identifying and detecting identity theft red flags and by responding to such red flags in a manner that will prevent identity theft. 
(Ord. No. 97, § 1, 1-6-09)
Sec. 9-53. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, the following definitions apply: 
City means the City of Lake Park. 
Covered account means: 
(1)	An account that a financial institution or creditor offers or maintains, primarily for personal, family, or household purposes, that involves or is designed to permit multiple payments or transactions, such as a credit card account, mortgage loan, automobile loan, margin account, cell phone account, utility account, checking account, or savings account; and 
(2)	Any other account that the financial institution or creditor offers or maintains for which there is a reasonably foreseeable risk to customers or to the safety and soundness of the financial institution or creditor from identity theft, including financial, operational, compliance, reputation, or litigation risks. 
Credit means the right granted by a creditor to a debtor to defer payment of debt or to incur debts and defer its payment or to purchase property or services and defer payment therefor. 
Creditor means any person who regularly extends, renews, or continues credit; any person who regularly arranges for the extension, renewal, or continuation of credit; or any assignee of an original creditor who participates in the decision to extend, renew, or continue credit and includes utility companies and telecommunications companies. 
Customer means a person that has a covered account with a creditor. 
Identity theft means a fraud committed or attempted using identifying information of another person without authority. 
Person means a natural person, a corporation, government or governmental subdivision or agency, trust, estate, partnership, cooperative, or association. 
Personal identifying information means a person's credit card account information, debit card information bank account information and drivers' license information and for a natural person includes their social security number, mother's birth name, and date of birth. 
Red flag means a pattern, practice, or specific activity that indicates the possible existence of identity theft. 
Service provider means a person that provides a service directly to the city. 
(Ord. No. 97, § 1, 1-6-09)
Sec. 9-54. - Findings. 
(a)	The city is a creditor pursuant to 16 CFR § 681.2 due to its provision or maintenance of covered accounts for which payment is made in arrears. 
(b)	Covered accounts offered to customers for the provision of city services include water and garbage pickup. 
(c)	The processes of opening a new covered account, restoring an existing covered account and making payments on such accounts have been identified as potential processes in which identity theft could occur. 
(d)	The city limits access to personal identifying information to those employees responsible for or otherwise involved in opening or restoring covered accounts or accepting payment for use of covered accounts. Information provided to such employees is entered directly into the city's computer system and is not otherwise recorded. 
(e)	The city determines that there is a low risk of identity theft occurring in the following ways: 
(1)	Use by an applicant of another person's personal identifying information to establish a new covered account; 
(2)	Use of a previous customer's personal identifying information by another person in an effort to have service restored in the previous customer's name; 
(3)	Use of another person's credit card, bank account, or other method of payment by a customer to pay such customer's covered account or accounts; 
(4)	Use by a customer desiring to restore such customer's covered account of another person's credit card, bank account, or other method of payment. 
(Ord. No. 97, § 1, 1-6-09)
Sec. 9-55. - Process of establishing a covered account. 
(a)	As a precondition to opening a covered account in the city, each applicant shall provide the city with personal identifying information of the customer along with a valid government issued identification card containing a photograph of the customer or, for customers who are not natural persons, a photograph of the customer's agent opening the account. Such information shall be entered directly into the city's computer system and shall not otherwise be recorded. 
(b)	Each account shall be assigned an account number which shall be unique to that account.
(Ord. No. 97, § 1, 1-6-09)
Sec. 9-56. - Access to covered account information. 
(a)	Access to customer accounts shall be password protected and shall be limited to authorized city personnel. 
(b)	Such password(s) shall be changed by the city clerk on a regular basis, shall be at least eight characters in length and shall contain letters, numbers and symbols. 
(c)	Any unauthorized access to or other breach of customer accounts is to be reported immediately to the city council and the password changed immediately. 
(d)	Personal identifying information included in customer accounts is considered confidential and any request or demand for such information shall be immediately forwarded to the city council and the city attorney. 
(Ord. No. 97, § 1, 1-6-09)
Sec. 9-57. - Credit card payments. 
(a)	In the event that credit card payments that are made over the Internet are processed through a third party service provider, such third party service provider shall certify that it has an adequate identity theft prevention program in place that is applicable to such payments. 
(b)	All credit card payments made over the telephone or the city's website shall be entered directly into the customer's account information in the computer data base. 
(c)	Account statements and receipts for covered accounts shall include only the last four digits of the credit or debit card or the bank account used for payment of the covered account. 
(Ord. No. 97, § 1, 1-6-09)
Sec. 9-58. - Sources and types of red flags. 
All employees responsible for or involved in the process of opening a covered account, restoring a covered account or accepting payment for a covered account shall check for red flags as indicators of possible identity theft and such red flags may include: 
(1)	Alerts from consumer reporting agencies, fraud detection agencies or service providers. Examples of alerts include but are not limited to: 
a.	A fraud or active duty alert that is included with a consumer report;
b.	A notice of credit freeze in response to a request for a consumer report;
c.	A notice of address discrepancy provided by a consumer reporting agency;
d.	Indications of a pattern of activity in a consumer report that is inconsistent with the history and usual pattern of activity of an applicant or customer, such as: 
1.	A recent and significant increase in the volume of inquiries;
2.	An unusual number of recently established credit relationships;
3.	A material change in the use of credit, especially with respect to recently established credit relationships; or 
4.	An account that was closed for cause or identified for abuse of account privileges by a financial institution or creditor. 
(2)	Suspicious documents. Examples of suspicious documents include: 
a.	Documents provided for identification that appear to be altered or forged;
b.	Identification on which the photograph or physical description is inconsistent with the appearance of the applicant or customer; 
c.	Identification on which the information is inconsistent with information provided by the applicant or customer; 
d.	Identification on which the information is inconsistent with readily accessible information that is on file with the financial institution or creditor, such as a signature card or a recent check; or 
e.	An application that appears to have been altered or forged, or appears to have been destroyed and reassembled. 
(3)	Suspicious personal identification, such as suspicious address change. Examples of suspicious identifying information include: 
a.	Personal identifying information that is inconsistent with external information sources used by the financial institution or creditor. For example: 
1.	The address does not match any address in the consumer report; or
2.	The Social Security Number (SSN) has not been issued, or is listed on the Social Security Administration's Death Master File. 
b.	Personal identifying information provided by the customer is not consistent with other personal identifying information provided by the customer, such as a lack of correlation between the SSN range and date of birth. 
c.	Personal identifying information or a phone number or address, is associated with known fraudulent applications or activities as indicated by internal or third-party sources used by the financial institution or creditor. 
d.	Other information provided, such as fictitious mailing address, mail drop addresses, jail addresses, invalid phone numbers, pager numbers or answering services, is associated with fraudulent activity. 
e.	The SSN provided is the same as that submitted by other applicants or customers.
f.	The address or telephone number provided is the same as or similar to the account number or telephone number submitted by an unusually large number of applicants or customers. 
g.	The applicant or customer fails to provide all required personal identifying information on an application or in response to notification that the application is incomplete. 
h.	Personal identifying information is not consistent with personal identifying information that is on file with the financial institution or creditor. 
i.	The applicant or customer cannot provide authenticating information beyond that which generally would be available from a wallet or consumer report. 
(4)	Unusual use of or suspicious activity relating to a covered account. Examples of suspicious activity include: 
a.	Shortly following the notice of a change of address for an account, city receives a request for the addition of authorized users on the account. 
b.	A new revolving credit account is used in a manner commonly associated with known patterns of fraud patterns. For example: 
1.	The customer fails to make the first payment or makes an initial payment but no subsequent payments. 
c.	An account is used in a manner that is not consistent with established patterns of activity on the account. There is, for example: 
1.	Nonpayment when there is no history of late or missed payments;
2.	A material change in purchasing or spending patterns.
d.	An account that has been inactive for a long period of time is used (taking into consideration the type of account, the expected pattern of usage and other relevant factors). 
e.	Mail sent to the customer is returned repeatedly as undeliverable although transactions continue to be conducted in connection with the customer's account. 
f.	The city is notified that the customer is not receiving paper account statements.
g.	The city is notified of unauthorized charges or transactions in connection with a customer's account. 
h.	The city is notified by a customer, law enforcement or another person that it has opened a fraudulent account for a person engaged in identity theft. 
(5)	Notice from customers, law enforcement, victims or other reliable sources regarding possible identity theft or phishing relating to covered accounts. 
(Ord. No. 97, § 1, 1-6-09)
Sec. 9-59. - Prevention and mitigation of identity theft. 
(a)	In the event that any city employee responsible for or involved in restoring an existing covered account or accepting payment for a covered account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible identity theft with respect to existing covered accounts, such employee shall use his or her discretion to determine whether such red flags or combination of red flags suggests a threat of identity theft. If, in his or her discretion, such employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity theft is likely or probable, such employee shall immediately report such red flags to the city clerk. If, in his or her discretion, such employee deems that identity theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to reconcile red flags, the employee shall convey this information to city clerk, who may in his or her discretion determine that no further action is necessary. If the city clerk, in his or her discretion, determines that further action is necessary, a city employee shall perform one or more of the following responses, as determined to be appropriate by the city clerk: 
(1)	Contact the customer;
(2)	Make the following changes to the account if, after contacting the customer, it is apparent that someone other than the customer has accessed the customer's covered account: 
a.	Change any account numbers, passwords, security codes, or other security devices that permit access to an account; or 
b.	Close the account;
(3)	Cease attempts to collect additional charges from the customer and decline to sell the customer's account to a debt collector in the event that the customer's account has been access without authorization and such access has caused additional charges to accrue; 
(4)	Notify a debt collector within 24 hours of the discovery of likely or probable identity theft relating to a customer account that has been sold to such debt collector in the event that a customer's account has been sold to a debt collector prior to the discovery of the likelihood or probability of identity theft relating to such account; 
(5)	Notify law enforcement, in the event that someone other than the customer has accessed the customer's account causing additional charges to accrue or accessing personal identifying information; or 
(6)	Take other appropriate action to prevent or mitigate identity theft.
(b)	In the event that any city employee responsible for or involved in opening a new covered account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible identity theft with respect to an application for a new account, such employee shall use his or her discretion to determine whether such red flag or combination of red flags suggests a threat of identity theft. If, in his or her discretion, such employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity theft is likely or probable, such employee shall immediately report such red flags to the city clerk. If, in his or her discretion, such employee deems that identity theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to reconcile red flags, the employee shall convey this information to the city clerk, who may in his or her discretion determine that no further action is necessary. If the city clerk in his or her discretion determines that further action is necessary, a city employee shall perform one or more of the following responses, as determined to be appropriate by the city clerk: 
(1)	Request additional identifying information from the applicant;
(2)	Deny the application for the new account;
(3)	Notify law enforcement of possible identity theft; or
(4)	Take other appropriate action to prevent or mitigate identity theft.
(Ord. No. 97, § 1, 1-6-09)
Sec. 9-60. - Updating the program. 
The city council shall annually review and, as deemed necessary by the council, update the identity theft prevention program along with any relevant red flags in order to reflect changes in risks to customers or to the safety and soundness of the city and its covered accounts from identity theft. In so doing, the city council shall consider the following factors and exercise its discretion in amending the program: 
(1)	The city's experiences with identity theft;
(2)	Updates in methods of identity theft;
(3)	Updates in customary methods used to detect, prevent, and mitigate identity theft;
(4)	Updates in the types of accounts that the city offers or maintains; and
(5)	Updates in service provider arrangements.
(Ord. No. 97, § 1, 1-6-09)
Sec. 9-61. - Program administration. 
The city clerk is responsible for oversight of the program and for program implementation. The city council is responsible for reviewing reports prepared by staff regarding compliance with red flag requirements and with making material changes to the program, as necessary in the opinion of the city clerk, to address changing identity theft risks and to identify new or discontinued types of covered accounts. Any recommended material changes to the program shall be submitted to the city council for consideration by the council. 
(1)	The city clerk will report to the city council at least annually, on compliance with the red flag requirements. The report will address material matters related to the program and evaluate issues such as: 
a.	The effectiveness of the policies and procedures of city in addressing the risk of identity theft in connection with the opening of covered accounts and with respect to existing covered accounts; 
b.	Service provider arrangements;
c.	Significant incidents involving identity theft and management's response; and
d.	Recommendations for material changes to the program.
(2)	The city clerk is responsible for providing training to all employees responsible for or involved in opening a new covered account, restoring an existing covered account or accepting payment for a covered account with respect to the implementation and requirements of the identity theft prevention program. The city clerk shall exercise his or her discretion in determining the amount and substance of training necessary. 
(Ord. No. 97, § 1, 1-6-09)
Sec. 9-62. - Outside service providers. 
In the event that the city engages a service provider to perform an activity in connection with one or more covered accounts the city clerk shall exercise his or her discretion in reviewing such arrangements in order to ensure, to the best of his or her ability, that the service provider's activities are conducted in accordance with policies and procedures, agreed upon by contract, that are designed to detect any red flags that may arise in the performance of the service provider's activities and take appropriate steps to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(Ord. No. 97, § 1, 1-6-09)
Chapter 10 - PERSONNEL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Personnel administration, §§ 3.30, 3.31.
Cross reference— Administration generally, Ch. 2.
State Law reference— Codes of ethics, OCGA § 45-10-1 et seq.; employees' retirement system of Georgia, OCGA § 47-2-1 et seq.; joint municipal employees benefit system, OCGA § 47-5-1 et seq.; social security coverage for employees of the state and political subdivisions of the state, OCGA § 47-18-1 et seq.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Personnel policy manual. 
The personnel policy manual of July 16, 1986, is hereby adopted. Copies are on file in the city clerk's office. 
(Res. of 7-16-86)
Sec. 10-2. - Employee retirement fund. 
The employee retirement fund is hereby adopted. Copies are on file in the city clerk's office. 
(Ord. No. 61, 9-3-91)
Secs. 10-3—10-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - POLICE DEPARTMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Fire department, § 6.5-21 et seq.

Sec. 10-20. - Chief—Appointment; head of the department. 
The council shall appoint a chief of police who shall serve as the chief executive of the police department under the general supervision and guidance of the governing body. 
(Ord. No. 8, § 1, 1-8-74)
Sec. 10-21. - Same—Duties. 
The chief of police shall faithfully discharge the duties of the enforcement of the ordinances of the city, and the laws of the United States of America and the state, applicable within the city, preserve law and order, and cause persons charged with such offenses and violations to be brought to the municipal court. 
(Ord. No. 8, § 2, 1-8-74)
Sec. 10-22. - Same—Records. 
The chief of police shall execute and maintain an accurate record of each offense or violation brought to his attention and shall furnish one copy of same to the clerk of the municipal court; and shall maintain a record of all fines charged and/or collected for all misdemeanors, violations, and unlawful acts for which collections are in order, and same shall be reported promptly to the clerk of the municipal court. 
(Ord. No. 8, § 3, 1-8-74)
Sec. 10-23. - Same—Term of office. 
The appointment and term of office for the chief of police shall coincide with that of the elected officials making such appointment. 
(Ord. No. 8, § 6, 1-8-74)
Sec. 10-24. - Same—Compensation. 
The chief of police shall be paid as remuneration for his services a sum as set from time to time by council as circumstances require and finances permit. Other proven expenses of office shall be borne by the city upon presentation to and approval of the mayor and council. Any expense in excess of $25.00 will require prior approval. 
(Ord. No. 8, § 5, 1-8-74; Ord. of 1-2-75, § 1; Ord. No. 8 Amd. 2, § 1, 3-2-82)
Sec. 10-25. - Same—Appointment of police officers. 
The chief of police shall have the authority with the approval of the council to appoint police officers and/or special deputies for the preservation of peace and order, and the enforcement of the laws, national, state and local. 
(Ord. No. 8, § 4, 1-8-74)
Chapter 11 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC WAYS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Powers as to streets, §§ 6.17, 7.10, 7.13, 7.21.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 11-1. - Pavement cut and repair—Permit required, fee. 
No person shall cut, remove or repair any part of the surface of any street, sidewalk or other public way, or tunnel under the same, in the city unless such person has applied for and received a permit from the city. Such application shall be accompanied by a permit fee as provided in the fee schedule approved by the city council, as amended from time to time. 
Sec. 11-2. - Same—Performance bond. 
The applicant, before receiving a permit required under section 11-1, must present a bond guaranteeing satisfactory performance in an amount to be determined by the city clerk, and such bond must be signed by at least one corporate surety licensed to execute bonds in the state, approved by the city clerk. 
Sec. 11-3. - Same—Specifications; approval. 
The actual work in cutting, removing and repairing the surface or supporting ground of any street, sidewalk or other public way surfaces must be done pursuant to city specifications, and subject to inspection and approval by the city. 
Sec. 11-4. - Street numbers. 
(a)	Starting place. On all streets running north and south, the numbers shall start at 100 at Cotton Avenue and increase therefrom north and south at the rate of 100 numbers to each block or space between streets and beginning at each consecutive 100 at each street intersection. On all streets running east and west, the numbers shall start at 100 at Main Street and increase therefrom east and west at the rate of 100 numbers to each block and so on to the city limits. 
(b)	Even and odd. The even numbers shall be placed on the north and east sides of the streets and the odd numbers on the south and west sides. 
(c)	When new numbers needed. If the street number assigned to or used or displayed upon any structure is or becomes erroneous due to resubdivision of lots, opening of new streets or any other cause, the inspections department shall assign a new number to such structure in accordance with subsection (a) and notify the owner and occupant of such structure of the error in the number used and the new number assigned. 
(d)	Marking required. All persons owning or occupying structures now erected within the city limits must place thereon the proper identifying street number of said structure so that the same may be read from the street. Numbers may be placed upon the structure, on a mailbox, on the curb or on a marker in front of said structure. 
(e)	Compliance required. It shall be the duty of the inspections department to assign a proper street number to each structure within the city in accordance with the provision of this section and it shall be unlawful for any property owner, after being notified of the number assigned to his property, pursuant to this section, to have posted or displayed upon his property a number different from the number assigned for said property. 
(Ord. No. 37, §§ 1—4, 7-5-83)
Secs. 11-5—11-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note—Ord. No. 96, § 1, adopted Jan. 6, 2009, set out provisions intended for a new chapter. For purposes of classification, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as Art. II, §§ 11-21—11-30.

Sec. 11-21. - Intent and purpose. 
The City of Lake Park (the "city") is vitally concerned with the use, construction within, and occupancy of all rights-of-way in the city as such rights-of-way are a valuable and limited resource which must be utilized to promote the public health, safety, welfare, economic development of the city and to protect public work infrastructure. Therefore, the city, under the authority of the Laws and Constitution of the State of Georgia, including but not limited to Article 9, Section 1, paragraphs 2 and 3 of the Georgia Constitution, OCGA §§ 36-1-20 and 32-4-42(6), has adopted this article for the purpose of regulating public and private entities which use the city rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 96, § 1, 1-6-09)
Sec. 11-22. - Scope. 
The provisions of this article shall apply to all utilities and facilities occupying the rights-of-way as provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 96, § 1, 1-6-09)
Sec. 11-23. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations have the meanings set forth herein. The words "shall" and "will" are mandatory and "may" is permissive. Words not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning. References hereafter to "sections" are, unless otherwise specified, references to sections in this article. Defined terms remain defined terms whether or not capitalized. 
City means the City of Lake Park, Georgia. 
City engineer means the City Engineer of the City of Lake Park, Georgia, or his or her designee. 
Codified ordinances means the codified ordinances of the City of Lake Park, Georgia. 
Construct means, but shall not be limited to, dig, bore, tunnel, trench, excavate, obstruct, install or remove signs, or facilities, other than landscaping or ornamental plantings, in, on, above, within, over, below, under, or through any part of the rights-of-way. Construct shall also include the act of opening and/or cutting into the surface of any paved or improved surface that is any part of the right-of-way. 
Construction means, but shall not be limited to, the act or process of digging, boring, tunneling, trenching, excavating, obstructing, installing or removing signs or facilities, other than landscaping or ornamental plantings, in, on, above, within, over, below, under, or through any part of the rights-of-way. Construction shall also include the act of opening, boring and/or cutting into the surface of any part of the right-of-way. 
Emergency means a condition that poses a clear and immediate danger to life, health, or safety of a person, or of significant damage or loss of real or personal property. 
Facility or facilities means any tangible thing, including but not limited to pipes, mains, conduits, cables, wires, poles, towers, traffic and other signals, and other equipment, appurtenances, appliances and future technology of any utility in, on, along, over, or under any part of the rights-of-way within the city. 
Facilities representative(s) means the specifically identified agent(s)/employee(s) of a utility who are authorized to direct field activities of that utility and serve as official notice agent(s) for facilities related information. Utility shall be required to make sure at least one of its facilities representative available at all times to receive notice of, and immediately direct response to, facilities related emergencies or situations. 
FCC means the Federal Communications Commission or any successor thereto. 
Permit means an authorization which grants permission to conduct specific regulated activities on, in, over, under or within any public right-of-way, and which may be subject to conditions specified in a written agreement with the city or in a related provision of this Code of Ordinances. 
Right(s)-of-way means the surface and space in, on, above, within, over, below, under or through any real property in which the city has an interest in law or equity, whether held in fee, or other estate or interest, or as a trustee for the public, including, but not limited to any public street, boulevard, road, highway, freeway, lane, alley, court, sidewalk, parkway, or any other place, area, or real property owned by or under the legal or equitable control of the city, now or hereafter, that consistent with the purposes for which it was dedicated, may be used for the purposes of constructing, operating, repairing or replacing facilities. 
Service(s) means the offering of any service by a utility for a fee directly to the public, or to such classes of users as to be effectively available directly to the public, or alternatively, the provision of any service by a utility between two or more points for a proprietary purpose to a class of users other than the general public. 
Service agreement means a valid license agreement, service agreement, franchise agreement, or operating agreement issued by the city or state pursuant to law and accepted by a utility or entered into by and between the city and a utility, which allows such utility to operate or provide service within the geographic limits of the city. 
Street or streets means the surface of, as well as the spaces above and below, any and all the streets, alleys, avenues, roads, bridges, tunnels and public places of the city within the corporate limits of the city, as the same now exist or may be hereafter extended or altered, and any location thereon, thereover or thereunder, and any portion thereof. 
Transfer means the disposal by the utility, directly or indirectly, by gift, assignment, sale, merger, consolidation, or otherwise, of more than 50 percent at one time of the ownership or controlling interest in the facilities, or of more than 50 percent cumulatively over the term of a written approval of registration of such interests to a corporation, partnership, limited partnership, trust, or association, or person or group of persons acting in concert. 
Unused facilities means facilities located in the rights-of-way which have remained unused for 12 months and for which the utility is unable to provide the city with a plan detailing the procedure by which the utility intends to begin actively using such facilities within the next 12 months, or that it has a potential purchaser or user of the facilities who will be actively using the facilities within the next 12 months, or, that the availability of such facilities is required by the utility to adequately and efficiently operate its facilities. 
Utility or utilities means all privately, publicly, or cooperatively owned systems for producing, transmitting, or distributing communication, data, information, telecommunication, cable television, video services, power, electricity, light, heat, gas, oil, crude products, water/sewer, steam, fire and police signals, traffic control devices, and street lighting systems, and housing or conduit for any of the foregoing, which directly or indirectly serve the public or any part thereof. The term "utility" may also be used to refer to the owner, operator, utility, service, contractor or subcontractor, or any agent thereof, of any above-described utility or utility facility. 
(Ord. No. 96, § 1, 1-6-09)
Sec. 11-24. - Utility registration. 
(a)	Registration required. Each utility who occupies, uses or has facilities in the rights-of-way at the time of passage of this article, including by lease, sublease or assignment, to operate facilities located in the rights-of-way, unless specifically exempted by state or federal law or this Code, shall file a registration statement with the city within 90 days of the effective date of this article. 
(b)	Registration procedure. The registration information provided to the city shall be on a form approved by the city and include, but not be limited to: 
(1)	The name, legal status (i.e. partnership, corporation, etc.), street address, email address, and telephone and facsimile numbers of the utility filing the registration statement (the "registrant"). If the registrant is not the owner of the facility in the right-of-way, the registration shall include the name, street address, email address if applicable, and telephone and facsimile numbers of the owner; 
(2)	The name, street address, email address if applicable and telephone and facsimile numbers of one or more facilities representative(s). Current information regarding how to contact the facilities representative(s) in an emergency shall be provided at the time of filing a registration and shall be updated as necessary to assure accurate contact information is available to the city at all times; 
(3)	A copy, if requested, of the utility's certificate of authority (or other acceptable evidence of authority to operate) from the Georgia Public Service Commission and/or the FCC and any other similar approvals, permits, or agreements; 
(4)	A copy, if requested, of the service agreement, if applicable or other legal instrument that authorizes the utility to use or occupy the right-of-way for the purpose described in the registration. 
(c)	Incomplete registration. If a registration is incomplete, the city engineer shall notify the registrant and shall provide a reasonable period of time in which to complete the registration. If a registration is complete, the city engineer shall so notify the utility in writing. 
(d)	Acceptance of the registration. Acceptance of the registration shall not convey title in the rights-of-way. Acceptance of the registration is only the nonexclusive, limited right to occupy rights-of-way in the city for the limited purposes stated in the acceptance. Acceptance of the registration does not excuse a utility from obtaining permits required by city ordinances nor from obtaining appropriate access or pole attachment agreements before using the facilities of others, including the city. Acceptance of the registration does not excuse a utility from notifying the city of construction as required herein. 
(e)	Facilities in place without registration. Beginning one year after the effective date of this article, any facilities or part of a facility found in a right-of-way for which registration is required but has not been obtained unless specifically exempted by law, and for which no valid service agreement exists with the city, may be deemed to be a nuisance and an unauthorized use of the rights-of-way. The city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity, including, but not limited to abating the nuisance; taking possession of the facilities, evicting the utility from the right-of-way; prosecuting the violator; and/or any other remedy provided by city ordinance or otherwise allowed in law or in equity. 
(Ord. No. 96, § 1, 1-6-09)
Sec. 11-25. - Construction permits. 
(a)	Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any utility to excavate or to construct, install, maintain, renew, remove or relocate facilities in, on, along, over or under the public roads of the city without a utility permit from the office of the city engineer in accordance with the terms of this article. 
(b)	Permit procedure. Utility permits shall be obtained from the office of the city clerk (or such other person as the city clerk may designate) upon application made on forms prescribed by the city engineer. The written application shall include the following: 
(1)	The name and address of the utility;
(2)	The nature, extent, and location of any work proposed to be done, along with satisfactory plans as attachments showing in detail the location of the proposed Facility or operations as described in the permit application. The plans shall show the size or capacity of facilities to be installed; their relationship to street features such as right-of-way lines, pavement edge, structures, etc., horizontal and vertical clearance to critical elements of the roadway and any other information necessary to evaluate the impact on the street and its operation; 
(3)	The name and address of the person or firm who is to do such work;
(4)	The name, street address, email address if applicable and telephone and facsimile numbers of one or more facilities representative(s); 
(5)	The projected dates for the work to be started and finished;
(6)	An indemnity bond or other acceptable security in an amount to be set by the city to pay any damages to any part of the city road system or other city property or to any city employee or member of the public caused by activity or work of the utility performed under authority of the permit issued; 
(7)	A copy, if requested, of the registrant's certificate of authority (or other acceptable evidence of authority to operate) from the Georgia Public Service Commission and/or the FCC and any other similar approvals, permits, or agreements; and 
(8)	A copy, if requested, of the service agreement, if applicable or other legal instrument that authorizes the utility to use or occupy the right-of-way for the purpose described in the application. 
(c)	Permit fees. Fees shall be determined by the city engineer, subject to the approval by resolution of the city council. A fee schedule shall be available at the offices of the city engineer and the city clerk and open for public inspection. 
(d)	Issuance of permit. If the city engineer determines the applicant has satisfied the following requirements, the city engineer may issue a permit. 
(1)	Whether issuing of the approval will be consistent with this article; and
(2)	Whether applicant has submitted a complete application and has secured all certificates and other authorizations required by law, if applicable, in order to construct facilities in the manner proposed by the applicant; and 
(3)	The impact on safety, visual quality of the streets, traffic flow, and other users of the right-of-way and the difficulty and length of time of the project, construction or maintenance. 
(e)	Emergency situations. 
(1)	Each utility shall, as soon as reasonably practicable, notify the city engineer of any event regarding its facilities which it considers to be an emergency. The utility may proceed to take whatever actions are necessary in order to respond to the emergency. A utility who engages in an emergency excavation shall take all reasonable precautions to avoid or minimize damage to any existing facilities. 
(2)	In the event that the city becomes aware of an emergency regarding utility facilities, the city may attempt to contact the affected utility or facilities representative. The city may take whatever action it deems necessary in order to respond to the emergency, including cut or move any of the wires, cables, amplifiers, appliances, or other parts of the facilities. The city shall not incur any liability to the utility, for such emergency actions, and the cost of such shall be paid by each utility affected by the emergency. 
(f)	Effective period of permit. 
(1)	Each permit shall have a set commencement and expiration date based on information provided in the applicant's permit application. 
(2)	The permit shall remain in place construction is completed or until its expiration date unless the utility is in default. The city engineer may give written notice of default to a utility if it is determined that a utility has: 
a.	Violated any provision or requirement of the issuance or acceptance of a permit application or any law of the city, state, or federal government; 
b.	Attempted to evade any provision or requirement of this article;
c.	Practiced any fraud or deceit upon the city; or
d.	Made a material misrepresentation or omission of fact in its permit application.
(g)	Cancellation for cause. If a utility fails to cure a default within 20 working days after such notice is provided to the utility by the city, then such default shall be a material breach and city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity to terminate the permit. If the city engineer decides there is cause or reason to terminate, the following procedure shall be followed: 
(1)	City shall serve a utility with a written notice of the reason or cause for proposed termination and shall allow a utility a minimum of 15 calendar days to cure its breach. 
(2)	If the utility fails to cure within 15 calendar days, the city may declare the permit terminated. 
(h)	Expiration of permit. If work is not begun within six months of the date of issuance, the permit will automatically expire. 
(Ord. No. 96, § 1, 1-6-09)
Sec. 11-26. - Required minimum standards. 
(a)	Utility accommodation manual adopted. The 1988 Utility Accommodation Policy and Standards manual, including all references contained therein to codes, rules, regulations, schedules, forms and appendix items, except Appendix B (Permit Forms and Supporting Documents), promulgated by the State of Georgia Department of Transportation, as may be amended from time to time is hereby adopted by reference and incorporated in the article as if fully set forth herein, subject to the amendments and modification contained in this article. A copy of the manual shall be maintained at the offices of the city engineer or his designee and open for public inspection. Any conflicts between the provisions of this article and the manual shall be resolved in favor of the manual. References to state personnel, agencies, and fees shall be interpreted, where required, as meaning the City of Valdosta municipal equivalents. 
(b)	Protection of traffic and roadway. Unless specifically in the permit, no utility may occupy the city rights-of-way unless sufficient space is available so that the free flow and safety of traffic and other capacity considerations are not unduly impaired and the installation does not prevent the department from reasonably maintaining the streets, structures, traffic control devices and other appurtenant facilities, and further provided that maintenance and operations of the facilities do not jeopardize the traffic, street structure, other users of the right-of-way or the right-of-way itself. 
(c)	Grading. If the grades or lines of any street within the city right-of-way are changed at any time by the city during the term of the permit and this change involves an area in which the utility's facilities are located, then the utility shall, at its own cost and expense and upon the request of the city upon reasonable notice, protect or promptly alter or relocate the facilities, or any part thereof, so as to conform with such new grades or lines. In the event the utility refuses or neglects to so protect, alter, or relocate all or part of the facilities, the city shall have the right to break through, remove, alter, or relocated all or any part of the facilities without any liability to the utility and the utility shall pay to the city the costs incurred in connection with such breaking through, removal, alteration, or relocation. 
(d)	Installation of poles and other wireholding structures and relocation. Unless otherwise provided in a valid service agreement, no placement of any pole or wireholding structure of the utility is to be considered a vested interest in the right-of-way, and such poles or structures are to be removed, relocated underground, or modified by the utility at its own expense whenever the city determines that the public convenience would be enhanced thereby. The facilities shall be so located and installed as to cause minimum interference with the rights and convenience of property owners. 
(e)	As provided in OCGA § 25-9-6 (the Georgia Utility Facility Protection Act) and other applicable state law currently in place or as amended, no Utility shall commence, perform, or engage in blasting or in excavating with mechanized excavating facilities unless and until the utility planning the blasting or excavating has given 48 hours' notice by submitting a locate request to the utility protection center, beginning the next working day after such notice is provided, excluding hours during days other than working days. 
(Ord. No. 96, § 1, 1-6-09)
Sec. 11-27. - Restoration of property. 
(a)	Each utility shall be responsible for the cost of repairing any facilities in the rights-of-way and adjoining property or other facilities which it or its facilities damage. 
(b)	A utility shall be liable, at its own cost and expense, to replace, restore or repair, any street, facilities or property or structure thereon, thereunder, thereover or adjacent thereto that may become disturbed or damaged as a result of the construction or installation, operation, upgrade, repair or removal of facilities to a condition as good as or better than its condition before the work performed by the utility that caused such disturbance or damage. If the utility does not commence such replacement or repair after 20 working days following written notice from the city, the city or the owner of the affected structure or property may make such replacement or repair and the utility shall pay the reasonable and actual cost of the same. 
(Ord. No. 96, § 1, 1-6-09)
Sec. 11-28. - Inspection. 
(a)	The utility shall make the construction site available to the city engineer and to all others as authorized by law for inspection at all reasonable times during the execution and upon completion of the construction. 
(b)	At any time, including the time of inspection, the city engineer may order the immediate cessation of any work which poses a serious threat to the health, safety, or welfare of the public, violates any law, or which violates the terms and conditions of the permit and/or this article or issue an order to correct work which does not conform to the permit and/or applicable standards, conditions or codes. 
(c)	When the construction under any permit is completed, the utility shall notify the city. 
(Ord. No. 96, § 1, 1-6-09)
Sec. 11-29. - Additional permits required. 
The utility shall obtain all construction, building or other permits or approvals as according to city ordinance, state or federal law. In addition, a permittee shall comply with all requirements of laws, shall complete work in a way as to not cause any unnecessary or unauthorized obstructions of sidewalks, streets, waterways or railways, and is responsible for all work done in the rights-of-way regardless of who performs the work. No rights-of-way obstruction or excavation may be performed when seasonally prohibited or when conditions are unreasonable for such work, except in the case of an emergency as outlined in section 11-25(e). 
(Ord. No. 96, § 1, 1-6-09)
Sec. 11-30. - Penalties. 
Every utility convicted of a violation of any provision of this article shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 per violation. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
(Ord. No. 96, § 1, 1-6-09)
Chapter 12 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Taxation, § 6.10 et seq.
Cross reference— Occupational licenses and taxes, Ch. 8.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note—Ord. No. 76, § 1, adopted Aug. 3, 1999, repealed the former §§ 12-1—12-6, and enacted a new Art. I as set out herein. The former sections pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 15, §§ 1—3, 5—7, 2-5-74; Ord. of 10-29-74, § 1; Ord. No. 15 Amd. 2, 7-2-85.

Sec. 12-1. - Administration. 
(a)	Except as otherwise provided in this article, the city clerk (ex-officio treasurer, tax receiver, tax collector) shall be charged with the duty to administer the imposition, collection and enforcement of all taxes and special assessments levied or imposed by the city in accordance with the administrative procedures hereinafter set forth. To the extent this article fails to provide a designated procedure, said officer shall act in the manner established, if any, for county tax collectors under applicable state law. 
(b)	In determining the fair market value of property within its taxing jurisdiction, the city shall use the fair market value as finally determined for the property for county ad valorem tax purposes. 
(c)	Following adoption of its current fiscal year budget, the mayor and council shall, by resolution, adopt a millage rate upon which property subject to ad valorem tax will be billed. Prior to adoption of said millage rate, the governing body shall publish the notice of proposed ad valorem tax rate as required by OCGA § 48-5-32. Millage rates shall be calculated using 40 percent of the assessed fair market value of the property upon which the tax is levied. 
(d)	The city clerk shall cause a bill to be sent to all taxpayers at the address last shown on the County Tax Digest by regular U.S. Mail, with adequate postage thereon; provided, however, failure by the taxpayer to receive a bill shall not constitute grounds for non-payment or late payment of the tax. The bill shall state the location or description of the property taxed, the fair market value of the property (100%) and its value (40% of fair market value), and the amount of taxable due thereon. The bill shall also state due date after which taxes shall be in default. The bill may also contain such additional information as allowed by law or authorized by the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 76, § 1, 8-3-99)
Sec. 12-2. - Due date; payment; interest on past due taxes. 
(a)	All ad valorem taxes shall be due and payable in full within 60 days after notice, unless the due date falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, in which case it shall be postponed until the first day following which is not a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday. Supplemental ad valorem taxes and special assessments shall be due and payable on the date set forth in the ordinance imposing the tax or assessment. 
(b)	All taxes and assessments imposed by the city shall be paid in full in legal tender of the United States; except where specially authorized by law or ordinance of the mayor and council, no partial payments shall be accepted. 
(c)	Taxes and special assessments shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month from the date the tax or assessment is due until the date the tax or assessment is paid. For purposes of this section, any period of less than one month shall be considered to be one full month. The city clerk may waive the collection of any interest, in whole or in part, due the city on unpaid taxes or assessments whenever or to the extent that he or she reasonably determines that the delay in payment was attributable to the action or inaction of his or her department. 
(Ord. No. 76, § 1, 8-3-99)
Sec. 12-3. - Penalties. 
(a)	All penalties imposed by this article are part of the tax or assessment and are to be collected as such. The proceedings to collect the original tax, the tax constituted from penalties imposed, and the interest shall all be conducted in the same manner. Any provision of law for criminal prosecution shall not operate to relieve any taxpayer of any tax, penalty, or interest imposed by this article. 
(b)	In any instance in which any taxpayer fails to pay a tax or assessment within 90 days of the due date, he shall pay a penalty of ten percent of the amount of the tax due, together with interest as specified herein. 
(c)	The mayor and council may waive, in whole or in part, the collection of any amount due as a penalty under this article to the extent said body finds and determines the default giving rise to the penalty was due to reasonable cause and not due to willful neglect or disregard of this article. 
(Ord. No. 76, § 1, 8-3-99)
Sec. 12-4. - Executions on delinquent taxes and assessments. 
(a)	As soon as the last day for the payment of taxes and assessments has arrived, the city clerk shall notify in writing the taxpayer of the fact that the taxes have not been paid and that, unless paid within 30 days, an execution shall be issued. 
(b)	The city clerk shall issue executions for the non-payment of taxes and assessments at any time after 30 days have elapsed since giving notice as provided in subsection (a) above. The execution shall identify the defendant in fi.fa. (taxpayer), the year(s) for which delinquent taxes are being executed, and the amount thereof. Executions shall be directed to "all and singular sheriffs and constables of the state." 
(c)	The city clerk shall cause all executions issued to be recorded on the general execution docket of the county where the property is located, in the case of real property, and, in the case of personal property, in the county of the taxpayer's residence if a resident of the state, otherwise in the county where any real or personal property of the taxpayer may be found. If the taxpayer is not a resident of the state and has no known real or personal property within the state, the execution shall be recorded in the county in which the act or activity giving rise to tax liability took place. 
(d)	All executions issued shall continue to bear interest and penalties at the rates established in this article for past-due taxes and assessments. 
(e)	The city clerk shall cause all executions issued to be placed in the hands of the city marshal for collection or levy and sale of property. The marshal shall exercise his best efforts to collect the full amount of taxes and assessments due, together with all interest, penalties, and any costs due thereon, from the defendant in fi.fa. In the event he is unable to do so, the marshal shall levy the execution on a sufficient amount of the defendant in fi.fa.'s property, whether real or personal, to satisfy the obligations due at a sale to be held and conducted in accordance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 76, § 1, 8-3-99)
Sec. 12-5. - Levy of executions; sale of property. 
(a)	The chief of police is hereby designated as the Marshal of the City of Lake Park and delegated the duties set forth in this article. The marshal shall be subject to being ruled for money in his hands arising from the public sale of any property pursuant to process issued by the municipality. After first paying the city clerk the amount due on the process under which the sale was made, the marshal shall pay any surplus to any lawful claimant holding an interest subordinate to the lien for taxes, else to the defendant in fi.fa. 
(b)	In all cases of levying on real property, within five days written notice of the levy must be given personally, or delivered by certified mail, to the defendant in fi.fa., and to any tenants in possession. If the land is unoccupied, a copy of the notice of levy shall also be conspicuously posted on the land. In the case of personal property, the marshal shall enter the same on the execution and plainly describe the property levied on and the amount of the interest of the defendant in fi.fa. therein. 
(c)	Whenever any real property is levied upon for taxes or assessment, it shall be the marshal's duty before proceeding to advertise the property for sale to give 20 days written notice of the levy to the record owner(s) of the property and the holder of each security deed of record. The 20-day period shall begin to run from the time the notice is personally delivered or, when delivered by registered or certified mail with return receipt requested, from the date of mailing. The notice shall contain a description of the land levied upon, the name of the owner of the land, the year or years for which the taxes were assessed, and a statement of the amount of the taxes due, together with accrued costs. The marshal shall keep a copy of the notice on which he shall enter the date the notice was delivered or mailed and how, where, and to whom the notice was delivered. The marshal shall file the copy with the city clerk. 
(d)	When a levy is made upon real or personal property, the property shall be advertised and sold by the marshal in the same manner as provided for executions and judicial sales; provided, however, in addition to such other notice as may be required by law, the defendant in fi.fa. shall be given at least ten days written notice of such sale by registered or certified mail. The notice shall be addressed to the taxpayer at the last known address listed in the records of the county tax commissioner. In addition, if the United States has a claim or lien on the property subject to being sold and such lien was filed or recorded more than 30 days before the proposed sale, the marshal shall cause written notice of the sale to be given to the Secretary of the Treasury or his delegate not less than 25 days before the sale. Notice may be given either by personal service or by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested. 
(e)	The marshal shall publish weekly for four weeks in the official legal organ of the county in which the sale will be conducted an advertisement of the date, place, and hours during which the sale will be conducted, together with a full and complete description of the property to be sold, making known the names of the owner(s) of record and any person who may be in possession of the property. The notice shall state the property is being sold for collection of taxes due to the City of Lake Park and the year(s) for which taxes have been executed. 
(f)	Sales of property under execution shall be made by the marshal before the city hall on the first Tuesday in each month between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. eastern standard time or eastern daylight savings time, whichever is applicable, and at public outcry to the highest bidder for cash; provided, however, should the first Tuesday of the month fall on New Year's Day or Independence Day, such sales shall take place on the immediately following Wednesday. The purchaser shall look for himself as to the title and soundness of all property sold under tax executions and neither the marshal conducting the sale, nor the City of Lake Park, make any representations or warranty of title, condition, or fitness for a particular purpose, expressed or implied. 
(g)	The marshal shall sell the property to the highest bidder for cash and, upon collection of the sales price, make a deed or bill of sale to the purchaser. Any person who becomes the purchaser of any property sold at the sale, who fails or refuses to comply with the terms of sale when requested by the marshal to do so, shall be liable for the amount of the purchase money. It shall be the option of the marshal either to proceed against the purchaser for the full amount of the purchase money or to resell the property and then proceed against the first purchaser for any deficiency. A tax deed for real property, or bill of sale for personal property, made and delivered as evidence of a sale for taxes conducted pursuant to this article shall convey the title as effectually as if the sale were made by the person against whom the process was issued. Sales of personal property shall be final; real property sold by virtue of an execution issued for the collection of taxes or for any special assessments is subject to redemption rights of the defendant in fi.fa., or any person having any right, title, or interest in or lien upon such property at the time of levy and sale. Recitals in a deed or bill of sale under power of sale for taxes shall be prima-facie evidence of the facts created, in the instrument. The marshal shall put the purchaser in possession of the property so sold, provided, however, the purchaser of real property is not entitled to be placed in possession until after the time for redemption has expired. 
(h)	Whenever no bids are forthcoming on property sold for taxes after the property has been offered a reasonable time, the marshal may either re-advertise and sell the property at a later date or abandon the property. The marshal shall make a proper notation on the execution whenever property levied upon and exposed for sale has been abandoned due to lack of bids. 
(Ord. No. 76, § 1, 8-3-99)
Sec. 12-6. - Bidding by city at tax sales; disposition of property acquired. 
(a)	If, during any sale of property for taxes and after the property has been offered a reasonable time, no one present at the sale bids an amount for the property being sold which is as much as the total of the taxes due (including any priority liens for taxes due the state, county, and school and other special tax districts of the state) plus the marshal's cost due on the sale, then the city manager, or his designee, may purchase the property for the City of Lake Park. If the city purchases property at a sale, the marshal shall make to the city a deed to the property sold and shall deliver the deed to the city manager. The marshal shall put the city in possession of the property so sold. 
(b)	Property acquired by the city pursuant to a sale for taxes or assessments may be divested or alienated by the city only by public sale of the property to the highest bidder; however, when the city has not parted with title to the property, the city may quitclaim the property to the owner at the time of the tax sale, or to the owner's administrators, executors, heirs, or assigns, upon full payment of the redemption price provided in section 12-9 of this article. 
(c)	The right of redemption in real property purchased by the city at a tax sale shall be foreclosed in the manner set forth in section 12-9 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 76, § 1, 8-3-99)
Sec. 12-7. - Accounting by marshal; final return or settlement. 
(a)	The marshal shall make a prompt accounting to the city clerk for all executions placed in his hands for collection or levy and sale. He shall pay over to the clerk all amounts due the city for taxes and assessments, interest, penalties, and costs, and shall file a final written return or settlement showing the amounts so paid, together with disposition of any excess proceeds derived from the sale. If there is any excess after paying taxes, costs, and all expenses of a sale, it shall be immediately paid to the person authorized to receive the excess. 
(b)	In any event, within 90 days from the date executions are placed in his hands, the marshal finds an execution to be either uncollectible or not collectable in full, he shall so notify the city clerk in writing. It shall be the duty of the clerk to cause cancellation of executions on the general execution docket of the county upon their final payment or collection. 
(Ord. No. 76, § 1, 8-3-99)
Sec. 12-8. - Garnishments by city; reduction of executions to judgment. 
(a)	Whenever the marshal can find no property belonging to a defendant in fi.fa., on which to levy any tax execution in his hands, he shall make an entry to that effect on the execution. The city clerk, in the same of the City of Lake Park, may then petition any court of competent jurisdiction to issue a summons of garnishment against any person whom he or she believes to be indebted to the defendant in fi.fa., or who has property, money, or effects in his hands belonging to the defendant in fi.fa. The clerk shall enter upon the execution the names of the persons garnished and the court and file number of the action where the garnishment is filed. All subsequent proceedings shall be the same as provided by law in other cases where judgments have been obtained or execution issued. 
(b)	When an execution for taxes remains unsatisfied and an entry of "nulla bona" has been duly entered by the marshal on the execution within the immediately preceding 30-day period and the city clerk has reason to believe the defendant in fi.fa., may have or may come into ownership of assets outside the state, the clerk, in the name of the City of Lake Park, may petition the Superior Court of the county in this state in which the defendant in fi.fa., maintains a known residence, place of business, or agent to receive service, to reduce the execution to judgment. If the defendant in fi.fa., does not maintain a known residence in this state, the action may be brought in the county where the tax obligation arose. This and all subsequent proceedings shall be brought in accordance with OCGA Chapter 3 of Title 48. 
(Ord. No. 76, § 1, 8-3-99)
Sec. 12-9. - Redemption rights of defendant in fi.fa.; vesting of title in grantee. 
(a)	Whenever real property is sold for taxes or any special assessment, the defendant in fi.fa., or any person having any right, title, or interest in or lien upon such property may redeem the property from the sale by the payment of the redemption price or the amount required for redemption as fixed by OCGA § 48-4-42, at any time within 12 months from the date of sale, and at any time after the sale until the right to redeem is foreclosed by the giving of the notice provided for in OCGA § 48-4-45, which Code sections by reference are incorporated herein as a part of this article. 
(b)	Where notice of foreclosure of the right to redeem real property sold at a tax sale has not been given as required in subsection (a) above, title shall ripen by prescription after a period of four years from the date of recording of the deed in the county where the property is situated, provided the defendant in fi.fa. was not laboring under any legal disability at the time of sale. Unless the tax deed indicates a lesser interest was levied upon and sold, a fee simple title to the property shall vest absolutely in the grantee in the deed or in the grantee's heirs or assigns. In the event the defendant in fi.fa., is laboring under any legal disability, the prescriptive term shall begin from the time the disabilities are removed or abated. 
(Ord. No. 76, § 1, 8-3-99)
Sec. 12-10. - Costs. 
(a)	For issuing execution, the city shall receive only an amount equal to any filing fees charged by the clerk of superior court for recording and cancellation of the tax fi.fa. 
(b)	Once a levy is made or posted on the property of a defendant in fi.fa., in addition to all taxes, interest, penalties and costs heretofore accrued, the marshal shall collect a levy administration fee of five percent of the taxes due or $250.00, whichever is the lesser; however, no levy administration fee shall be less than $50.00. 
(c)	In addition to the levy administration fee, after levy but prior to the sale, the marshal shall collect his actual cost for advertising the sale, postage and service fees actually incurred, and any attorney's fees incurred in examination of title to property, plus a commission for conducting the sale, not to exceed eight percent on sums of $50.00 or less, six percent on sums above $50.00 up to $550.00, and three percent on all sums exceeding $550.00. 
(d)	The costs provided in this section shall be cumulative and in addition to any statutory premiums allowed as a part of the redemption price. 
(Ord. No. 76, § 1, 8-3-99)
Chapter 13 - TRAFFIC[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Creation of noise by vehicles, § 7-3(1), (6), (7), (11), (13), throwing rubbish from vehicles, § 7-30.
State Law reference— Effect of Uniform Rules of the Road on powers of local authorities, OCGA § 40-6-370 et seq.; Motor Vehicle Safety Responsibility Act, OCGA § 40-9.1 et seq.; traffic violations bureaus, OCGA § 40-13-50 et seq.

Sec. 13-1. - State rules of the road—Adoption by reference. 
Pursuant to Chapter 6 of Title 40 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, Code Sections 40-6-372 through 40-6-376, that chapter known as the Uniform Rules of the Road and the definitions contained in Code Section 40-1-1 are hereby adopted as and for the traffic regulations of this municipality with like effect as if recited herein. 
(Ord. No. 19, § 1, 2-12-74; Ord. No. 27, 7-6-74; Ord. of 8-6-74, § 1)
Sec. 13-2. - Same—Penalties. 
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by law, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of section 13-1 shall be punished as provided in section 1-8. 
(Ord. No. 19, § 2, 2-74; Ord. No. 27, 7-6-74; Ord. of 8-6-74, § 2)
Sec. 13-3. - Criteria for fines for certain violations. 
Pursuant to the enforcement of the Uniform Rules of the Road, OCGA Title 40, Chapter 6 and sections applicable thereto by local ordinance, the council hereby declares that fines relating thereto shall be set from time to time by council as appropriate in accordance with Georgia Code, Title 40 as amended. 
(Ord. No. 29, § 1, 10-7-75; Ord. No. 29 Amd. 1, 3-2-82)
Sec. 13-4. - Speed limits—Maximum generally. 
Except as otherwise provided in section 13-5, the maximum speed limits for all automobiles, trucks, tractors, motorcycles and other motorized vehicles on the streets of the city shall be 35 miles per hour. 
(Ord. No. 1, § 1, 8-7-73; Ord. No. 27 Amd. 1, 3-12-85)
State Law reference— Maximum in urban area generally, OCGA § 40-6-181(b)(1). 
Sec. 13-5. - Same—Maximum on state roads. 
The following speed zones are established based on an engineering and traffic investigation: 
On-System 
55 mph: 
State Route 7 (U.S. 41) from the south city limits of Lake Park (milelog 3.44) to a point 200 feet south of City Street 1081 (Pine Circle, milelog 3.77) a distance of 0.33 mile. 
State Route 7 (U.S. 41) from a point 300 feet north of State Route 376 (milelog 5.24) to the north city limits of Lake Park (milelog 5.99) a distance of 0.75 mile. 
State Route 376 from a point 1,056 feet north of City Street 1077 (milelog 8.85) to the north city limits of Lake Park (milelog 9.05) a distance of 0.20 mile. 
45 mph: 
State Route 7 (U.S. 41) from a point 200 feet south of City Street 1081 (milelog 3.77) to a point 300 feet north of State Route 376 (milelog 5.24) a distance of 1.47 miles. 
State Route 376 from the west city limits of Lake Park (milelog 6.56) to State Route 7 (U.S. 41, milelog 7.27) a distance of 0.71 mile. 
State Route 376 from State Route 7 (U.S. 41, milelog 8.54) to a point 1,056 feet north of City Street 1077 (milelog 8.85) a distance of 0.31 mile. 
25 mph: 
State Route 7 (U.S. 41), school zone, from Crawford Street (milelog 4.20) to Clayton Street (milelog 4.52) a distance of 0.32 mile to be zoned 25 miles per hour from 7:30 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and from 15:00 to 16:00 p.m., SCHOOL DAYS ONLY. 
Off-System 
45 mph: 
Main Street from a point 52 feet south of City Street 1103 (Lake Park south city limits) to a point 264 feet north of City Street 1100 a distance of 0.47 mile. 
35 mph: 
Gordon Road from State Route 7 to Ricks Drive a distance of 0.35 mile. 
Long Pond Road from State Route 7 to Shevette Road a distance of 0.52 mile. 
Main Street from a point 264 feet north of City Street 1100 to State Route 7 a distance of 0.45 mile. 
Shevette Road from Broadway Street to Long Pond Road a distance of 0.27 mile. 
30 mph: 
Broadway Street from North Railroad Avenue to Shevette Road a distance of 0.70 mile. 
Collins Avenue from State Route 376 to Powell Street a distance of 0.38 mile. 
Cotton Avenue from State Route 7 to East Street a distance of 1.03 miles. 
North Railroad Street from East Street to Clayton Street a distance of 0.58 mile. 
South Railroad Street from Main Street to Clayton Street a distance of 0.50 mile. 
Four-H Club Road from State Route 7 to Corbert Road a distance of 0.40 mile. 
25 mph: 
Collins Avenue, school zone, from West Street to Powell Street a distance of 0.30 mile to be zoned 25 miles per hour from 7:30 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and from 3:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m., SCHOOL DAYS ONLY. 
(Ord. No. 27, 7-6-74; Ord. No. 27 Amd. 1, 3-12-85; Ord. No. 27 Amd. 4, 2-7-89; Ord. No. 27 Amd. 5, 7-5-90; Ord. No. 27 Amd. 7, 8-6-96) 
Chapter 14 - UTILITIES AND SERVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority to operate, § 7.11.
Cross reference— Water department, superintendent, §§ 2-1, 2-7.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 14-1—14-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 14-20. - Promulgation of rules and regulations; hiring of employees. 
(a)	The mayor and council in cooperation with the superintendent of the water department shall have full authority to make such rules and regulations for the operation of the water department as are necessary to the proper operation of the department as are not in conflict with the charter or any ordinance of the city. 
(b)	The superintendent of the water department shall have full authority, in cooperation with the mayor and council, to hire employees of said department, either on a part-time basis or on a full-time basis, as such superintendent may deem adequate and as shall not be in conflict with the charter and with any ordinance and shall have full power to remove employees of said department, with the assent of the governing body. 
(Ord. No. 21, § 3, 2-5-74)
Sec. 14-21. - Operation of department. 
The superintendent is hereby vested with full power and authority to maintain, extend, improve, modify, and operate the water department in cooperation with the mayor and council and shall have full authority to do all things necessary to successfully and properly operate said department with the advice and consent of said mayor and council. The mayor and council are vested with the duty to draft rules and regulations governing the price to be charged for water service, rules and regulations to be enforced between the customers and the city, rules and regulations for the cutting off of delinquents, and rules regarding the collecting of rents from customers and all other regulations necessary to the proper operation of the water department. 
(Ord. No. 21, § 4, 2-5-74)
Sec. 14-22. - Records. 
The superintendent shall be in charge of all records of the water department and shall keep a full and complete record of all receipts and disbursements of monies paid into and disbursed from the department and shall keep said records available for inspection at any time. 
(Ord. No. 21, § 5, 2-5-74)
Sec. 14-23. - Control of waterworks. 
The superintendent shall be the judge of the quality of all materials and workmanship in connection with the waterworks, and shall have the entire charge of the whole work and details of such connections, and shall be authorized to require that the full rules and regulations of the city be complied with in connection with such waterworks. 
(Ord. No. 21, § 6, 2-5-74)
Sec. 14-24. - Right of entry; correction of defects. 
The superintendent shall have the privilege at any time of entering and inspecting the water system of any premises and if same are found not to comply with the rules and regulations of the city, the superintendent shall order the same to be altered to conform to the rules and regulations of the city in regard to the operation of the water system. Any person failing to make such alterations for a period of ten days after such notice shall be deemed guilty of a breach of this Code and shall be subject to discontinuance of water service, and to punishment as provided in section 1-8. 
(Ord. No. 21, § 7, 2-5-74)
Sec. 14-25. - Attachment of private system to public system. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to attach a private water system to the water system of the city. 
(Ord. No. 21, § 8, 2-5-74)
Sec. 14-26. - Fluoridation of water. 
The city shall have the right and privilege to fluoridate the water supply, provided the same is authorized by the state department of human resources or the department having jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 21, § 11, 2-5-74)
State Law reference— Power of board of natural resources to require fluoridation of public water systems, providing of state funds to municipalities, etc., for cost of equipment, chemicals, etc., OCGA § 12-5-175. 
Sec. 14-27. - Interference with waterworks and water supply—Generally. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere in any way with the water lines, city well or reservoirs, mains or other equipment related to the water supply of the city. 
(Ord. No. 21, § 12, 2-5-74)
Sec. 14-28. - Same—Tampering. 
It shall be unlawful for any person not authorized by the city to tamper with, alter or injure any part of the waterworks or supply system, or any meter. 
(Ord. No. 21, § 19, 2-5-74)
Sec. 14-29. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LAYING AND REPAIRING OF LINES 

Sec. 14-30. - Minimum depth of water line. 
Any person laying a water line on public property within the city shall lay said line a minimum of 36 inches below ground level. 
(Ord. No. 21, § 9, 2-5-74)
Sec. 14-31. - Regulation of extensions. 
The superintendent shall supervise all extensions of mains and other lines; such extensions must meet the requirements of the city in regard to extensions. 
(Ord. No. 21, § 10, 2-5-74)
Sec. 14-31.5. - Application. 
From the effective date of this section forward, any future developments and running of new water lines into subdivisions or developments shall require the filing of, and approval of, an application with the superintendent of the water department, to which application the applicant/developer shall attach at developer's own expense full plans and specifications for the installation of such service. The application and supporting documentation shall be considered by the superintendent of the water department for compliance with the specifications drawn up by the city council for the installation of new services and lines. No installation shall be commenced unless it shall have been approved by the superintendent of the water department. 
(Ord. No. 21 Amd. 8, § 1, 9-6-94)
Sec. 14-32. - Payment for service pipes; inspection. 
All service pipes from the mains to the premises served shall be installed by, and at the cost of, the owner of the property to be serviced, on the application for the service. Such installation shall be under the inspection of the superintendent or other city official or employee designated by the superintendent. 
(Ord. No. 21, § 21, 2-5-74)
Sec. 14-33. - Specifications. 
No service pipes shall be installed unless it conforms to specifications drawn up by the council and approved by it, a copy of which specifications shall be kept on file by the superintendent and shall be open to inspection by any person interested. 
(Ord. No. 21, § 22, 2-5-74)
Sec. 14-34. - Payment for repairs. 
All repairs of service pipes and plumbing systems of buildings shall be made by and at the expense of the owners of the premises served. The city may in case of emergency repair any service pipe and if this is done the cost of such repair work shall be repaid by the owner to the city. 
(Ord. No. 21, § 23, 2-5-74)
Sec. 14-35. - Excavations; proximity to sewer pipes. 
Excavations for installing service pipes or repairing the same shall be made in compliance with the provisions of this Code relating to making excavations in streets. Provided, it shall be unlawful to place any service pipe in the same excavation with, or directly over, any drain or sewer pipe. 
(Ord. No. 21, § 24, 2-5-74)
Cross reference— See § 11-1. 
Sec. 14-36. - Shut-off boxes. 
Shut-off boxes or service boxes shall be placed on every service pipe, and shall be located between the curb line and the sidewalk line where this is practicable. Such boxes shall be so located that they are easily accessible and shall be protected from frost. 
(Ord. No. 21, § 25, 2-5-74)
Secs. 14-37—14-39. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SERVICE 

Sec. 14-40. - City to turn on water. 
No water from the city water system shall be turned on for service into any premises by any person except an official or employee of the city or some other person authorized by the city to perform this service. 
(Ord. No. 21, § 13, 2-5-74)
Sec. 14-41. - Application; fee. 
Application to have water turned on shall be made in writing to the superintendent, and shall contain an agreement by the applicant to abide by and accept all of the provisions of this article as conditions governing the use of the city water supply by the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 21, § 14, 2-5-74; Ord. No. 21 Amd. 3, 3-1-83)
Sec. 14-42. - Deposit. 
A deposit of $50.00 shall be paid with each rental application; a sum of $25.00 shall be paid with each owner application; this sum to be retained by the city, to insure payment of all bills when service to the applicant is disconnected permanently. 
(Ord. No. 21, § 15, 2-5-74; Ord. No. 21 Amd. 3, § 2, 3-1-83; Ord. No. 21 Amd. 6, § 2, 8-1-89) 
Sec. 14-43. - Plumbing; supply for construction. 
No water shall be turned on for service in premises in which the plumbing does not comply with the ordinances of the city; provided, water may be turned on for construction work in unfinished buildings, subject to the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 21, § 16, 2-5-74)
Sec. 14-44. - Service connection permit. 
No connection with a water main shall be made without a permit being issued and 24 hours notice having been given to the superintendent. All such connections shall be made and all such work done at the expense of the applicant who shall also pay for materials necessary for such work; all such connections shall be made under the supervision of a city official or employee, and no connections shall be covered until the work has been inspected by him. Applications for such connections must be made to the superintendent of the water department. 
(Ord. No. 21, § 17, 2-5-74)
Sec. 14-45. - Resale. 
No water shall be resold or distributed by the recipient thereof from the city supply to any premises other than that for which the application has been made and the meter installed, except in case of emergency. 
(Ord. No. 21, § 18, 2-5-74)
Sec. 14-46. - Meters—Required. 
(a)	All premises using the city water supply must be equipped with an adequate water meter furnished by the city, but paid for by the consumer; provided, such water service may be supplied at a flat rate of charge until such meter is installed. Title to such meter shall remain in the city. 
(b)	Before any premises are occupied, a water meter shall be installed therein as herein required or application made for such water service at the flat rate of charge until the meter can be installed; or no water shall be furnished such premises. 
(Ord. No. 21, § 27, 2-5-74)
Sec. 14-47. - Same—Installation. 
Meters shall be installed in a location that will be easy of access. 
(Ord. No. 21, § 28, 2-5-74)
Sec. 14-48. - Same—Reading. 
A city official or employee shall read or cause to be read every meter in the city at such times as are necessary, that the bills may be sent out at the proper times. 
(Ord. No. 21, § 29, 2-5-74)
Sec. 14-49. - Rates. 
All property upon which any building has been or may hereafter be erected having a connection with any mains or pipes used in connection with the water system shall pay the following rates per month: 
0 to 2,000 gallons, minimum .....$13.00 
2,000 and over, per 1,000 gallons .....1.15 
(Ord. No. 21, § 30, 2-5-74; Ord. No. 21 Amd. 1, § 1, 6-4-74; Ord. No. 21 Amd. 2, § 1, 8-2-77; Ord. No. 21 Amd. 4, 12-4-84; Ord. No. 21 Amd. 5, § 1, 11-1-88; Ord. No. 21 Amd. 7, § 1, 10-1-91; Ord. No. 21 Amd. 12, § I, 2-4-2014) 
Sec. 14-50. - Bills. 
Bills for water used shall be dated and sent out at the first of each month and such bills shall be due within ten days after the first of each month. After the expiration of the ten days each user shall be subject to a penalty of ten percent of the amount of the bill due. This penalty shall be in addition to and cumulative of any other penalties or remedies provided by this article for the nonpayment of a water bill. 
(Ord. No. 21, § 31, 2-5-74)
Sec. 14-51. - Use by construction contractors. 
During the construction of any building and before any water is installed as is herein provided, the contractor so constructing such building may be permitted to use the city water supply by making application therefor, and paying the flat fee prescribed by the council. 
(Ord. No. 21, § 32, 2-5-74)
Sec. 14-52. - Nonpayment. 
The water supply may be shut off from any premises for which the water bill remains unpaid for a period of ten days after the bill is rendered and mailed. When shut off, water shall not be turned on except upon the payment of a $30.00 fee for turning on water. 
(Ord. No. 21, § 33, 2-5-74; Ord. No. 21, Amd. 1, § 2, 6-4-74; Ord. No. 21, Amd. 2, § 2, 8-2-77; Ord. No. 21 Amd. 11, 12-2-2013) 
Sec. 14-53. - Change of occupancy. 
When there is any change in the occupancy of any building connected to the water system, notice of such change shall be given to the superintendent with the request that the water meter be read for a determination of the amount due for water used to the date of the occupancy change. In the event the notice of change of occupancy is not given by the person making the change, such person shall remain liable for all water passing through the meter on the premises. 
(Ord. No. 21, § 34, 2-5-74)
Secs. 14-54—14-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - WELLHEAD PROTECTION 

Sec. 14-61. - Short title and purpose. 
(a)	This division shall be known as the "Wellhead Protection Ordinance."
(b)	The purpose of this division is to insure the provision of a safe and sanitary drinking water supply for the City of Lake Park by the establishment of wellhead protection zones surrounding the wellheads for all wells and springs which are the supply sources for the City of Lake Park water system, and by the designation and regulation of property uses and conditions which may be maintained within such zones. 
(Ord. No. 92, 11-4-08)
Sec. 14-62. - Establishment of a wellhead protection zone. 
There is hereby established a use district to be known as a wellhead protection zone as identified and described within the attached State of Georgia approved wellhead protection plan. 
(Ord. No. 92, 11-4-08)
Editor's note— The State of Georgia approved wellhead protection plan is not set out herein, but is on file in the offices of the city. 
Sec. 14-63. - Prohibited uses. 
Land use and activities in the wellhead protection zones as identified and described as potential pollution sources in the attached State of Georgia approved wellhead protection plan will be prohibited as stated in the plan. 
(Ord. No. 92, 11-4-08)
Editor's note— The State of Georgia approved wellhead protection plan is not set out herein, but is on file in the offices of the city. 
Sec. 14-64. - Administration. 
The policies and procedures for administration of any wellhead protection zone established under this division, shall be the same as provided in the existing zoning ordinance for the City of Lake Park as the same is presently enacted or may from time to time be amended. 
(Ord. No. 92, 11-4-08)
APPENDIX A - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note—The city's zoning ordinance, adopted Oct. 4, 1977, and as extensively revised Oct. 5, 1985 and January 7, 1988, is published separately. The zoning ordinance, like all city records, is on file in the office of the city clerk.
Charter reference— Authority as to buildings and structures, § 7.22.
Cross reference— Planning commission, § 2-11; adult entertainment zone, § 8-40.
State Law reference— Planning and zoning, Ga. Constitution, Art. IX, § II, ¶ IV; zoning procedures, OCGA § 36-66-1 et seq.

APPENDIX B - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note—The city's subdivision regulations, adopted Sept. 7, 1982, are published separately. The subdivision regulations, like all city records, are on file in the office of the city clerk.

STATUTORY REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Code, either in the text or notes following the text of references to the state law or related matters. 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 
This is a numerical listing of the ordinances of the city used in this Code. Repealed or superseded laws and any omitted materials are not reflected in this table. 

 