THE CODE OF THE CITY OF RICEBORO, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published in 2011 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 

OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
RICEBORO, GEORGIA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
William T. Austin 
Mayor 
____________ 
John Young 
Christopher Stacy 
David Miller 
Tommy M. Williams Sr. 
City Council 
____________ 
John Pirkle 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Malinda G. McIver 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a codification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Riceboro, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the ordinances adopted by the city council through September 7, 2010. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 

 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves that stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Sandra S. Fox, Code Attorney, and Lisa Stevens, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Bill Austin, Mayor, and Malinda G. McIver, City Clerk, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Riceboro, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Riceboro, Georgia. 
©  Copyrighted material.  Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Riceboro, Georgia. 2011. 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
  
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

 
PART I - CHARTER AND LOCAL ACTS 
Subpart A - CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— The City of Riceboro was originally incorporated as the Village of Riceborough, Georgia, on December 21, 1819, by 1819 Ga. Laws (Act No. 54), p. 74, much of the text of which is not recoverable. (The 1819 village Charter was amended and the Village of Riceborough, Georgia, was redesignated as the City of Riceboro, Georgia, on August 20, 1926, by 1927 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 327), p. 1493. This second city Charter was amended on February 28, 1966, by 1966 Ga. Laws (Act No. 113), p. 2331 (regarding city elections), and on February 14, 1989, by 1989 Ga. Laws (Act No. 261), p. 4643 (regarding the corporate limits of the city). On February 5, 1992, a third city Charter was enacted by 1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 614), p. 4614, which was amended on March 27, 1998, by 1998 Ga. Laws (Act No. 586), p. 3664 (regarding corporate limits). (It should be noted that excluded from the foregoing legislative history are historical references to a February 1, 1797, act referring to "a place to be called Riceborough," since the act itself is not recoverable, and an act (1799 Ga. Laws (Act No. Unknown), p. 47), dated December 4, 1799, containing a reference to the "Town" of Riceborough, Georgia. Neither of these early acts, to the extent they are recoverable, included an incorporation of the city or its precursors.) Printed in this part is the 1992 city Charter as amended. History notes following each section in the charter identify the sections of the 1992 Charter and subsequent amendments. The sequence of sections used below is the same as in the 1992 act. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. The title, enactment, severability, repealer, transitional, ratification, publication and effective date provisions have been omitted, and where a section has been amended or repealed by a later provision, only the current language has been printed. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
State Law reference— Creation, dissolution, merger, boundary changes, and deannexation of municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-2; municipal annexations, O.C.G.A. § 36-36-1 et seq.; home rule for municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-3; limitations on home rule for municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6; requirement for filing and publication of charter, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-5; incorporation of municipal corporations, O.C.G.A. § 36-31-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - INCORPORATION AND POWERS 

Sec. 1.10. - Name. 
This city and inhabitants thereof are hereby constituted and declared a body politic and corporate under the name and style "City of Riceboro, Georgia," and by that name shall have perpetual succession. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 614), p. 4614, § 1.10) 
Sec. 1.11. - Corporate boundaries. 
(a)	The boundaries of this city shall be those existing on the effective date of the adoption of this Charter with such alterations as may be made from time to time in the manner provided by law. The boundaries of this city at all times shall be shown on a map, a written description, or any combination thereof to be retained permanently in the Office of Clerk and to be designated, as the case may be: "Official Map or Description of the corporate limits of the City of Riceboro, Georgia." Photographic, typed, or other copies of such map or description certified by the City Clerk shall be admitted as evidence in all courts and shall have the same force and effect as with the original map or description. 
(b)	The city council may provide for the redrawing of any such map by ordinance to reflect lawful changes in the corporate boundaries. A redrawn map shall supersede for all purposes the entire map or maps which it is designated to replace. 
(c)	In addition to the area described in subsection (a) of this section, the corporate limits shall also include the following area: The City of Riceboro is proposing to annex the area along the E.B. Cooper Highway (S.R. 119) North for a distance of 2.5 miles from its existing city limits to Union Camp, Howell Swamp Road and Easterly from the existing right-of-way of E.B. Cooper Highway (S.R. 119) for a distance of Five Hundred (500) feet and Westerly from the existing right-of-way of E.B. Cooper Highway (S.R. 119) for a distance of Five Hundred (500) feet 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 614), p. 4614, § 1.11; 1998 Ga. Laws (Act No. 586), p. 3664) 
Sec. 1.12. - Powers and construction. 
(a)	This city shall have all powers possible for a city to have under the present or future constitution and laws of this state as fully and completely as though they were specifically enumerated in this Charter. This city shall have all the powers of self-government not otherwise prohibited by this Charter or by general law. 
(b)	The powers of this city shall be construed liberally in favor of the city. The specific mention or failure to mention particular powers shall not be construed as limiting in any way the powers of this city. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 614), p. 4614, § 1.12) 
Sec. 1.13. - Examples of powers. 
[Examples of powers of the city are:] 
(1)	Air and Water Pollution. To regulate the emission of smoke or other exhaust which pollutes the air and to prevent the pollution of natural streams which flow within the corporate limits of the city; 
(2)	Animal regulation. To regulate and license or to prohibit the keeping or running at-large of animals and fowl and to provide for the impoundment of same if in violation of any ordinance or lawful order; to provide for the disposition by sale, gift, or humane destruction of animals and fowl when not redeemed as provided by ordinance; and to provide punishment for violation of ordinances enacted hereunder; 
(3)	Appropriations and expenditures. To make appropriations for the support of the government of the city; to authorize the expenditure of money for any purposes authorized by this Charter and for any purpose for which a municipality is authorized by the laws of the State of Georgia; and to provide for the payment of expenses of the city; 
(4)	Building regulation. To regulate and license the erection and construction of buildings and all other structures; to adopt building, housing, plumbing, electrical, gas, and heating and air conditioning codes; and to regulate all housing, and building trades; 
(5)	Business regulation and taxation. To levy and provide for the collection of license fees and taxes on privileges, occupations, trades and professions; to license and regulate the same; to provide for the manner and method of payment of such licenses and taxes; and to revoke such licenses after due process for failure to pay any city taxes or fees; 
(6)	Condemnation. To condemn property, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city, for present or future use and for any corporate purpose deemed necessary by the city council utilizing procedures enumerated in Title 22 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated [O.C.G.A. title 22] or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted; 
(7)	Contracts. To enter into contracts and agreements with other governmental entities and with private persons, firms, and corporations; 
(8)	Emergencies. To establish procedures for determining and proclaiming that an emergency situation exists inside or outside the city, and to make and carry out all reasonable provisions deemed necessary to deal with or meet such an emergency for the protection, safety, health, or well-being of the citizens of the city; 
(9)	Fire regulations. To fix and establish fire limits and from time to time extend, enlarge, or restrict the same; to prescribe fire safety regulations not inconsistent with general law relating to both fire prevention and detection and to firefighting; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof; 
(10)	Garbage fees. To levy, fix, assess, and collect a garbage, refuse, and trash collection and disposal and other sanitary service charge, tax, or fee for such services as may be necessary in the operation of the city from all individuals, firms, and corporations residing or doing business inside the city and benefiting from such services; to enforce the payment of such charges, taxes, or fees; and to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges; 
(11)	General health, safety, and welfare. To define, regulate, and prohibit any act, practice, conduct, or use of property which is detrimental to health, sanitation, cleanliness, welfare, and safety of the inhabitants of the city and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(12)	Gifts. To accept or refuse gifts, donations, bequests, or grants from any source for any purpose related to powers and duties of the city and the general welfare of its citizens on such terms and conditions as the donor or grantor may impose; 
(13)	Health and sanitation. To prescribe standards of health and sanitation inside the city and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(14)	Jail sentences. To provide that persons given jail sentences in the municipal court may work out such sentences in any public works or on the streets, roads, drains, and squares in the city; to provide for commitment of such persons to any jail; or to provide for commitment of such persons to any county work camp or county jail by agreement with the appropriate county officials; 
(15)	Motor vehicles. To regulate the operation of motor vehicles and exercise control over all traffic including parking upon or across the streets, roads, alleys, and walkways of the city; 
(16)	Municipal agencies and delegation of power. To create, alter, or abolish departments, boards, offices, commissions, and agencies of the city and to confer upon such agencies the necessary and appropriate authority for carrying out all the powers conferred upon or delegated to the same; 
(17)	Municipal debts. To appropriate and borrow money for the payment of debts of the city and to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized by this Charter or the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(18)	Municipal property ownership. To acquire, dispose of, and hold in trust or otherwise any real, personal, or mixed property, in fee simple or lesser interest, inside or outside the property limits of the city; 
(19)	Municipal property protection. To provide for the preservation and protection of property and equipment of the city and the administration and use of same by the public and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof; 
(20)	Municipal utilities. To acquire, lease, construct, operate, maintain, sell, and dispose of public utilities, including, but not limited to, a system of waterworks, sewers and drains, sewage disposal, gas works, electric light plants, transportation facilities, public airports, and any other public utility; and to fix the taxes, charges, rates, fares, fees, assessments, regulations, and penalties therefor; to provide for the withdrawal of service for refusal or failure to pay the same; to authorize the extension of water, sewage, and electrical distribution systems and all necessary appurtenances by which said utilities are distributed inside and outside the corporate limits of the city; and to provide utility services to persons, firms, and corporations inside and outside the corporate limits of the city as provided by ordinance; 
(21)	Nuisance. To define a nuisance and provide for its abatement whether on public or private property; 
(22)	Penalties. To provide penalties for violation of any ordinances adopted pursuant to the authority of this Charter and the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(23)	Planning and zoning. To provide comprehensive city planning for development by zoning and to provide subdivision regulation and the like as the city council deems necessary and reasonable to insure a safe, healthy, and aesthetically pleasing community; 
(24)	Police and fire protection. To exercise the power of arrest through duly appointed police officers and to establish, operate, or contract for a police and a firefighting agency; 
(25)	Public hazards; removal. To provide for the destruction and removal of any building or other structure which is or may become dangerous or detrimental to the public; 
(26)	Public improvements. To provide for the acquisition, construction, building, operation, and maintenance of public ways, parks and playgrounds, recreational facilities, cemeteries, markets and market houses, public buildings, libraries, public housing, airports, hospitals, terminals, docks, parking facilities, or charitable, cultural, educational, recreational, conservation, sport, curative, corrective, detentional, penal, and medical institutions, agencies, and facilities; to provide any other public improvements, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city; to regulate the use of public improvements; and, for such purposes, property may be acquired by condemnation under Title 22 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated [O.C.G.A. title 22] or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted; 
(27)	Public peace. To provide for the prevention and punishment of drunkenness, riots, and public disturbances; 
(28)	Public transportation. To organize and operate or contract for such public transportation systems as are deemed beneficial; 
(29)	Public utilities and services. To grant franchises or make contracts for public utilities and public services and to prescribe the rates, fares, regulations, and standards and conditions of service applicable to the service to be provided by the franchise grantee or contractor, insofar as not in conflict with valid regulation of the Public Service Commission; 
(30)	Regulation of roadside areas. To prohibit or regulate and control the erection, removal, and maintenance of signs, billboards, trees, shrubs, fences, buildings, and any and all other structures or obstructions upon or adjacent to the rights of way of streets and roads or within view thereof, inside or abutting the corporate limits of the city and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violation of such ordinances; 
(31)	Retirement. To provide and maintain a retirement plan for officers and employees of the city; 
(32)	Roadways. To lay out, open, extend, widen, narrow, establish, or change the grade of, abandon or close, construct, pave, curb, gutter, adorn with shade trees, or otherwise improve, maintain, repair, clean, prevent erosion of, and light the roads, alleys, and walkways within the corporate limits of the city; to negotiate and execute leases over, through, under, or across any city property or the right of way of any street, road, alley, and walkway or portion thereof within the corporate limits of the city for bridges, passageways, or any other purpose or use between buildings on opposite sides of the street and for other bridges, overpasses, and underpasses for private use at such location and to charge a rental therefor in such manner as may be provided by ordinance; to authorize and control the construction of bridges, overpasses, and underpasses within the corporate limits of the city; to grant franchises and rights of way throughout the streets and roads and over the bridges and viaducts for the use of public utilities and for private use; and to require real estate owners to repair and maintain in a safe condition the sidewalks adjoining their lots or lands and to impose penalties for failure to do so; 
(33)	Sewer fees. To levy a fee, charge, or sewer tax as necessary to assure the acquiring, constructing, equipping, operating, maintaining, and extending of a sewage disposal plant and sewage system; to levy on those to whom sewers and sewage systems are made available a sewer service fee, charge, or tax for the availability or use of the sewers; to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charge and for enforcing payment of the same; and to charge, impose and collect a sewer connection fee or fees to those connected with the system; 
(34)	Solid waste disposal. To provide for the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse; and to regulate the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse by others; to provide for the separate collection of glass, tin, aluminum, cardboard, paper, and other recyclable materials; and to provide for the sale of such recyclable items; 
(35)	Special areas of public regulation. To regulate or prohibit junk dealers, pawnshops, the manufacture, sale, or transportation of intoxicating liquors, and the use and sale of firearms; to regulate the transportation, storage, and use of combustible, explosive, and inflammable materials, the use of lighting and heating equipment, and any other business or situation which may be dangerous to persons or property; to regulate and control the conduct of peddlers and itinerant traders, theatrical performances, exhibitions, and shows of any kind, by taxation or otherwise; and to license, tax, regulate, or prohibit professional fortunetelling, palmistry, adult bookstores, and massage parlors; 
(36)	Special assessments. To levy and provide for the collection of special assessments to cover the costs for any public improvements; 
(37)	Ad valorem taxes. To levy and provide for the assessment, valuation, revaluation, and collection of taxes on all property subject to taxation; 
(38)	Other taxes. To levy and collect such other taxes as may be allowed now or in the future by law; 
(39)	Taxicabs. To regulate and license vehicles operated for hire in the city; to limit the number of such vehicles; to require the operators thereof to be licensed; to require public liability insurance on such vehicles in the amounts to be prescribed by ordinance; and to regulate the parking of such vehicles; 
(40)	Urban redevelopment. To organize and operate an urban redevelopment program; 
(41)	Other powers. To exercise and enjoy all other powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities necessary or desirable to promote or protect the safety, health, peace, security, good order, comfort, convenience, or general welfare of the city and its inhabitants; to exercise all implied powers necessary to carry into execution all powers granted in this Charter as fully and completely as if such powers were fully stated herein; and to exercise all powers now or in the future authorized to be exercised by other municipal governments under other laws of the State of Georgia; and no listing of particular powers in this Charter shall be held to be exclusive of others, nor restrictive of general words and phrases granting powers, but shall be held to be in addition to such powers unless expressly prohibited to municipalities under the constitution or applicable laws of the State of Georgia. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 614), p. 4614, § 1.13) 
Sec. 1.14. - Exercise of powers. 
All powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities of the city, its officers, agencies, or employees shall be carried into execution as provided by this Charter. If this Charter makes no provision, such shall be carried into execution as provided by ordinance or as provided by pertinent laws of the State of Georgia. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 614), p. 4614, § 1.14) 
ARTICLE II. - GOVERNMENT STRUCTURE 

Sec. 2.10. - City council creation; number; election. 
The legislative authority of the government of this city, except as otherwise specifically provided in this Charter, shall be vested in a city council to be composed of a mayor and four councilmembers. The mayor and councilmembers shall be elected in the manner provided by this Charter. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 614), p. 4614, § 2.10) 
Sec. 2.11. - City council terms and qualifications for office. 
The members of the city council shall serve for terms of four years and until their respective successors are elected and qualified. No person shall be eligible to serve as mayor or councilmember unless he shall have been a resident of the city immediately prior to the date of the election of mayor or councilmembers; each such person shall continue to reside inside the city during said period of service and to be registered and qualified to vote in municipal elections of this city. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 614), p. 4614, § 2.11) 
Sec. 2.12. - Vacancy; filling of vacancies; suspensions. 
(a)	The office of mayor or councilmember shall become vacant upon the incumbent's death, resignation, forfeiture of office, or removal from office in any manner authorized by this Charter or the general laws of the State of Georgia. A vacancy in the office of mayor or councilmember shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term, if any, as provided for in this Charter. 
(b)	Upon the suspension from office of mayor or councilmember in any manner authorized by the general laws of the State of Georgia, the city council or those remaining shall appoint a successor for the duration of the suspension. If the suspension becomes permanent, then the office shall become vacant and shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term, if any, as provided for in this Charter. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 614), p. 4614, § 2.12) 
Sec. 2.13. - Compensation and expenses. 
The mayor and councilmembers shall receive compensation and expenses for their services as provided by ordinance. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 614), p. 4614, § 2.13) 
Sec. 2.14. - Conflicts of interest; holding other offices. 
(a)	No elected official, appointed officer, or employee of the city or any agency or political entity to which this Charter applies shall knowingly: 
(1)	Engage in any business or transaction or have a financial or other personal interest, direct or indirect, which is incompatible with the proper discharge of his official duties or which would tend to impair the independence of his judgment or action in the performance of his official duties; 
(2)	Engage in or accept private employment or render services for private interests when such employment or service is incompatible with the proper discharge of his official duties or would tend to impair the independence of his judgment or action in the performance of his official duties; 
(3)	Disclose confidential information concerning the property, government, or affairs of the governmental body by which he is engaged without proper legal authorization or use such information to advance the financial or other private interest of himself or others; 
(4)	Accept any valuable gift, whether in the form of service, loan, thing, or promise, from any person, firm, or corporation which to his knowledge is interested, directly or indirectly, in any manner whatsoever in business dealings with the governmental body by which he is engaged; provided, however, that an elected official who is a candidate for public office may accept campaign contributions and services in connection with any such campaign; 
(5)	Represent other private interests in any action or proceeding against this city or any portion of its government; or 
(6)	Vote or otherwise participate in the negotiation or in the making of any contract with any business or entity in which he has financial interest. 
(b)	Any elected official, appointed officer, or employee who shall have any private financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any contract or matter pending before or within any department of the city shall disclose such private interest to the city council. The mayor or any councilmember who has a private interest in any matter pending before the city council shall disclose such private interest and such disclosure shall be entered on the records of the city council, and he shall disqualify himself from participating in any decision or vote relating thereto. Any elected official, appointed officer, or employee of any agency or political entity to which this Charter applies who shall have any private financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any contract or matter pending before or within such entity shall disclose such private interest to the governing body of such agency or entity. 
(c)	No elected official, appointed officer, or employee of the city or any agency or entity to which this Charter applies shall use property owned by such governmental entity for personal benefit, convenience, or profit except in accordance with policies promulgated by the city council or the governing body of such agency or entity. 
(d)	Any violation of this section which occurs with the knowledge, express or implied, of a party to a contract or sale shall render said contract or sale voidable at the option of the city council. 
(e)	Except where authorized by law, neither the mayor nor any councilmember shall hold any other elective or compensated appointive office in the city or otherwise be employed by said government or any agency thereof during the term for which he was elected. No former mayor and no former councilmember shall hold any compensated appointive office in the city until one year after the expiration of the term for which he was elected. 
(f)	No appointive officer and no employee of the city shall continue in such employment upon qualifying as a candidate for nomination or election to any public office. 
(g)	[Commit malfeasance.] 
(1)	Any city officer or employee who knowingly conceals such financial interest or knowingly violates any of the requirements of this section shall be guilty of malfeasance in office or position and shall be deemed to have forfeited his office or position. 
(2)	Any officer or employee of the city who shall forfeit his office or position as described in paragraph [(g)](1) above shall be ineligible for appointment or election to or employment in a position in the city government for a period of three years thereafter. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 614), p. 4614, § 2.14) 
Sec. 2.15. - Inquiries and investigations. 
The city council may make inquiries and investigations into the affairs of the city and the conduct of any department, office or agency thereof, and for this purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony, and require the production of evidence. Any person who fails or refuses to obey a lawful order issued in the exercise of these powers by the city council shall be punished as provided by ordinance. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 614), p. 4614, § 2.15) 
Sec. 2.16. - General power and authority of the city council. 
Except as otherwise provided by the charter, the city council shall be vested with all the powers of government of this city as provided by Article I of this Charter. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 614), p. 4614, § 2.16) 
Sec. 2.17. - Eminent domain. 
The city council is hereby empowered to acquire, construct, operate, and maintain public ways, parks and playgrounds, cemeteries, markets, market houses, public building, libraries, sewers, drains, sewage treatment facilities, waterworks, electrical systems, gas systems, airports, hospitals, and charitable, educational, recreational, sport, curative, corrective, detentional, penal, and medical institutions, agencies, and facilities, and any other public improvements inside or outside the city, and to regulate the use thereof, and for such purposes, property may be condemned under procedures established under general law applicable now or as provided in the future. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 614), p. 4614, § 2.17) 
Sec. 2.18. - Organizational meetings. 
The city council shall hold an organizational meeting on the first Tuesday in January. The meeting shall be called to order by the city clerk and the oath of office shall be administered to the newly elected members as follows: 
"I do solemnly (swear)(affirm) that I will faithfully perform the duties of (mayor) (councilmember) of this city and that I will support and defend the charter thereof as well as the constitution and laws of the State of Georgia and the United States of America." 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 614), p. 4614, § 2.18) 
Sec. 2.19. - Regular and special meetings. 
(a)	The city council shall hold regular meetings at such times and places as prescribed by ordinance. 
(b)	Special meetings of the city council may be held on call of the mayor or two members of the city council. Notice of such special meetings shall be served on all other members personally, or by telephone personally, at least 48 hours in advance of the meeting. Such notice to councilmembers shall not be required if the mayor and all councilmembers are present when the special meeting is called. Such notice of any special meeting may be waived by a councilmember in writing before or after such a meeting, and attendance at the meeting shall also constitute a waiver of notice on any business transacted in such councilmember's presence. Only the business stated in the call may be transacted at the special meeting. 
(c)	All meetings of the city council shall be public to the extent required by law and notice to the public of special meetings shall be made fully as is reasonably possible two days prior to such meetings. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 614), p. 4614, § 2.19) 
Sec. 2.20. - Rules of procedure. 
(a)	The city council shall adopt its rules of procedure and order of business consistent with the provisions of this Charter and shall provide for keeping a journal of its proceedings, which shall be a public record. 
(b)	All committees and committee chairmen and officers of the city council shall be appointed by the mayor and shall serve at his pleasure. The mayor shall have the power to appoint new members to any committee at any time. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 614), p. 4614, § 2.20) 
Sec. 2.21. - Quorum; voting. 
Three councilmembers shall constitute a quorum and shall be authorized to transact business of the city council. Voting on the adoption of ordinances shall be by voice vote and the vote shall be recorded in the journal, but any member of the city council shall have the right to request a roll call vote and such vote shall be recorded in the journal. Except as otherwise provided in this Charter the affirmative vote of two councilmembers shall be required for the adoption of any ordinance, resolution, or motion. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 614), p. 4614, § 2.21) 
Sec. 2.22. - Ordinance form; procedures. 
(a)	Every proposed ordinance should be introduced in writing and in the form required for final adoption. No ordinance shall contain a subject which is not expressed in its title. The enacting clause shall be "The Council of the City of Riceboro hereby ordains … " and every ordinance shall so begin. 
(b)	An ordinance may be introduced by any councilmember and be read at a regular or special meeting of the city council. Ordinances shall be considered and adopted or rejected by the city council in accordance with the rules which it shall establish; provided, however, an ordinance shall not be adopted the same day it is introduced, except for emergency ordinances provided in Section 2.24 of this Charter. Upon introduction of any ordinance, the clerk shall as soon as possible distribute a copy to the mayor and to each councilmember and shall file a reasonable number of copies in the office of the clerk and at such other public places as the city council may designate. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 614), p. 4614, § 2.22) 
Sec. 2.23. - Action requiring an ordinance. 
Acts of the city council which have the force and effect of law shall be enacted by ordinance. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 614), p. 4614, § 2.23) 
Sec. 2.24. - Emergencies. 
To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property, or public peace, the city council may convene on call of the mayor or two councilmembers and promptly adopt an emergency ordinance, but such ordinance may not levy taxes; grant, renew or extend a franchise; regulate the rate charged by any public utility for its services; or authorize the borrowing of money except for loans to be repaid within 30 days. An emergency ordinance shall be introduced in the form prescribed for ordinances generally, except that it shall be plainly designated as an emergency ordinance and shall contain, after the enacting clause, a declaration stating that an emergency exists, and describing the emergency in clear and specific terms. An emergency ordinance may be adopted, with or without amendment, or rejected at the meeting at which it is introduced, but the affirmative vote of at least two councilmembers shall be required for adoption. It shall become effective upon adoption or at such later time as it may specify. Every emergency ordinance shall automatically stand repealed 30 days following the date upon which it was adopted, but this shall not prevent reenactment of the ordinance in the manner specified in this section if the emergency still exists. An emergency ordinance may also be repealed by adoption of a repealing ordinance in the same manner specified in this section for adoption of emergency ordinances. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 614), p. 4614, § 2.24) 
Sec. 2.25. - Codes of technical regulations. 
(a)	The city council may adopt any standard code of technical regulations by reference thereto in an adopting ordinance. The procedure and requirements governing such adopting ordinance shall be as prescribed for ordinances generally except that: (1) the requirements of subsection (b) of Section 2.22 of this Charter for distribution and filing of copies of the ordinance shall be construed to include copies of any code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance; and (2) a copy of each adopted code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance, shall be authenticated and recorded by the clerk pursuant to Section 2.26 of this Charter. 
(b)	Copies of any adopted code of technical regulations shall be made available by the clerk for distribution or for purchase at a reasonable price. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 614), p. 4614, § 2.25) 
Sec. 2.26. - Signing; authenticating; recording; codification; printing. 
(a)	The clerk shall authenticate by his signature and record in full in a properly indexed book kept for that purpose, all ordinances adopted by the council. 
(b)	The city council shall provide for the preparation of a general codification of all the ordinances of the city having the force and effect of law. The general codification shall be adopted by the city council by ordinance and shall be published promptly, together with all amendments thereto and such codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations as the city council may specify. This compilation shall be known and cited officially as "The Code of the City of Riceboro, Georgia." Copies of the Code shall be furnished to all officers, departments and agencies of the city, and made available for purchase by the public at a reasonable price as fixed by the city council. 
(c)	The city council shall cause each ordinance and each amendment to this Charter to be printed promptly following its adoption, and the printed ordinances and charter amendments shall be made available for purchase by the public at reasonable prices to be fixed by the city council. Following publication of the first code under this Charter and at all times thereafter, the ordinances and charter amendments shall be printed in substantially the same style as the code currently in effect and shall be suitable in form for incorporation therein. The city council shall make such further arrangements as deemed desirable with reproduction and distribution of any current changes in or additions to codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations included in the code. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 614), p. 4614, § 2.26) 
Sec. 2.27. - Election of mayor; forfeiture; compensation. 
The mayor shall be elected and serve for a term of four years and until his successor is elected and qualified. He shall be a qualified elector of this city and shall have been a resident of the city immediately preceding his election. He shall continue to reside inside this city during the period of his service. He shall forfeit his office on the same grounds and under the same procedure as for councilmembers. The compensation of the mayor shall be established in the same manner as for councilmembers. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 614), p. 4614, § 2.27) 
Sec. 2.28. - Mayor pro tem. 
By a majority vote, the city council shall elect a councilmember to serve as mayor pro tem. The mayor pro tem shall assume the duties and powers of the mayor during the mayor's disability or absence. Any such disability or absence shall be declared by a majority vote of the city council. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 614), p. 4614, § 2.28) 
Sec. 2.29. - Powers and duties of mayor. 
The mayor shall: 
(1)	Preside at all meetings of the city council; 
(2)	Be the head of the city for the purpose of service of process and for ceremonial purposes, and be the official spokesman for the city and the chief advocate of policy; 
(3)	Have the power to administer oaths and take affidavits; 
(4)	Sign as a matter of course on behalf of the city all written and approved contracts, ordinances, and other instruments executed by the city which by law are required to be in writing; 
(5)	Prepare and submit to the city council a recommended annual operating budget and recommended capital budget; 
(6)	Fulfill such other executive and administrative duties as the city council deems appropriate; 
(7)	Vote in the event that there is a tie vote on a matter before the city council; 
(8)	Be the chief executive of the city; 
(9)	See that all laws and ordinances of the city are faithfully executed; 
(10)	Exercise supervision over all executive and administrative activities; 
(11)	Submit to the city council at least once a year a statement covering the financial conditions of the city, and from time to time, such other information as the city council may request; 
(12)	Recommended [Recommend] to the city council such measures relative to the affairs of the city, improvement of the government, and promotion of the welfare of its inhabitants as he may deem expedient; 
(13)	Call special meetings of the city council as provided for in subsection (b) of Section 2.19 of this Charter; 
(14)	Provide for an annual audit of all accounts of the city; 
(15)	Require any department or agency of the city to submit written reports whenever he deems it expedient; and 
(16)	Perform such other duties as may be required by law, this Charter, or by ordinance. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 614), p. 4614, § 2.29) 
ARTICLE III. - ORGANIZATION OF GOVERNMENT, GENERAL AUTHORITY, AND ORDINANCES 

Sec. 3.10. - Administrative and service departments. 
(a)	Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, the city council, by ordinance, shall prescribe the functions or duties, and establish, abolish or alter all nonelective offices, positions of employment, departments, and agencies of the city, as necessary for the proper administration of the affairs and government of this city. 
(b)	Except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by law, the directors of departments and other appointed officers of the city shall be appointed solely on the basis of their respective administrative and professional qualifications. 
(c)	All appointive officers and directors of departments shall receive such compensation as prescribed by ordinance. 
(d)	There shall be a director of each department or agency who shall be its principal officer. Each director shall, subject to the direction and supervision of the mayor, be responsible for the administration and direction of the affairs and operations of his department or agency. 
(e)	All directors under the supervision of the mayor shall be nominated by the mayor with confirmation of appointment by the city council. The mayor may suspend or remove directors under his supervision. The mayor shall give written notice of such action and the reasons therefor to the director involved and to the city council. The director involved shall have 30 days in which he or she may appeal to the city council which, after a hearing, may override the mayor's action by a vote of three councilmembers. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 614), p. 4614, § 3.10) 
Sec. 3.11. - Boards, commissions, and authorities. 
(a)	The city council shall create by ordinance such boards, commissions and authorities to fulfill any investigative, quasi-judicial or quasi-legislative function the city council deems necessary, and shall by ordinance establish the composition, period of existence, duties and powers thereof. 
(b)	All members of boards, commissions and authorities of the city shall be appointed by the city council for such terms of office and in such manner as shall be provided by ordinance, except where other appointing authority, terms of office, or manner of appointment is prescribed by this Charter or by law. 
(c)	The city council, by ordinance, may provide for the compensation and reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses of the members of any board, commission or authority. 
(d)	Except as otherwise provided by charter or by law, no member of any board, commission or authority shall hold any elective office in the city. 
(e)	Any vacancy on a board, commission or authority of the city shall be filled for the unexpired term in the manner prescribed herein for original appointment, except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by law. 
(f)	No member of a board, commission or authority shall assume office until he has executed and filed with the clerk of the city an oath obligating himself to faithfully and impartially perform the duties of his office, such oath to be prescribed by ordinance and administered by the mayor. 
(g)	Any member of a board, commission or authority may be removed from office for cause by a vote of two members of the city council. 
(h)	Except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by law, each board, commission, or authority of the city shall elect one of its members as chairman and one member as vice-chairman, and may elect as its secretary one of its own members or may appoint as secretary an employee of the city. Each board, commission, or authority of the city government may establish such bylaws, rules, and regulations not inconsistent with this Charter, ordinances of the city, or law as it deems appropriate and necessary for the fulfillment of its duties or the conduct of its affairs. Copies of such bylaws, rules, and regulations shall be filed with the clerk of the city. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 614), p. 4614, § 3.11) 
Sec. 3.12. - City attorney. 
The city council and mayor by majority vote shall appoint a city attorney, together with such assistant city attorneys as may be authorized, and shall provide for the payment of such attorney or attorneys for services rendered to the city. The city attorney shall be responsible for representing and defending the city in all litigation in which the city is a party; may be the prosecuting officer in the municipal court; shall attend the meetings of the city council as directed; shall advise the city council, mayor, and other officers and employees of the city concerning legal aspects of the city's affairs; and shall perform such other duties as may be required of him by virtue of his position as city attorney. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 614), p. 4614, § 3.12) 
Sec. 3.13. - City clerk. 
(a)	The city council and mayor by majority vote shall appoint a city clerk who shall not be a councilmember. The city clerk shall be custodian of the official city seal; maintain city council records required by this Charter; and perform such other duties as may be required by the city council. 
(b)	The city clerk shall be directed by the city council to collect all taxes, licenses, fees, and other moneys belonging to the city subject to the provisions of this Charter and the ordinances of the city, and to enforce all laws of Georgia relating to the collection of delinquent taxes and sale or foreclosure for nonpayment of taxes by the city. The city clerk shall also be responsible for the general duties of a treasurer and fiscal officer. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 614), p. 4614, § 3.13) 
Sec. 3.14. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 3.14 was omitted without comment from the original act. 
Sec. 3.15. - City accountant. 
The city council shall appoint a city accountant to perform the duties of an accountant. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 614), p. 4614, § 3.15) 
Sec. 3.16. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 3.16 was omitted without comment from the original act. 
Sec. 3.17. - Personnel policies. 
The city council shall adopt rules and regulations consistent with this Charter concerning: 
(1)	The method of employee selection and probationary periods of employment; 
(2)	The administration of the position classification and pay plan, methods of promotion and application of service ratings thereto, and transfer of employees within the classification plan; 
(3)	Hours of work, vacation, sick leave, and other leaves of absence, overtime pay, and the order and manner in which layoffs shall be effected; 
(4)	Such dismissal hearings as due process may require; and 
(5)	Such other personnel notices as may be necessary to provide for adequate and systematic handling of personnel affairs. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 614), p. 4614, § 3.17) 
ARTICLE IV. - JUDICIAL BRANCH 

Sec. 4.10. - Municipal court. 
The city by ordinance shall have the authority to establish a court to be known as the "Municipal Court of the City of Riceboro" along the following lines and authority. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 614), p. 4614, § 4.10) 
Sec. 4.11. - Judges. 
(a)	The municipal court shall be presided over by a chief judge and such part-time, full-time, or standby judges as shall be provided by ordinance. The method of selection and terms of such judges shall be provided by ordinance. 
(b)	No person shall be qualified or eligible to serve as a judge on the municipal court unless he shall have attained the age of 21 years and shall be a member of the State Bar of Georgia. All judges shall be appointed by the city council. 
(c)	Compensation of the judges shall be fixed by ordinance. 
(d)	Judges may be removed for cause by a vote of three members of the city council. 
(e)	Before assuming office, each judge shall take an oath, given by the mayor, that he will honestly and faithfully discharge the duties of his office to the best of his ability and without fear, favor or partiality. The oath shall be entered upon the minutes of the city council journal required in Section 2.20 of this Charter. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 614), p. 4614, § 4.11) 
Sec. 4.12. - Convening. 
The municipal court shall be convened at regular intervals as provided by ordinance. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 614), p. 4614, § 4.12) 
Sec. 4.13. - Jurisdiction; powers. 
(a)	The municipal court shall try and punish violations of this Charter, all city ordinances, and such other violations as provided by law. 
(b)	The municipal court shall have authority to punish those in its presence for contempt, provided that such punishment shall not exceed $200.00 or ten days in jail. 
(c)	The municipal court may fix punishment for offence within its jurisdiction not exceeding a fine of $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 120 days or both such fine and imprisonment or may fix punishment by fine, imprisonment, or alternative sentencing as now or hereafter provided by law. 
(d)	The municipal court shall have authority to establish a schedule of fees to defray the cost of operation and shall be entitled to reimbursement of the actual cost of meals, transportation, and caretaking of prisoners bound over to superior courts for violations of state law. 
(e)	The municipal court shall have authority to establish bail and recognizance to ensure the presence of those charged with violations before said court and shall have discretionary authority to accept cash or personal or real property as surety bond for the appearance of persons charged with violations. Whenever any person shall give bail for his appearance and shall fail to appear at the time fixed for trial, his bond shall be forfeited by the judge presiding at such time and an execution shall be issued thereon by serving the defendant and his sureties with a rule nisi at least two days before a hearing on the rule nisi. In the event that cash or property is accepted in lieu of bond for security for the appearance of a defendant at trial, and, if such defendant fails to appear at the time and place fixed for trial, the cash so deposited shall be on order of the judge declared forfeited to the city, or the property so deposited shall have a lien against it for the value forfeited which lien shall be enforceable in the same manner and to the same extent as a lien for city property taxes. 
(f)	The municipal court shall have the same authority as superior courts to compel the production of evidence in the possession of any party; to enforce obedience to its orders, judgments, and sentences; and to administer such oaths as are necessary. 
(g)	The municipal court may compel the presence of all parties necessary to a proper disposal of each case by the issuance of summonses, subpoenas, and warrants which may be served as executed by any officer as authorized by this Charter or by law. 
(h)	Each judge of the municipal court shall be authorized to issue warrants for the arrest of persons charged with offenses against any ordinance of the city, and each judge of the municipal court shall have the same authority as a magistrate of the state to issue warrants for offenses against state laws committed within the city. 
(i)	The municipal court is specifically vested with all the jurisdiction and powers throughout the geographic area of this city granted by law to mayors, recorders, and police courts, and particularly by such laws as authorize the abatement of nuisances and prosecution of traffic violations. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 614), p. 4614, § 4.13) 
Sec. 4.14. - Certiorari. 
The right of certiorari from the decision and judgment of the municipal court shall exist in all criminal cases and ordinance violation cases, and such certiorari shall be obtained under the sanction of a judge of the Superior Court of Liberty County under the laws of the State of Georgia regulating the granting and issuance of writs of certiorari. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 614), p. 4614, § 4.14) 
Sec. 4.15. - Rules. 
With the approval of the city council, the judge shall have full power and authority to make reasonable rules and regulations necessary and proper to secure the efficient and successful administration of the municipal court; provided, however, that the city council may adopt in part or in total the rules and regulations applicable to superior courts. The rules and regulations made or adopted shall be filed with the city clerk, shall be available for public inspection, and, upon request, a copy shall be furnished to all defendants in municipal court proceedings at least 48 hours prior to said proceedings. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 614), p. 4614, § 4.15) 
ARTICLE V. - ELECTIONS 

Sec. 5.10. - Applicability of general law. 
All primaries and elections shall be held and conducted in accordance with Chapter 3 of Title 21 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, the "Georgia Municipal Election Code" [O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq.]. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 614), p. 4614, § 5.10) 
Sec. 5.11. - Nonpartisan elections. 
Political parties shall not conduct primaries for city offices and all names of candidates for city offices shall be listed without party labels. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 614), p. 4614, § 5.11) 
Sec. 5.12. - Special elections; vacancies. 
In the event that the office of mayor or councilmember shall become vacant for any cause whatsoever, the city council or those remaining shall appoint a successor for the remainder of the term. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 614), p. 4614, § 5.12) 
Sec. 5.13. - Removal of officers. 
(a)	The mayor, councilmembers, or other appointed officers provided for in this Charter shall be removed from office for any one or more of the following causes: 
(1)	Incompetence, misfeasance, or malfeasance in office; 
(2)	Conviction of a crime moral turpitude; 
(3)	Failure at any time to possess any of the qualifications of office as provided by this Charter or by law; 
(4)	Knowingly violating any express prohibition of this Charter; 
(5)	Abandonment of office or neglect to perform the duties thereof; or 
(6)	Failure for any other cause to perform the duties of office as required by this Charter or by state law. 
(b)	Removal of an officer pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall be accomplished by one of the following methods: 
(1)	By the vote of three councilmembers after an investigative hearing. In the event an elected officer is sought to be removed by the action of the city council, such officer shall be entitled to a written notice specifying the ground or grounds for removal and to a public hearing which shall be held not less than ten days after the service of such written notice. Any elected officer sought to be removed from office as herein provided shall have the right of appeal from the decision of the city council to the Superior Court of Liberty County. Such appeal shall be governed by the same rules as govern appeals to the superior court from the probate court. 
(2)	By an order of the Superior Court of Liberty County following a hearing on a complaint seeking such removal brought by any resident of the City of Riceboro. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 614), p. 4614, § 5.13) 
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCE 

Sec. 6.10. - Property tax. 
The city council may assess, levy, and collect an ad valorem tax on all real and personal property inside the corporate limits of the city that is subject to such taxation by the state and county. This tax is for the purpose of raising revenues to defray the costs of operating the city government, of providing governmental services, for the repayment of principal and interest on general obligations, and for any other public purpose as determined by the city council in its discretion. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 614), p. 4614, § 6.10) 
Sec. 6.11. - Millage. 
The city council by ordinance shall establish a millage rate for the city property tax, a due date, and the time period within which these taxes must be paid. The city council by ordinance may provide for the payment of these taxes by installments or in one lump sum, as well as authorize voluntary payment of taxes prior to the time when due. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 614), p. 4614, § 6.11) 
Sec. 6.12. - Occupation and business taxes. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to levy such occupation or business taxes as are not denied by law. Such taxes may be levied on both individuals and corporations who transact business in this city or who practice or offer to practice any profession or calling therein to the extent such persons have a constitutionally sufficient nexus to this city to be so taxed. The city council may classify businesses, occupations, professions or callings for the purpose of such taxation in any way which may be lawful and may compel the payment of such taxes as provided in Section 6.18 of this Charter. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 614), p. 4614, § 6.12) 
Sec. 6.13. - Licenses. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to require any individuals or corporations who transact business in this city or who practice or offer to practice any profession or calling inside this city to obtain a license or permit for such activity from the city and pay a reasonable fee for such license or permit where such activities are not now regulated by general law in such a way as to preclude city regulations. Such fees may reflect the total cost to the city of regulating the activity, and if unpaid, shall be collected as provided in Section 6.18 of this Charter. The city council by ordinance may establish reasonable requirements for obtaining or keeping such licenses as the public health, safety and welfare necessitates. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 614), p. 4614, § 6.13) 
Sec. 6.14. - Franchises. 
The city council shall have the power to grant franchises for the use of this city's streets and alleys for the purposes of railroads, street railways, telephone companies, electric companies, cable television companies, gas companies, transportation companies, and other similar organizations. The city council shall determine the duration, terms, whether the same shall be exclusive or nonexclusive, and the consideration for such franchises; provided, however, no franchise shall be granted for a period in excess of 35 years and no franchise shall be granted unless the city receives just and adequate compensation therefor. The city council shall provide for the registration of all franchises with the city clerk in a registration book kept by him. The city council may provide by ordinance for the registration within a reasonable time of all franchises previously granted. As an alternative the city shall be empowered to levy a tax upon the gross sales of such organizations to all customers serviced by each supplier within the corporate limits of the city and give credit against such tax for any fee paid under the above said franchise agreement by any such organization. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 614), p. 4614, § 6.14) 
Sec. 6.15. - Services charges. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to assess and collect fees, charges, and tolls for sewers, sanitary and health services, or any other services provided or made available within and without the corporate limits of the city for the total cost to the city of providing or making available such services. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in Section 6.18 of this Charter. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 614), p. 4614, § 6.15) 
Sec. 6.16. - Special assessments. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to assess and collect the cost of constructing, reconstructing, widening, or improving any public way, street, sidewalk, curbing, gutters, sewers, or other utility mains and appurtenances from the abutting property owners under such terms and conditions as are reasonable. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in Section 6.18 of this Charter. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 614), p. 4614, § 6.16) 
Sec. 6.17. - Other taxes. 
This city shall be empowered to levy any other tax allowed now or hereafter by law, and the specific mention of any right, power, or authority in this article shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general powers of this city to govern its local affairs. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 614), p. 4614, § 6.17) 
Sec. 6.18. - Collection of delinquent taxes and fees. 
The city council, by ordinance, may provide generally for the collection of delinquent taxes, fees, or other revenue due the city under Sections 6.10 through 6.17 of this Charter by whatever reasonable means as are not precluded by law. This shall include providing for the dates when the taxes or fees are due, late penalties or interest, issuance and execution of fi.fas. [fi. fa.], creation and priority of liens, making delinquent taxes and fees personal debts of the persons required to pay the taxes or fees imposed, revoking city licenses for failure to pay any city taxes or fees, and providing for the assignment or transfer of tax executions. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 614), p. 4614, § 6.18) 
Sec. 6.19. - General obligation bonds. 
The city council shall have the power to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized under this Charter or the laws of the state. Such bonding authority shall be exercised in accordance with the laws governing bond issuance by municipalities in effect at the time said issue is undertaken. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 614), p. 4614, § 6.19) 
Sec. 6.20. - Revenue bonds. 
Revenue bonds may be issued by the city council as state law now or hereafter provides. Such bonds are to be paid out of any revenue produced by the project, program, or venture for which they were issued. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 614), p. 4614, § 6.20) 
Sec. 6.21. - Short-term loans. 
The city may obtain short-term loans and must repay such loans not later than December 31 of each year, unless otherwise provided by law. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 614), p. 4614, § 6.21) 
Sec. 6.22. - Fiscal year. 
The city council shall set the fiscal year by ordinance. This fiscal year shall constitute the budget year and the year for financial accounting and reporting of each and every office, department, agency, and activity of the city government. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 614), p. 4614, § 6.22) 
Sec. 6.23. - Preparation of budgets. 
The city council shall provide an ordinance on the procedures and requirements for the preparation and execution of an annual operating budget, a capital improvement program, and a capital budget, including requirements as to the scope, content, and form of such budgets and programs. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 614), p. 4614, § 6.23) 
Sec. 6.24. - Submission of operating budget to city council. 
On or before a date fixed by the city council but not later than 30 days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the mayor shall submit to the city council a proposed operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year. The budget shall be accompanied by a message from the mayor containing a statement of the general fiscal policies of the city, the important features of the budget, explanations of major changes recommended for the next fiscal year, a general summary of the budget, and such other comments and information as he may deem pertinent. The operating budget and the capital improvements budget hereinafter provided for, the budget message, and all supporting documents shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and shall be open to public inspection. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 614), p. 4614, § 6.24) 
Sec. 6.25. - Action by city council on budget. 
(a)	The city council may amend the operating budget proposed by the mayor; except that the budget as finally amended and adopted must provide for all expenditures required by state law or by other provisions of this Charter and for all debt service requirements for the ensuing fiscal year, and the total appropriations from any fund shall not exceed the estimated fund balance, reserves, and revenues. 
(b)	The city council by ordinance shall adopt the final operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than the first day of the fiscal year. If the city council fails to adopt the budget by this date, the amounts appropriated for operation for the current fiscal year shall be deemed adopted for the ensuing fiscal year on a month-to-month basis, with all items prorated accordingly until such time as the city council adopts a budget for the ensuing fiscal year. Adoption of the budget shall take the form of an appropriations ordinance setting out the estimated revenues in detail by sources and making appropriations according to fund and by organizational unit, purpose, or activity as set out in the budget preparation ordinance adopted pursuant to Section 6.23 of this Charter. 
(c)	The amount set out in the adopted operating budget for each organizational unit shall constitute the annual appropriation for such, and no expenditure shall be made or encumbrance created in excess of the otherwise unencumbered balance of the appropriations or allotment thereof, to which it is chargeable. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 614), p. 4614, § 6.25) 
Sec. 6.26. - Tax levies. 
Following adoption of the operating budget, the city council shall levy by ordinance such taxes as are necessary. The taxes and tax rates set by such ordinance shall be such that reasonable estimates of revenues from such levy shall at least be sufficient, together with other anticipated revenues, fund balances, and applicable reserves, to equal the total amount appropriated for each of the several funds set forth in the annual operating budget for defraying the expenses of the general government of this city. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 614), p. 4614, § 6.26) 
Sec. 6.27. - Changes in appropriations. 
The city council by ordinance may make changes in the appropriations contained in the current operating budget at any regular, special, or emergency meeting called for such purpose, but any additional appropriations may be made only from an existing unexpended surplus. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 614), p. 4614, § 6.27) 
Sec. 6.28. - Capital improvements budget. 
(a)	On or before the date fixed by the city council, but no later than 30 days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the mayor shall submit to the city council a proposed capital improvements budget with his recommendations as to the means of financing the improvements proposed for the ensuing fiscal year. The city council shall have power to accept, with or without amendments, or reject the proposed program and proposed means of financing. The city council shall not authorize an expenditure for the construction of any building, structure, work, or improvement, unless the appropriations for such project are included in the capital improvements budget, except to meet a public emergency as provided in Section 2.24 of this Charter. 
(b)	The city council shall adopt by ordinance the final capital improvements budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than the first day of the fiscal year. No appropriation provided for in a prior capital improvements budget shall lapse until the purpose for which the appropriation was made shall have been accomplished or abandoned; provided, however, the mayor may submit amendments to the capital improvements budget at any time during the fiscal year accompanied by his recommendations. Any such amendments to the capital improvements budget shall become effective only upon adoption by ordinance. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 614), p. 4614, § 6.28) 
Sec. 6.29. - Independent audit. 
There shall be an annual independent audit of all city accounts, funds and financial transactions by a certified public accountant selected by the city council. The audit shall be conducted according to generally accepted accounting principles. Any audit of any funds by the state or federal governments may be accepted as satisfying the requirements of this Charter. Copies of all audit reports shall be available at printing costs to the public. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 614), p. 4614, § 6.29) 
Sec. 6.30. - Contracting procedures. 
No contract with the city shall be binding on the city unless: 
(1)	It is in writing; 
(2)	It is drawn by or submitted and reviewed by the city attorney, and as a matter of course, is signed by him to indicate such drafting or review; and 
(3)	It is made or authorized by the city council and such approval is entered in the city council journal of proceedings pursuant to Section 2.21 [2.20] of this Charter. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 614), p. 4614, § 6.30) 
Sec. 6.31. - Centralized purchasing. 
The city council shall by ordinance prescribe procedures for a system of centralized purchasing for the city. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 614), p. 4614, § 6.31) 
Sec. 6.32. - Sale of city property. 
(a)	The city council may sell and convey any real or personal property owned or held by the city for governmental or other purposes as now or hereafter provided by law. 
(b)	The city council may quitclaim any rights it may have in property not needed for public purposes upon report by the mayor and adoption of a resolution, both finding that the property is not needed for public or other purposes and that the interest of the city has no readily ascertainable monetary value. 
(c)	Whenever in opening, extending or widening any street, avenue, alley or public place of the city, a small parcel or tract of land is cut off or separated by such work from a larger tract or boundary of land owned by the city, the city council may authorize the mayor to execute and deliver in the name of the city a deed conveying said cut-off or separated parcel or tract of land to an abutting or adjoining property owner or owners in exchange for rights-of-way of said street, avenue, alley, or public place when such swap is deemed to be in the best interest of the city. All deeds and conveyances heretofore and hereafter so executed and delivered shall convey all title and interest the city has in such property, notwithstanding the fact that no public sale after advertisement was or is hereafter made. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 614), p. 4614, § 6.32) 
ARTICLE VII. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 7.10. - Bonds for officials. 
The officers and employees of this city, both elective and appointive, shall execute such surety or fidelity bonds in such amounts and upon such terms and conditions as the city council shall from time to time require by ordinance or as may be provided by law. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 614), p. 4614, § 7.10) 
Sec. 7.11. - Prior ordinances. 
All ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations now in force in the city not inconsistent with this Charter are hereby declared valid and of full effect and force until amended or repealed by the city council. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 614), p. 4614, § 7.11) 
Secs. 7.12, 7.13. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Sections 7.12 and 7.13 were omitted from the original act without comment. 
Sec. 7.14. - Pending matters. 
Except as specifically provided otherwise by this Charter, all rights, claims, actions, orders, contracts, and legal or administrative proceedings shall continue and any such ongoing work or cases shall be completed by such city agencies, personnel, or offices as may be provided by the city council. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 614), p. 4614, § 7.14) 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE GEORGIA LAWS 
This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 

 
Subpart B - LOCAL ACTS 
ARTICLE I. - JOINT FIRE PROTECTION FACILITIES AND EQUIPMENT AUTHORITY[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed in this article is 1994 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1077), p. 4826, which was dated April 5, 1994, to be effective July 1, 1994. The sequence of sections is the same as in the act comprising it. Amendments to the original act are indicated by history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a subsequent history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. The title, enactment, severability, repealer, transitional, ratification, publication and effective date provisions have been omitted, and where a section has been amended or repealed by a later provision, only the current language has been printed. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

Sec. 1. - [Definitions.] 
As used in this Act, the term "project" means a capital outlay project or projects as defined and authorized under subparagraph of O.C.G.A. § 48-8-111(a)(1)(C) consisting of fire protection facilities and equipment. 
Sec. 2. - [Created; appointment and term of members; vacancies; compensation; quorum.] 
(a)	There is created a body corporate and politic to be known as the Joint Liberty County, City of Gum Branch, City of Midway, City of Riceboro, and City of Walthourville Fire Protection Facilities and Equipment Authority which shall be deemed to be an instrumentality of the State of Georgia and a public corporation, and, by that name, style, and title, such body may contract and be contracted with, sue and be sued, implead and be impleaded, and complain and defend in all courts of law and equity. The authority shall have perpetual existence. 
(b)	The authority shall consist of 11 members, who shall be appointed as follows: 
(1)	The city council of Liberty County shall appoint seven members; 
(2)	The city council of the City of Gum Branch shall appoint one member; 
(3)	The city council of the City of Midway shall appoint one member; 
(4)	The city council of the City of Riceboro shall appoint one member; and 
(5)	The city council of the City of Walthourville shall appoint one member. 
(c)	No person shall be eligible to serve as a member of the authority unless that person: 
(1)	Is a resident of Liberty County at the time of appointment; 
(2)	Continues to reside within Liberty County during that person's term of office; and 
(3)	Is a registered and qualified elector of Liberty County. 
(d)	Members of the authority shall be appointed by a majority vote of the members of the city council authorized to make such appointment. 
(e)	The initial members of the authority shall be appointed as soon as practicable after July 1, 1994, and serve for a term of office of one year and until their respective successors are appointed and qualified. 
(f)	Successors to initial members of the authority whose terms of office expire in 1995 and all future successors to members of the authority whose terms of office are to expire shall be appointed immediately preceding the expiration of such terms and shall serve for terms of office of one year each and until the appointment and qualification of their respective successors. 
(g)	There shall be no limit to the number of terms of office to which a person may be appointed to serve as a member of the authority. 
(h)	In the event a vacancy occurs for any reason, such vacancy shall be filled by the applicable appointing authority. Any person appointed to fill such vacancy shall serve for the remainder of the unexpired term of office and until the appointment and qualification of such person's successor. 
(i)	The members of the authority shall receive no salary for their services. 
(j)	The authority shall have full power to organize, adopt rules for its government, and generally to direct the affairs of the authority. No vacancy on the authority shall impair the power of the authority to exercise all of the rights and powers of and perform all of the duties and obligations of the authority. 
(k)	The chairperson of the authority shall be a member elected annually by the membership of the authority. Such person shall serve as chairperson during that person's term of office. 
(l)	A majority of the members in office shall constitute a quorum. The authority shall have perpetual existence; provided, however, that nothing contained in this Act shall preclude the General Assembly of Georgia from amending this Act. 
Sec. 3. - [Members to act as trustees; audit of books and records.] 
The members of the authority shall be accountable in all respects as trustees, and the authority shall keep suitable books and records of all its obligations, contracts, transactions, undertakings, income, receipts of every nature, and expenditures of every kind. The financial books and records of the authority shall be audited annually by the same auditor employed to audit the books and records of the Liberty County government. Said audit shall be paid for by the authority, and copies shall be furnished to the Board of Commissioners of Liberty County. Said audit shall be a public record. 
Sec. 4. - [Purpose of authority; powers.] 
(a)	The purpose of the authority shall be for the acquiring, constructing, equipping, or any combination thereof, in accordance with subparagraph O.C.G.A. § 48-8-111(a)(1)(C) of a capital outlay project or projects consisting of fire protection facilities and equipment for the use and benefit of the citizens of Liberty County, the City of Gum Branch, the City of Midway, the City of Riceboro, and the City of Walthourville. The proceeds collected pursuant to the levy of the special county 1 percent sales and use tax pursuant to Article 3 of Chapter 8 of Title 48 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 48-8-110 et seq.] shall only be expended for such capital outlay project purposes and shall not be expended for maintenance and operation purposes. Without limiting the generality of any provisions of this Act, the further purpose of the authority is declared to be that of acquiring, constructing, equipping, maintaining, and operating adequate fire protection services, facilities, and equipment; making such facilities and the services thereof available to public and private consumers and users located in Liberty County and its environs, including municipalities inside the county; extending and improving such facilities; acquiring the necessary property therefor, both real and personal, with the right to contract for the use of or to lease or sell any or all of such facilities, including real property, to any persons, firms, or corporations, whether public or private, if in the sole judgment of the authority such use, lease, or sale supports the general purposes of the authority; and, doing all things deemed by the authority necessary, convenient, and desirable for and incident to the efficient and proper development and operation of such type of undertakings. 
(b)	The authority shall have the power to: 
(1)	Adopt and alter a corporate seal; 
(2)	Make contracts and execute all instruments necessary or convenient in connection with its purposes; and 
(3)	Adopt, alter, or repeal its own bylaws, rules, and regulations governing the manner in which its business may be transacted and in which the power granted to it may be enjoyed, as the authority may deem necessary or expedient in facilitating its business. 
Sec. 5. - [Limitations on powers.] 
The authority shall not have the power of eminent domain. The authority shall not have the power to issue revenue bonds or certificates of participation. The authority shall not have the power to incur any indebtedness in or for the purpose of the acquisition of real or personal property. 
Sec. 6. - [Actions against authority.] 
Any action brought against the authority shall be brought in the Superior Court of Liberty County and such court shall have exclusive jurisdiction of such action. 
Sec. 7. - [Powers supplemental.] 
The provisions of this Act shall be deemed to provide an additional and alternative method for the doing of the things authorized by this Act and shall be regarded as supplemental and additional to powers conferred by other laws, and shall not be regarded as in derogation of any powers now existing. 
Sec. 8. - [Purpose of act; liberal construction.] 
This Act, being for the welfare of Liberty County and its inhabitants, shall be liberally construed to effect the purposes of this Act. 
LOCAL ACTS COMPARATIVE TABLE GEORGIA LAWS 
This table shows the location of the sections of the Local Acts and any amendments thereto. 

 
PART II - CODE OF ORDINANCES 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal Home Rule Act, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; home rule for municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-3; limitations on home rule for municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6; authority to adopt ordinances for regulation of matters for which no provision has been made by general law, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20; duty to codify ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-19; inspection of public records, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70 et seq.; requirements for publication of code, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-19; maximum penalties that may be imposed by municipalities, O.C.G.A. §§ 36-32-1, 36-32-5, 36-35-6; additional penalties and bond in certain criminal and traffic cases, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-73; authority to impose community service as punishment, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-1; alternative sentences by municipal courts, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-5; municipal corporation defined, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-1. 

Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
The provisions embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated "The Code of the City of Riceboro, Georgia," and may be so cited. This Code may also be referred to by the shortened form "Riceboro Code." 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt ordinances for regulation of matters for which no provision has been made by general law, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20; duty to codify ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-19. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
As used in this Code, the following terms and phrases shall have the meanings indicated unless otherwise specifically provided, and the following rules of construction shall be applied: 
Applicability. In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council. The rules of construction and definitions set out in this section shall not be applied to any section of this Code which contains any express provisions excluding such construction or where the subject matter or context of the section may be repugnant thereto. 
As soon as possible. The term "as soon as possible" means within a reasonable time, having due regard to all the circumstances. 
City. The term "the city" or "this city" means the City of Riceboro, Georgia. 
City council. The term "city council" means the governing authority of the City of Riceboro, Georgia. 
Code. The term "Code" refers to The Code of the City of Riceboro, Georgia. 
Computation of time. When a number of days is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, the first day shall be excluded and the last day shall be counted. If the last day falls on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise such privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action shall fall on a public or legal holiday as set forth in state law, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following business day to exercise such privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, an intermediate Saturday, Sunday, and legal holiday shall be excluded in the computation. 
Conjunctions. Where a provision involves two or more items, conditions, provisions, or events connected by any of the conjunctions "and," "or," "either … or," or "neither … nor," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows: 
(1)	The term "and" indicates that all the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply. 
(2)	The term "or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events may apply singly or in any combination. 
(3)	The terms "either … or" and "neither … nor" indicate that the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events shall apply singly, but not in combination. 
County. The term "county" means Liberty County, Georgia. 
Court. The term "court" means the municipal court, if one has been established under authority provided in the city Charter, or the county court of appropriate jurisdiction. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department or other officer of the city to do some act or perform some duty, it shall be construed to authorize such department head or officer to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act or perform the required duty unless the terms of the provision designate otherwise. 
Department, city council, agency. The name or title of any department, city council, or agency, unless otherwise specifically stated otherwise, shall be read as though the words "of the City of Riceboro, Georgia" were added thereto. 
Fee schedule or schedule of fees and charges. The term "fee schedule" or "schedule of fees and charges" means the official consolidated list maintained in the city clerk's office that lists rates for utility or other public enterprises, fees of any nature, deposit amounts and various charges as determined from time to time by the city council. 
Gender. A term importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be implied to the female gender and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. 
Governing authority, governing body. The term "governing authority" or "governing body" means the city council of the City of Riceboro, Georgia. 
HAMPO means the Hinesville Area Metropolitan Planning Organization. 
Incorporated limits or incorporated areas of the city. The term "incorporated limits" or "incorporated areas of the city" means all areas of the city that are not situated within the territorial limits of an incorporated town or city. 
Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirement adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. 
Joint authority. Whenever a joint authority is given to three or more persons or officers, it shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of them. 
Judge. The term "judge" means the judge of the city court. 
Keeper, proprietor. The terms "keeper" and "proprietor" mean and include persons as the term "person" is defined herein, whether acting by themselves or through an agent or employee. 
Law. The term "law" means and denotes applicable federal law, the state constitution and statutes, this Code, ordinances and resolutions of the city, and, when appropriate, any and all rules and regulations that may be promulgated thereunder. 
LCPC. The acronym "LCPC" means the Liberty Consolidated Planning Commission. 
Liberal construction; minimum requirements; overlapping provisions. 
(1)	The ordinary signification shall be applied to all words, except words of art or words connected with a particular trade or subject matter when they shall have the signification attached to them by experts in such trade or with reference to such subject matter. 
(2)	In all interpretations, the courts shall look diligently for the intention of the city council, keeping in view, at all times, the old law, the evil, and the remedy. Grammatical errors shall not vitiate, and a transposition of words and clauses may be resorted to when the sentence or clause is without meaning as it stands. 
(3)	All general provisions, terms, phrases, and expressions contained in this Code shall be liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the city council may be fully carried out. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience, and general welfare. 
May. The term "may" is to be construed as being permissive. 
Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be constructed according to the common and approved usage of the language; but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. 
Number. The singular number shall include the plural and the plural number shall include the singular. 
Oath. The term "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the terms "affirm" and "affirmed" shall be equivalent to the terms "swear" and "sworn." 
O.C.G.A. The abbreviation "O.C.G.A." refers to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
Officials or officers. Whenever reference is made to officials, city councils, commissions, departments or other municipal agents by title only, such reference shall be read as though followed by the words "of Riceboro, Georgia." 
Ordinance. The term "ordinance" means a legislative act of the municipal governing body of a general and permanent nature. 
Owner. The term "owner," when applied to a building or to land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, join tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a part of such building or land. 
Person. The term "person" includes a corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization, and any other group action as a unit, as well as an individual. 
Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property except real property, as hereinafter defined. 
Preceding, following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Premises. Whenever the term "premises" is used, it means place. 
Property. The term "property" includes real, personal, and mixed estates and interests. 
Public place. The term "public place" means any park, cemetery, shopping center, schoolyard, or open space adjacent thereto, or any area available accessible to the public, regardless of whether privately or publicly owned, and any place that the public is invited or permitted to go or to congregate. 
Real property. The term "real property" includes lands, tenements, and hereditaments. 
Reasonable time or reasonable notice. The term "reasonable time" or "reasonable notice" shall be deemed to mean only such time as may be necessary for the prompt performance of the act required. 
Resolution. The term "resolution" means a legislative act of the city governing authority of a special or temporary character. 
Shall. The term "shall" is mandatory. 
Signature, subscription. The term "signature" or "subscription" includes a mark intended as such when the person cannot write. 
State. The term "the state" or "this state" means the State of Georgia. 
Statute. The term "statute," unless otherwise specifically stated, refers to the indicated portion of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
Tenant or occupant. The term "tenant" or "occupant," when applied to a building or to land, includes any person holding a written or oral lease of, or who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others. 
Tense. Terms used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
Week. The term "week" means seven days. 
Will. The term "will" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
Writing and written. The terms "writing" and "written" include printing and any other mode of representing words and letters. 
State Law reference— Statutory definitions and rules of construction, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1 et seq.; construction of statutory definitions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-2; general statutory definition, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines, notes, and references. 
(a)	The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, not as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or re-enacted. 
(b)	The history or source notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are intended merely to indicate the source of matter contained in the section. Editor's notes, Charter references and state law references that appear after sections or subsections of this Code or which otherwise appear in footnote form are provided for the convenience of the user of the Code and have no legal effect. 
(c)	All references to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions, or sections are to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions, or section of this Code, unless otherwise specified. 
State Law reference— Notes and catchlines of code sections not part of law, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-7. 
Sec. 1-4. - Effect of repeal or expiration of Code section. 
(a)	The repeal of a Code section or ordinance, or its expiration by virtue of any provision contained therein, shall not affect any right accrued or any offense committed, any penalty or punishment incurred, or any proceeding commenced before the repeal took effect or the ordinance expired. 
(b)	When any ordinance repealing a former Code section, ordinance, clause or provision shall be itself repealed, such repeal shall not be construed to revive such former Code section, ordinance, clause, or provision unless it shall be expressly so provided. 
Sec. 1-5. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)	By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive, permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city council or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete. The new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. Charter amendments may be included in like manner. 
(b)	In the preparation of a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code that have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)	When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)	Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)	Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)	Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)	Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ through ____________ " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)	Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; 
but, in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-6. - Amendments to Code. 
(a)	All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code that amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion therein. When subsequent ordinances repeal any chapter, section or subsection or any portion thereof, such repealed portions may be excluded from said Code by omission from reprinted pages. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed, or omitted in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time as this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code by the city council. 
(b)	Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code shall be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section ____________ of The Code of the City of Riceboro, Georgia, is hereby amended to read as follows: … . The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)	In the event a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language shall be used: "That The Code of the City of Riceboro, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered ____________ , which said section reads as follows: … . The new section shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)	All sections, articles, chapters or provisions to be repealed must be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, with reference to the subject matter, as the case may be. 
Sec. 1-7. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend by additions or deletions any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever, except by ordinance or resolution or other official act of the city council. 
State Law reference— Altering, falsifying, or stealing public records unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 45-11-1. 
Sec. 1-8. - Exclusion of special or temporary ordinances. 
Ordinances hereafter adopted which are not of a general or permanent nature shall be numbered consecutively, authenticated, published and recorded in the book of ordinances, but shall not be prepared for insertion in this Code, nor be deemed a part hereof. 
Sec. 1-9. - Form of Code; repository; maintenance. 
A copy of this Code shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk, preserved in looseleaf form or in such other form as the clerk may consider most expedient. It shall be the express duty of the clerk or his designee to insert in their designated places all resolutions, general resolutions and ordinances that indicate the intention of the city council to make the same a part of this Code, when the same have been printed or reprinted in page form, and to extract from this Code all provisions that may be from time to time repealed by the city council. A copy of this Code shall be available in the office of the city clerk for examination by all persons. 
State Law reference— Inspection of public records, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70 et seq.; requirements for publication of code, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-19. 
Sec. 1-10. - Responsibility of city personnel with respect to assigned copies of Code. 
Each city official or employee assigned a copy of this Code shall be responsible for maintaining the same and for the proper insertion of amendatory pages as received. Each such copy shall remain the property of the city and shall be turned over by the official or employee having custody thereof, upon expiration of his term of office or employment, to his successor or to the city clerk, in case he shall have no successor. 
Sec. 1-11. - General penalty; continuing violations; violations as public nuisance. 
(a)	In this section, the term "violation of this Code" means: 
(1)	Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared to be an unlawful act, an offense, or a misdemeanor by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance; 
(2)	Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance, rule, or regulation authorized by ordinance; or 
(3)	Failure to perform an act if the failure is declared a misdemeanor, an offense, or an unlawful omission by ordinance, rule, or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(b)	The term "violation of this Code" does not include the failure of a city officer or city employee to perform an official duty, unless it is provided that failure to perform the duty is to be punished as provided in this section, or it is clear from the context of this Code that it is the intent of the city to impose the penalty provided for in this section upon the city officer or employee. 
(c)	Except as otherwise provided in this Code or by general law, a person convicted of a violation of this Code shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 120 days, or work on the streets or public works for a period not exceeding 120 days, or both, or any combination thereof. 
(d)	All sentences must be in the alternative, and fines may be imposed with the alternative of the other punishment in the event the fines are not paid. Each day any violation of any provision of this Code or any such ordinance, resolution, rule, regulation or order shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(e)	Except as otherwise provided in this Code, each day that a violation of this Code continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(f)	Violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time are a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief and by such other means as are provided by law. Further, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this Code or any such ordinance, resolution, rules, regulation or order shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be abated by the city as provided by law. 
(g)	The imposition of a penalty does not prohibit equitable relief. 
(h)	The imposition of a penalty does not prohibit revocation or suspension of a license, permit, or franchise or the imposition of other administrative sanctions. 
(i)	All fines shall be paid into the city treasury. 
(j)	In the event community service is substituted for a fine, the monetary rate for hourly work shall be the federal minimum hourly wage. 
(k)	If it is deemed by a court of competent jurisdiction that a punishment imposed under this Code conflicts with state law, the punishment shall be the maximum permitted by law. 
State Law reference— Maximum penalties that may be imposed by municipalities, O.C.G.A. §§ 36-35-6, 36-32-1, 36-32-5; additional penalties and bond in certain criminal and traffic cases, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-73; authority to impose community service as punishment, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-1; alternative sentences by municipal courts, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-5; powers of municipal court judges in criminal cases, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-3; jurisdiction of municipal court, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-6 et seq. 
Sec. 1-12. - Prior offenses, penalties, contracts or rights not affected by adoption of Code. 
(a)	Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(b)	The adoption of this Code shall not be interpreted as authorizing or permitting any use or the continuance of any use of a structure or premises in violation of any ordinance or resolution in effect on the date of adoption of this Code. 
Sec. 1-13. - Continuation of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are substantially the same as ordinances existing at the time of the effective date of this Code, shall be considered continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-14. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
(a)	Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)	Any rates, fees or charges consistent with this Code; 
(2)	Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds for the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the city; 
(3)	Any ordinance or resolution consistent with this Code prescribing traffic regulations for specific locations, such as prescribing through streets, parking limitations, parking prohibitions, one-way traffic or limitations on loads of vehicles or loading zones; 
(4)	Any ordinance or resolution consistent with this Code fixing salaries of, or providing policies and programs for, or providing retirement, disability or death benefits for officials, officers or employees of the city; 
(5)	Any budget ordinance or appropriation ordinance; 
(6)	Any ordinance levying any tax; 
(7)	Any right or franchise granted by any ordinance or resolution; 
(8)	Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, closing, paving, widening or vacating any street or public way in the city; 
(9)	Any ordinance establishing and prescribing the street grades of any street in the city; 
(10)	Any ordinance providing for local improvements or assessing taxes therefor; 
(11)	Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision within the city; 
(12)	Any zoning ordinance or any ordinance regulating subdivisions or any ordinance regulating signs or any ordinance regulating building design standards; 
(13)	Any ordinance or resolution adopted for purposes that have been consummated; 
(14)	Any ordinance that is temporary, although general in effect, or special, although permanent in effect; and 
(15)	Any resolution of the city not in conflict with this Code. 
(b)	All such ordinances or resolutions set forth in subsection (a) of this section are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
Sec. 1-15. - Severability of parts of Code. 
If any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional, invalid or unenforceable by a court of competent jurisdiction, it shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs, and sections of this Code. 
State Law reference— Severability of state legislation, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-3. 
Sec. 1-16. - Conflicting regulations. 
(a)	If the provisions of different chapters conflict with each other, the provisions of each individual chapter shall control all issues arising out of the events and persons intended to be governed by that chapter. 
(b)	If the provisions of different sections of the same chapter conflict with each other, the provision which is more specific in its application to the events or persons raising the conflict shall control over the more general provision. 
(c)	If any of the provisions hereof conflict, and the conflict cannot be resolved by application of subsections (a) and (b) of this section, the more stringent regulation shall apply and the specific provision shall prevail over the general. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal Home Rule Act, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; home rule for municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-3; limitations on home rule for municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6; general authority of municipalities, O.C.G.A. §§ 36-34-1 et seq., 36-35-1 et seq.; liability of municipal corporations, O.C.G.A. § 36-33-1 et seq.; limitations on home rule powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6; provisions applicable to counties and municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-1 et seq.; provisions applicable to counties, municipalities, and other governmental entities, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-2 et seq.; liability of municipal corporations for acts or omissions, O.C.G.A. § 36-33-1 et seq.; municipal acquisition and disposition of real and personal property, O.C.G.A. § 36-37-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 2-1—2-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY COUNCIL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of council to bind subsequent council, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-3; councilmen incompetent to hold other municipal office, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-4; effect of residence in annexed territory as qualification for office, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-5; voting when personally interested, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-6; method of calling election in the event all seats in municipal governing authority are vacant, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-13; initial terms of office of members of governing authority, O.C.G.A. § 36-31-9. 

Secs. 2-19—2-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— General authority of municipalities, O.C.G.A. §§ 36-34-1 et seq., 36-35-1 et seq.; liability of municipal corporations, O.C.G.A. § 36-33-1 et seq.; limitations on home rule powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6; authority to provide for, regulate, etc., officers and employees, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2; liability of municipality for acts of officers, O.C.G.A. § 36-33-3; personal liability of municipal officers, O.C.G.A. § 36-33-4; local government officers and employees not subject to liability for torts involving use of government vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 36-92-3; fixing of salaries of municipal employees, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-4; training of members of municipal governing authorities, O.C.G.A. § 36-45-4; local referenda for abolishing local offices or shortening or lengthening term, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-11; authority to provide compensation and employee benefits to municipal officers and employees, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-4. 

Sec. 2-40. - Personnel manual adopted. 
The city has compiled the Riceboro Personnel Policy and Procedure Manual which is adopted by reference as if fully set forth herein and as amended from time to time by the city council. 
Secs. 2-41—2-68. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DEPARTMENTS AND COMMITTEES 

Secs. 2-69—2-116. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, AGENCIES AND AUTHORITIES 

Sec. 2-117. - Liberty Consolidated Planning Commission. 
The city has elected to participate in the Liberty Consolidated Planning Commission (LCPC) which is governed by bylaws adopted by that commission. A copy of the LCPC bylaws are available in the office of the city clerk or from the LCPC. 
(Ord. of 6-2-2009, § I(14-2)) 
Sec. 2-118. - Hinesville Area Metropolitan Planning Organization. 
The city has elected to participate in the Hinesville Area Metropolitan Planning Organization (HAMPO) which is governed by bylaws adopted by that organization. A copy of the HAMPO bylaws are available in the office of the city clerk, from the LCPC, or from HAMPO. 
Sec. 2-119. - Liberty County Water Planning Council. 
The city has elected to participate in the Liberty County Water Planning Council (LCWP) which is governed by bylaws adopted by that organization. A copy of the council's bylaws are available in the office of the city clerk or from the council. 
Sec. 2-120. - County-provided services. 
The city has elected to participate in the intergovernmental agreement by which the county, through its county board of commissioners, provides certain roadway maintenance and animal control services to the city. A copy of the intergovernmental agreement is available in the office of the city clerk or from the county board of commissioners. 
Secs. 2-121—2-157. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal finance generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-1 et seq.; adoption of budget articles and resolutions, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-1 et seq.; political subdivision audits, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-7; accounting for public funds, O.C.G.A. § 45-8-1; limitations on use of purchasing and contract procedures, O.C.G.A. § 34-4-3.1; municipal bonds, O.C.G.A. § 36-38-1; standards for city and county audits, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-8; officer responsible for political subdivision investments, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-4; public works bidding, O.C.G.A. § 26-91-1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-158. - Fiscal year. 
The fiscal year of the city shall begin on July 1 and end on June 30 of each year. 
State Law reference— Fiscal year required to be established by ordinance, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-3. 
Sec. 2-159. - Fee schedule; fees established by resolution. 
The city maintains a schedule of fees for permits, licenses, and other municipal charges. The amount of fees or charges imposed by the city including, but not limited to, those encompassed in the city's fee schedule, shall be established from time to time by resolution of the city council, as it deems necessary. The fee schedule compiled by the city council is adopted herein by reference as though fully set forth in this Code. 
Sec. 2-160. - Identity theft prevention program. 
The city has implemented an identity theft prevention program (red flag policy) to satisfy the requirements of compliance with 16 CFR 681.2 and to detect, prevent and mitigate identity theft by identifying and detecting identity theft red flags, and by responding to such red flags in a manner that will prevent identity theft. The policy is adopted as though fully set forth herein. A copy of the policy is available in the office of the city clerk. 
Secs. 2-161—2-188. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - RECORDS MANAGEMENT 

Secs. 2-189—2-210. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - ETHICS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-211. - Intent. 
It is essential to the proper administration and operation of the city that the members of the city council be, and give the appearance of being, independent and impartial; that public office not be used for private gain; and that there be public confidence in the integrity of the city council. The city council finds that the public interest requires that they protect against such conflicts of interest by establishing appropriate ethical standards with respect to the conduct of the members of the city council in situations where a conflict may exist. 
(Res. of 12-3-2002, § 1) 
Sec. 2-212. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Complaint means a written sworn statement filed with the mayor or his designee containing specific allegations of misconduct by a member; provided, however, such allegations must be filed within six months of discovery of the alleged misconduct. 
Interest means any direct pecuniary benefit, which is not a remote interest held by or accruing to a member of the city council as a result of a contract or transaction that is or may be the subject of an official act or action by or with the city. A member of the city council shall be deemed to have an interest in transactions involving: 
(1)	Any person in the member's immediate family; 
(2)	Any person with whom a contractual relationship exists whereby the member may receive any payment or other benefits unless the member is receiving a benefit for goods or services in the normal course of business for which the member has paid a commercially reasonable rate; 
(3)	Any business in which the member is a director, officer, employee, agent, or shareholder, except as otherwise provided herein; or 
(4)	Any person of whom the member is a creditor, whether secured or unsecured. 
(Res. of 12-3-2002, § 2) 
Sec. 2-213. - Certified City of Ethics program. 
For purposes of qualifying for the Georgia Municipal Association's Certified City of Ethics program, the city council, as a body and as individual members, has subscribed to and pledged to conduct its and their affairs in accordance with the following ethics principles as defined in the Model Code of Ethics for Georgia City Officials published by the Georgia Municipal Association: 
(1)	To serve others, and not ourselves; 
(2)	To use resources with efficiency and economy; 
(3)	To treat all people fairly; 
(4)	To use the power of our positions for the well-being of our constituents; and 
(5)	To create an environment of honesty, openness, and integrity. 
Secs. 2-214—2-230. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CONDUCT STANDARDS 

Sec. 2-231. - Prohibitions. 
No member of the city council shall: 
(1)	By conduct, give reasonable basis or the impression that any person can improperly influence him or unduly enjoy his favor in the performance of official acts; 
(2)	Directly or indirectly request, exact, receive, or agree to receive a gift, loan, favor, promise, or thing of value for himself or another person if it could reasonably be considered to influence the member in the discharge of official duties, except that this prohibition shall not apply to: 
a.	An occasional nonpecuniary gift of insignificant value; 
b.	An award publicly presented in recognition of public service; 
c.	A commercially reasonable loan or other financial transaction made in the ordinary course of business by an institution or individual authorized by state law to engage in the making of such a loan or financial transaction; 
d.	Campaign contributions made and reported in accordance with state law; 
(3)	Disclose or otherwise use confidential information acquired by virtue of his official position for his or another person's private gain; 
(4)	Use his official position to attempt to secure privileges that are not available to the general public; 
(5)	Engage in, accept employment with, or render services for any private business or professional activity when such employment or tendering of services is adverse to and incompatible with the proper discharge of official duties, except that this prohibition shall not apply to a member of the city council who is a licensed professional and appears on behalf of any applicant in such professional capacity, so long as disclosures required in this article are made 30 days prior to any action being taken, and the member is associated with the project at the time the initial application is filed; 
(6)	Engage in any activity or transaction that is prohibited by law now existing or hereafter enacted which is applicable to him by virtue of being a member of the city council; 
(7)	Use his position to request or require an employee to: 
a.	Do clerical work on behalf of the member's family, business, social, church or fraternal interest when such work is not furthering a city interest; 
b.	Perform any work outside the employee's normal course of municipal employment; 
c.	Purchase goods or services to be used for personal, business, or political purposes; 
d.	Work for the member personally without paying the employee just compensation; 
(8)	Use government property of any kind for other than officially approved activities, nor shall he direct employees to use such property for any purposes other than those officially approved; or 
(9)	Use his position in any way to coerce another person to provide any financial benefit to himself or persons having an interest. 
(Res. of 12-3-2002, § 3) 
Sec. 2-232. - Disclosure of conflicts of interest. 
(a)	An appointed member of the city council who has an interest that he has reason to believe may be affected by his official acts or actions or by the official acts or actions of the city council shall disclose the precise nature of such interest by written or verbal statement 30 days prior to the city council's taking official action on a matter affecting such interest and abstain from discussion and voting. An elected member of the city council shall disclose the nature of any interest he has at the time such matter is presented to the mayor and council for discussion. 
(b)	Such written or verbal statements shall be recorded into the minutes of the meeting and thus become part of the public record. Following any disclosure made pursuant to this section, the member shall refrain from all ex-parte communications with other members regarding the application in which he has an interest. 
(Res. of 12-3-2002, § 4) 
Sec. 2-233. - Disqualification. 
A member of the city council shall disqualify himself from participating in any official act or action of the city which results in a pecuniary benefit to the member or a business or activity in which he has an interest, when such benefit is not available to the public at large. 
(Res. of 12-3-2002, § 5) 
Sec. 2-234. - Prohibited contracts. 
The city shall not enter into any contract involving services or property with a member of the city council or with a business in which a member of the city council has an interest. This section shall not apply in the case of: 
(1)	The designation of a bank or trust company as a depository for city funds; 
(2)	The borrowing of finds from any bank or lending institution which offers the lowest available rate of interest in the community for such loan; 
(3)	Contracts entered into in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 16-10-6; 
(4)	Contracts entered into under circumstances that constitute an emergency situation, provided that the mayor prepares a written record explaining the emergency; 
(5)	Contracts entered into with a member of the city council, or with a business in which a member of the city council has an interest, provided that such contract is the result of a competitive bid, disclosure of the nature of such member's interest is made prior to the time any bid is submitted, and a waiver of the prohibition contemplated by this section is issued by the city administrator following disclosure. 
(Res. of 12-3-2002, § 6) 
Sec. 2-235. - Restrictions on contracts with former councilmembers. 
The city shall not enter into any contract with any person or business represented by such person, who has been within the preceding 12-month period a member of the city council, unless the contract is awarded by a competitive bid or a committee selection process. 
(Res. of 12-3-2002, § 7) 
Secs. 2-236—2-250. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - BOARD OF ETHICS 

Sec. 2-251. - Member qualifications and appointment. 
(a)	The board of ethics of the city shall be composed of five residents of the city to be appointed as provided in this division. 
(b)	Each member of the board of ethics shall have been a resident of the city for at least one year immediately preceding the date of taking office and shall remain a resident of the city while serving as a member of the board of ethics. 
(c)	No person shall serve as a member of the board of ethics if the person has, or has had within the preceding one-year period, any interest in any contract, transaction, or official action of the city. 
(d)	The mayor and city council shall each designate two qualified citizens to provide a pool of 14 individuals who have consented to serve as a member of the board of ethics and who will be available for a period of two years to be called upon to serve if appointed. The city administrator shall maintain a listing of the 14 qualified citizens. 
(Res. of 12-3-2002, § 9(a)(1)—(3)) 
Sec. 2-252. - Compensation. 
Members of the board of ethics shall serve without compensation. 
(Res. of 12-3-2002, § 9(a)(4)) 
Sec. 2-253. - Meeting space, supplies and equipment. 
The city council shall provide meeting space for the board of ethics. Subject to budgetary procedures and requirements of the city, the city shall provide the board of ethics with such supplies and equipment as may be reasonably necessary for it to perform its duties and responsibilities. 
(Res. of 12-3-2002, § 9(a)(4)) 
Sec. 2-254. - Powers and duties. 
The constituted board of ethics shall have the following duties and powers: 
(1)	To establish procedures, rules and regulations governing its internal organization and conduct of its affairs; 
(2)	To hold a hearing within 60 days after the receipt of complaint, provided that failure to hold a hearing within the specified time shall result in dismissal of the complaint as to the transaction and shall prevent refiling if a complaint arises in the same incident for at least a period of six months; 
(3)	To prescribe forms, approved by the city attorney, for the disclosure required in this article and to make available to the public information disclosed as provided in this section; 
(4)	To receive and hear complaints of violations of the standards required by this article; 
(5)	To make such investigation and response to a complaint as it deems necessary to determine whether any person has violated any provisions of this article; 
(6)	To hold such hearings and make such inquiries as deemed necessary to investigate and rule upon complaints; 
(7)	To report its findings to the city council for such action as the city council deems appropriate. 
(Res. of 12-3-2002, § 9(b)) 
Secs. 2-255—2-275. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - COMPLAINT PROCEDURE 

Sec. 2-276. - Filing. 
(a)	Any person having a complaint against any member of the city council for an alleged ethics violation shall file in writing a verified complaint setting forth the particular facts and circumstances which constitute the alleged violation against the city council. 
(b)	The complaint shall be filed with the mayor, or in the event the complaint is against the mayor, shall be filed with the city council. 
(Res. of 12-3-2002, § 8) 
Sec. 2-277. - Review by investigating committee. 
(a)	Upon receipt of a complaint, the mayor or city council shall appoint three members of the city council, who, along with the city attorney, shall constitute an investigating committee to determine whether the complaint sets forth significant facts and circumstances so as to warrant a hearing before the board of ethics. 
(b)	In the event the complaint does not set forth sufficient facts to constitute an alleged violation and is found unjustified, frivolous or patently unfounded, it shall be dismissed and the complainant notified immediately. 
(c)	In the event the complaint is found to state sufficient facts to warrant a hearing before the board of ethics, the board shall be appointed as provided in this division. 
(Res. of 12-3-2002, § 8) 
Sec. 2-278. - Appointment of hearing board. 
Should the investigating committee determine a complaint warrants a hearing before the board of ethics, the mayor and council, at the first public meeting after such determination, shall select names randomly from the listing of qualified citizens until the specified five members of the board of ethics have been appointed. The board will elect one of its members to serve as chairman. 
(Res. of 12-3-2002, § 9(a)(3)) 
Sec. 2-279. - Service of complaint. 
The board of ethics as appointed in this article for hearing shall cause the complaint to be served on the member of the city council charged as soon as practicable. Service may be by personal service or by certified mail, return receipt requested. 
(Res. of 12-3-2002, § 10) 
Sec. 2-280. - Hearing procedure. 
A hearing shall be held within 60 days after filing of the complaint. The board of ethics shall conduct the hearing in accordance with the procedures and regulations it establishes but, in all circumstances, the hearing shall include the taking of testimony and the cross examination of witnesses. The decision of the board of ethics shall be rendered to the mayor and council within five days after completion of the hearing. 
(Res. of 12-3-2002, § 10) 
Sec. 2-281. - Rights of accused. 
At any hearing held by the board of ethics, the member of the city council who is the subject of inquiry shall have the right to written notice of the allegations at least ten business days before a hearing, to be represented by counsel, to hear and examine the evidence and witnesses and to present evidence and witnesses in opposition or in extenuation. 
(Res. of 12-3-2002, § 11(b)) 
Sec. 2-282. - Penalty. 
Any member of the city council who knowingly violates any provision of the code of ethics provided in this article shall be subject to public reprimand or censure by the city council. 
(Res. of 12-3-2002, § 11(a)) 
Sec. 2-283. - Appeal. 
Any member of the city council or a complainant adversely affected by these findings of the board of ethics may obtain judicial review by filing an application for a writ of certiorari in the county superior court within 30 days after the decision of the board of ethics. The filing of such application shall act as supersedeas. 
(Res. of 12-3-2002, § 12) 
Chapter 4 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq.; regulation of alcoholic beverages generally, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-1 et seq.; authority of local authorities to license and regulate alcoholic beverage sales, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2; local regulation of sales on Sundays, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-7; prohibited acts on licensed premises, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-40 et seq.; malt beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-1 et seq.; wine, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-1 et seq.; local licensing requirements for sale of malt beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-40 et seq.; requirements for sale of wine, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-40. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 4-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alcoholic beverage is defined pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-1-2(2) and includes all alcohol, distilled spirits, beer, malt beverages, wine, or fortified wine as defined in such statute. 
Distilled spirits, liquor is defined pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-1-2(7) and includes any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume, including, but not limited to, all liquors and fortified wines. The term "liquor" shall be construed to mean "distilled spirits." 
Election day means one hour before the polls open until one hour after the polls close on any day set aside for any general or special election for any city, county, state, and/or federal offices, referendum questions, or any other ballot questions. 
Licensee means an establishment holding a license to engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages. Licensee may also be used to refer to the person who makes application for and is issued a license under this chapter. 
Malt beverage means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops, or any other similar product, or any combination of such products in water, containing not more than six percent alcohol by volume and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager beer, small beer, and strong beer. The term does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine. 
Minor is defined pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23, as currently enacted or hereafter amended. 
Premises means a defined closed or partitioned-in locality, whether room, shop or building wherein alcoholic beverages are sold. 
Wine means any alcoholic beverage containing not more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries, or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term "wine" includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, champagnes, combinations of such beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines, and like products. The term "wine" does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. A liquid shall first be deemed to be a wine at that point in the manufacturing process when it conforms to the definition of wine contained in this section. 
(Ord. of 10-6-1992(3), § 101; Ord. of 11-5-1998, § 101) 
State Law reference— Similar definitions, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq. 
Sec. 4-2. - Geographical applicability. 
This chapter shall apply to all of the incorporated areas of the city. 
(Ord. of 10-6-1992(3), § 306) 
Sec. 4-3. - Adoption of state statutes. 
The provisions of O.C.G.A. § 3-3-1 regarding the sale of alcoholic beverages and licensure therefor are adopted herein to the extent applicable within the jurisdiction of the city. 
Sec. 4-4. - Duty of management to keep copy of chapter on premises. 
It shall be the duty of the management of premises licensed hereunder to maintain a copy of this chapter on such premises and to instruct each and every employee of the terms thereof. 
(Ord. of 10-6-1992(3), § 208) 
Sec. 4-5. - Certification by applicant of knowledge of regulations. 
No person shall be approved for a license hereunder, or approved for employment by a licensee, unless such person shall have read these regulations in full text and certify in writing the fact of such reading and knowledge thereof. 
(Ord. of 10-6-1992(3), § 212) 
Sec. 4-6. - Violations by licensee. 
Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter by the holder of a license hereunder shall subject the holder of such license to revocation of said license in addition to all other applicable penalties for violation of this Code. 
(Ord. of 10-6-1992(3), § 207) 
Secs. 4-7—4-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Declaration of business of manufacturing, selling and other dealings in alcoholic beverages as privilege subject to regulatory requirements, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-1; powers of local authorities as to granting, refusal, suspension or revocation of licenses generally, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2; allowing or permitting of breaking of packages or drinking of contents thereof on premises prohibited, exception for sales pursuant to a license for consumption on the premises, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-26. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 4-31. - Required. 
No malt beverage, wine, distilled spirits or any other alcoholic beverage shall be sold or manufactured in the city except under a license issued under this chapter by the city clerk's office. 
State Law reference— Dealing in malt beverages at wholesale and retail prohibited without local license, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-40; county licensing fees for the sale of malt beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-41; restriction on county licensing fees for the sale of malt beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-43; dealing in wine at wholesale and retail prohibited without local license, O.C.G.A. § 3-8-40. 
Sec. 4-32. - Discretionary authority of city. 
Licenses hereunder shall be mere grants or privileges and the city council shall have the discretion to approve or deny any application for a license to sell alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. of 10-6-1992(3), § 123; Ord. of 11-5-1998, § 123) 
State Law reference— Similar provision, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-1. 
Sec. 4-33. - Compliance with applicable rules. 
All applicable state laws, rules and regulations governing sale of alcoholic beverages must be complied with by any applicant for a license hereunder. 
(Ord. of 10-6-1992(3), § 211) 
Sec. 4-34. - Separate application required for each location. 
A separate application is required for each license class, and the city council will act upon each application separately. 
Sec. 4-35. - Payment of all fees and taxes required. 
No license shall be issued under this chapter unless the applicant has fully paid all license fees and taxes due under this chapter as well as all other business taxes and ad valorem taxes due to the city for the business location. 
Sec. 4-36. - Classes of licenses. 
The following licenses are available in the city, to the extent authorized and approved by the city council pursuant to the provisions of this chapter: 

 
Sec. 4-37. - Application forms; applicant to provide information and produce persons upon request. 
(a)	The city council shall prescribe forms for new or renewal applicants hereunder. 
(b)	All applicants shall furnish all data, information and records requested of them by the city council and failure to furnish such data, information and records within 30 days from the date of such request shall automatically serve to dismiss, with prejudice, the application. Applicants, by filing an application, agree to produce for oral interrogation any person requested by the city council. Failure to produce such person within 30 days after being requested to do so shall result in the automatic dismissal of such application. 
(Ord. of 10-6-1992(3), § 127) 
Sec. 4-38. - License issuance and renewal fees; administrative fees; proration; refunds. 
(a)	Original application. Each original application for license under this chapter shall be accompanied by a certified check or cash for the full amount of the license fee, together with a separate certified check or cash for the full amount of an administrative fee to defray the cost of investigation and reporting. If the application is denied and the license refused, the administrative fee shall be retained as the cost of filing and processing the application. In addition to the fees provided for in this section, the applicant shall pay fingerprint costs. 
(b)	Annual renewals. An annual license fee shall be charged for the initial license issued to any licensee hereunder, and a like amount for each renewal license. All license fees hereunder shall be paid in advance on or before December 31 of each year and any new license granted hereunder during a calendar year shall pay the full license fee without proration. 
(c)	Fee amounts. The amount of annual license fees and administrative fees shall be as provided in the city fee schedule. 
(Ord. of 10-6-1992(3), § 304; Ord. of 11-5-1998, § 304) 
State Law reference— Maximum fees for municipal licenses for sale of distilled spirits, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-50; restriction on certain municipal fees for licenses for the sale of malt beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-43. 
Sec. 4-39. - Denial of application. 
(a)	If an application is denied, then the applicant shall be notified in writing of the council's decision, and the reasons therefor, within ten days. Applicant shall then have 30 days to either request reconsideration of the council's denial or appeal the council's decision to the county court of competent jurisdiction. 
(b)	If an application is denied, then the applicant may not submit another application for the same proposed business premises for a period of 12 months from the council's decision. 
Sec. 4-40. - Term of license. 
No license shall be issued for less than a calendar-year period, or the remainder thereof, and in case of the revocation or surrender of such license before the expiration of such calendar-year period, the holder thereof shall not be entitled to receive any refund whatsoever. 
(Ord. of 10-6-1992(3), § 119) 
Sec. 4-41. - License must be obtained and fees paid within 30 days of approval of application. 
All licenses must be obtained and fees paid not later than 30 days from the date of approval of the application and, if not so obtained, the permit shall be void. 
(Ord. of 10-6-1992(3), § 120) 
Sec. 4-42. - Licenses not transferable; exceptions for partnerships. 
(a)	Licenses hereunder shall not be transferable, except as otherwise provided herein. In case of the death of any person holding such a license, or any interest therein, the same may be transferred to the administrator, executor or the lawful heirs of the deceased person, if otherwise qualified. 
(b)	Nothing in this section, however, shall prohibit one or more of the partners in a partnership holding a license to withdraw from the partnership in favor of one or more of the partners who were partners at the time of the issuance of the license. Such a withdrawal shall not, however, serve to bring any new ownership into the partnership. 
(c)	Should a transfer of a location be approved, there shall be no pro rata return of any license fee and the new location shall be considered as a new license hereunder. 
(d)	However, a licensee may take in partners or additional stockholders where it is determined that the additional capital furnished is to be used exclusively for additional inventory or expanding the facilities of the business or for building new facilities and where it appears that the licensee himself receives directly none of the additional capital invested. Under this section, an additional partner or new principal stockholder must be approved by the city council. 
(Ord. of 10-6-1992(3), § 124) 
Sec. 4-43. - Opening of establishment. 
(a)	All applicants for licenses hereunder must, within six months after the approval of said license, open for business the establishment referred to in the license and begin the sale of the product or products authorized by the said license. 
(b)	Failure to open the establishment and begin the sale as referred to in subsection (a) of this section within the six-month period shall serve as automatic forfeiture and cancellation of the unused license and no refund of license fees shall be made to the license holder. 
(Ord. of 10-6-1992(3), § 125) 
Sec. 4-44. - Forfeiture of license when business not operative for three months. 
Any holder of a license hereunder who shall begin the operation of the business and sale of the products as authorized in the said license, but who shall, for a period of three consecutive months thereafter, cease to operate the business and sale of the products authorized in said license shall, after said three-month period, automatically forfeit his license, which license shall, by virtue of said failure to operate, be canceled without the necessity of any further action. 
(Ord. of 10-6-1992(3), § 126) 
Sec. 4-45. - Display of license. 
All licensees hereunder shall display the license provided by this Code in a prominent place on the premises. 
(Ord. of 10-6-1992(3), § 204; Ord. of 11-5-1998, § 204) 
State Law reference— Similar provision, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-3. 
Sec. 4-46. - Surrender of license upon sale, transfer, or closing of licensed business. 
Any license issued under this chapter shall be immediately surrendered to the city clerk upon sale, transfer, or closing of the licensed business. 
Sec. 4-47. - Renewal. 
All licensees hereunder shall be required to apply for renewal of their licenses annually on forms prescribed by the city council and must comply with all the provisions. 
(Ord. of 10-6-1992(3), § 122) 
Sec. 4-48. - Duty to report changes. 
Whenever there shall be a change in any of the facts reported to the city council in the information in an application for a license, before or after such license has been granted, it shall be the duty of the licensee to report the same to the city clerk in writing within ten business days of the change. 
Sec. 4-49. - Report of allegations of violations required. 
(a)	All applicants for licenses, in the case of pending applications, and all licensees, in the case of issued licenses, shall immediately report to the city clerk or other officer designated by the city any allegations, and all findings and dispositions regarding allegations, of a violation by the applicant or licensee of any city, state, or federal law or regulation if the allegations: 
(1)	Are made by the state department of revenue, any federal or state law enforcement officer, administrative agency, or prosecuting attorney of this or any other state; 
(2)	Charge the applicant or licensee, as the case may be, with the violation of any federal or state law or regulation that could or would, in the event of a finding of guilt, result in a suspension or revocation or denial of and application for license under this chapter. 
(b)	Failure to make reports required by this section shall itself be grounds for suspension or revocation of or the denial of an application for a license as the city council shall determine. 
Secs. 4-50—4-71. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION 

Sec. 4-72. - Suspension or revocation for due cause. 
(a)	No license which has been issued or which may hereafter be issued by the city hereunder shall be suspended or revoked, except for due cause as hereinafter defined, and after a hearing and upon prior three-day written notice to the holder of such license of the time, of the place and purpose of such hearing and a statement of the charge upon which such hearing shall be held. 
(b)	The term "due cause" for the suspension or revocation of such license means the violation of any laws, ordinances or resolution regulating such businesses, or violation of regulations made pursuant to authority granted for the purpose of regulating such business, or for the violation of any state or federal law, or for the violation of any municipal ordinance or county resolution other than traffic ordinances. 
(Ord. of 10-6-1992(3), § 121) 
Sec. 4-73. - Investigations incident to disciplinary action. 
The city council shall have the right to make such inquiry or investigation as it may find to be reasonably necessary to determine the licensee's compliance or noncompliance with this chapter. Such investigation may consist, among other actions, of calling licensees for examination under oath, obtaining evidence under oath from other persons, the procurement of documents and records including records of the licensee, and inspection and examination of records and documents from whatever source obtainable. 
Secs. 4-74—4-104. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - QUALIFICATIONS FOR LICENSURE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Discretion and due process as to grant or suspension of permits, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2. 

Sec. 4-105. - Factors considered in issuing licenses or in renewing licenses. 
In determining whether or not any license applied for hereunder or any renewal or any license shall be granted in addition to all provisions of this chapter and any other provisions of this Code not inconsistent herewith, the following shall be considered in the public interest and welfare: 
(1)	The applicant's reputation, character, mental and physical capacity to conduct this business. 
(2)	If the applicant is a previous holder of a license to sell alcoholic beverages, whether or not he has violated any law, regulation or ordinances relating to such business. 
(3)	If the applicant is a previous holder of a license to sell alcoholic beverages, the manner in which he conducted the business hereunder as to the necessity for unusual police observation and inspection in order to prevent the violation of any law, regulation or ordinances relating to such business. 
(4)	The location for which the license is sought as to traffic congestion, general character or neighborhood, and the effect such an establishment would have on the adjacent and surrounding property values. 
(5)	The number of licenses already granted for similar businesses in the trading area of the place for which the license is sought. 
(6)	Whether the person whose license issued under the police powers of any governmental entity has been previously suspended or revoked. 
(Ord. of 10-6-1992(3), § 107) 
Sec. 4-106. - Discretionary standards of review. 
The city council, in its discretion, in reviewing an application for issuance of license under this chapter, may consider any extenuating circumstances that may reflect favorably or unfavorably on issuance of the license. The judgment of the city council that circumstances are such that the granting of the license would not be in the best interest of the general public are final and may be grounds for denying the application. 
Sec. 4-107. - No licenses issued to convicted persons. 
(a)	No original license shall be issued to any person, partnership or corporation organized for pecuniary gain where any individual, or his spouse, having any interest either as owner, partner, principal stockholder, directly or indirectly beneficial or absolute, shall have been convicted or shall have taken a plea of guilty or nolo contendere within ten years immediately prior to the filing of said application for any felony or misdemeanor under federal law or the law of any state or any municipal ordinance or county resolution except traffic violations. 
(b)	The term "conviction" shall include an adjudication of guilt or a plea of guilty or nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond when charged with a crime. Where the violation is for a misdemeanor, forfeiture of bond or violation of a municipal ordinance or county resolution, the city council, after investigation, may waive the conviction as a basis for disqualification from license. 
(Ord. of 10-6-1992(3), § 108) 
Sec. 4-108. - Citizenship and residency requirements. 
All applicants must be residents of the United States and a resident of this state. If the applicant is a corporation, the principal stockholder must meet the requirements of this section and any license that may be issued shall be issued to the corporation and the principal stockholder. If the applicant is a partnership, the requirements of this section shall apply to all partners. 
(Ord. of 10-6-1992(3), § 109; Ord. of 11-5-1998, § 109) 
Secs. 4-109—4-129. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - BUILDING REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 4-130. - Compliance with city and state law required; final inspection and approval. 
The completed building or the proposed building for licensure shall comply with ordinances of the city, regulations of the state revenue commissioner, and the laws of the state. The proposed building shall also be subject to final inspection and approval, when completed, by the code enforcement inspector. 
(Ord. of 10-6-1992(3), § 103) 
Sec. 4-131. - Exterior lighting. 
Each building in which the business will be located shall provide sufficient lighting so that the building itself and all sides of the building are readily visible at all times so as to reveal all of the outside of said building. 
(Ord. of 10-6-1992(3), § 103) 
Sec. 4-132. - Plans required. 
No license for consumption on the premises shall be issued unless the building in which the premises will be located is complete and detailed plans of said building are attached to the application, or unless proposed plans and specification and a building permit of a proposed building to be built are attached to the application. 
(Ord. of 10-6-1992(3), § 103) 
Sec. 4-133. - Proof of ownership or lease of building required. 
Each applicant for a license for consumption on the premises shall attach to his application evidence of ownership of the building or proposed building or a copy of the lease if the applicant is leasing the building. 
(Ord. of 10-6-1992(3), § 103) 
Sec. 4-134. - Toilet facilities; interior illumination. 
All premises within a building for which a license for consumption on the premises shall be issued, shall afford therein adequate sanitary toilet facilities and shall be adequately illuminated so that all hallways, passageways and open areas may be clearly seen by customers therein. 
(Ord. of 10-6-1992(3), § 103) 
Secs. 4-135—4-151. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - LOCATION RESTRICTIONS 

Sec. 4-152. - Distance from libraries, churches, schools, etc. 
(a)	Except as otherwise specifically provided in O.C.G.A. § 3-3-21, no person knowingly and intentionally may sell or offer to sell: 
(1)	Any distilled spirits in or within 100 yards of any church building or within 200 yards of any school building, educational building, school grounds, or college campus; 
(2)	Any wine or malt beverages within 100 yards of any school building, school grounds, or college campus. This subsection (a)(2) shall not apply at any location for which a license has been issued prior to July 1, 1981, nor to the renewal of such license. Nor shall this subsection (a)(2) apply at any location for which a new license is applied for if the sale of wine and beer was lawful at such location at any time during the 12 months immediately preceding such application; 
(3)	Any distilled spirits, wine, or malt beverages within 100 yards of an alcoholic treatment center owned and operated by this state or any county or municipal government therein. This subsection (a)(3) shall not apply to any business having a license in effect on July 1, 1981; 
(4)	Any distilled spirits, wine or malt beverages with 250 feet of any polling place or of the outer edge of any building within which such polling place is established on primary or election days; 
(5)	Any distilled spirits, wine or malt beverages for consumption on the premises within 300 feet of any property line of any library, shrine, or mortuary; 
(6)	Any distilled spirits, wine or malt beverages within 150 feet of any area zoned residential; or 
(7)	Any distilled spirits, wine or malt beverages for consumption off the premises within 150 feet of any area zoned residential. 
(b)	As used in this section, the term "school building" or "educational building" shall apply only to state, county, city, or church school buildings and to such buildings at such other schools in which are taught subjects commonly taught in the common schools and colleges of this state and which are public schools or private schools as defined in O.C.G.A. § 20-2-690(b). 
(c)	The distances provided in this section shall be measured as follows: 
(1)	With regard to establishments licensed for consumption on the premises, the distance shall be measured in a straight line and shall be computed from the property lines of the properties. 
(2)	With regard to establishments licensed for consumption off the premises (package sales), the distance shall be measured from the portal or public entrance of the facilities, following the public streets or roads of the city. 
(Ord. of 10-6-1992(3), § 118) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions regarding schools and churches, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-21; similar provisions regarding polling placed, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-20. 
Sec. 4-153. - No sales outside of licensed premises. 
It shall be unlawful for any sales to be made outside of the building, premises or place of business licensed for such sale. 
(Ord. of 10-6-1992(3), § 205) 
Sec. 4-154. - Sale from residence or home prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to dispense or sell alcoholic beverages to any person from any private home or residence. 
(Ord. of 10-6-1992(3), § 110) 
Secs. 4-155—4-176. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - ON-PREMISES CONSUMPTION LICENSE RESTRICTIONS 

Sec. 4-177. - License of sale for consumption on premises authorized. 
With the approval of the city council, a license authorizing the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises may be issued. 
(Ord. of 10-6-1992(3), § 201) 
Sec. 4-178. - Sale unlawful without license. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell alcoholic beverages for use or consumption on the premises without the license required herein. 
(Ord. of 10-6-1992(3), § 209) 
Sec. 4-179. - Scope of license. 
(a)	A licensee for the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises shall have the right to serve beer or wine, provided he shall secure a business license therefor and pay the license fee as specified by the current business license regulations. 
(b)	No licensee shall set or give away, or permit the sale or gift to, or the procuring for, any such alcoholic beverages to any minor, to any person who is mentally incompetent, or to any person who is physically or mentally incapacitated due to the consumption of alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. of 10-6-1992(3), § 105) 
Sec. 4-180. - Registration cards. 
(a)	Generally. It shall be unlawful for the holder of any retail license hereunder for consumption on the premises of alcoholic beverages to operate a business without having a dealer registration card signed by an official designated by the city. 
(b)	Employees. Every person working or serving alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises in a place of business shall have an employee registration card setting forth thereon the name of the employer and the location of the place of employment. It shall be unlawful for the holder of any retail license hereunder for consumption on the premises of alcoholic beverages to permit any person to work or serve in or about such place of business unless such person has such a registration card. 
(c)	Notice upon termination. It shall be unlawful for the holder of any retail license hereunder for consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises to fail to notify the representative within five days after the termination of employment of any person registered to work in any place where alcoholic beverages are served. 
(d)	Applications. Applications for registration cards will be made at the county sheriff's department, and a fee in the amount provided in the city fee schedule is required to cover the cost of laminating the permanent card. Applicants are required to have three 1½-inch by 1½-inch black and white photographs when applying for such registration card. A temporary letter will be issued upon application, the same being valid for 30 days only. The permanent registration card will be issued within 30 days from the date of application if investigation reveals that the applicant is qualified for registration pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 10-6-1992(3), § 202; Ord. of 11-5-1998, § 202) 
Sec. 4-181. - Periodic inspections. 
The business premises of the holder of consumption on the premises license shall be open to inspection at any time and all times by the officer or officials charged to conduct such inspections. 
(Ord. of 10-6-1992(3), § 104) 
Secs. 4-182—4-200. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - OFF-PREMISES CONSUMPTION (PACKAGE) LICENSE RESTRICTIONS 

Sec. 4-201. - License of sale for consumption off premises authorized. 
With the approval of the city council, a license authorizing the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption off the premises may be issued. 
(Ord. of 10-6-1992(3), § 301) 
Sec. 4-202. - Sale of beer and wine in grocery stores. 
Grocery stores shall be allowed to sell beer and wine by the carton and not for consumption on premises, provided they have the required beer and wine license. 
(Ord. of 10-6-1992(3), § 302) 
Sec. 4-203. - Sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink not permitted. 
Licenses for off-premises consumption shall not permit the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink. 
(Ord. of 10-6-1992(3), § 305) 
Secs. 4-204—4-229. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RULES AND STANDARDS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 4-230. - Compliance with health standards. 
All persons operating establishments for the sale of alcoholic beverages within the city shall comply with the health standards of the city as prescribed by the city council. 
(Ord. of 10-6-1992(3), § 117) 
Sec. 4-231. - Maintenance of premises; certain acts prohibited. 
All premises licensed under article II of this chapter shall be kept clean and in proper sanitary condition and in full compliance with the provisions and regulations governing the conditions of premises used for storage and sale of food for human consumption. It shall be unlawful to permit any disturbance of the peace or obscenity or any lewd, immoral or improper entertainment, conduct or practices. 
(Ord. of 10-6-1992(3), § 102) 
Sec. 4-232. - Misrepresentation of quality, quantity, etc., of alcoholic beverages. 
It shall be illegal for licensees under article II of this chapter to add to the contents of a bottle or to refill empty bottles or in any other manner to misrepresent the quantity, quality or brand name of any alcoholic beverage. 
(Ord. of 10-6-1992(3), § 203) 
Sec. 4-233. - Advertising. 
No licensee hereunder shall advertise in any manner except as provided by state law. 
(Ord. of 10-6-1992(3), § 206) 
State Law reference— Signs advertising sale of distilled liquors, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-3; advertisement of prices for distilled liquor sales, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-26. 
Secs. 4-234—4-259. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - HOURS OF SALE 

Sec. 4-260. - Opening and closing hours generally. 
Unless otherwise specifically provided herein, it shall be unlawful for any establishment other than grocery and convenience-type stores engaged in the sale of alcoholic beverages to remain open or sell, barter, trade or give away any such beverages between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
(Ord. of 10-6-1992(3), § 111; Ord. of 11-5-1998, § 111) 
Sec. 4-261. - Christmas day and election day closing. 
It shall be unlawful for any establishment engaged in the sale of alcoholic beverages to remain open on Christmas Day after the hour of 12:45 a.m. or before the hour of 8:00 a.m. on the following day or as prohibited on election days by O.C.G.A. § 3-3-20. 
(Ord. of 10-6-1992(3), § 112; Ord. of 11-5-1998, § 112) 
State Law reference— Sales of alcoholic beverages on Sundays, election days and Christmas Day, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-20. 
Sec. 4-262. - Sunday closing. 
(a)	Establishments licensed to pour and sell alcoholic beverages shall be closed and no alcoholic beverages shall be sold, bartered, traded or given away between the hours of 12:45 a.m. on Sunday to 8:00 a.m. Monday. 
(b)	Upon the first violation of this section or state law regarding Sunday sales of alcoholic beverages witnessed by state, county, city or other law enforcement officials or determined to have occurred by a court of competent jurisdiction shall be sufficient reason for an immediate 30-day suspension of the license issued hereunder. Within the 30-day suspension period, a public hearing shall be held by the mayor and city council at which time the licensee shall have the opportunity to show why such license should not be permanently revoked. 
(Ord. of 10-6-1992(3), § 113; Ord. of 11-5-1998, § 113) 
State Law reference— Sales of alcoholic beverages on Sundays, election days and Christmas Day, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-20. 
Secs. 4-263—4-287. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - MINORS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Sale to underage persons prohibited, O.C.G.A. §§ 3-3-23, 3-3-23.1; restrictions on employment of underage persons, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-24. 

Sec. 4-288. - Possession, consumption by minors. 
It shall be unlawful for any minor to drink or possess any alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. of 10-6-1992(3), § 106) 
Sec. 4-289. - Sale to minors prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to dispense, sell or give to any person under the legal drinking age, as defined by state law, any alcoholic beverage. 
(Ord. of 10-6-1992(3), § 114) 
Sec. 4-290. - Sale or dispensing by minors. 
It shall be unlawful for any person under the legal drinking age, as defined by state law, to dispense or sell to any other person any alcoholic beverage of any kind or character. 
(Ord. of 10-6-1992(3), § 115) 
Sec. 4-291. - Misrepresentation of age. 
It shall be unlawful for any person under the legal drinking age, as defined by state law, to willfully misrepresent his age to any other person for the purpose of inducing such other person to dispense, sell or give any alcoholic beverage of any kind or description to the person making such false representation. 
(Ord. of 10-6-1992(3), § 116) 
Secs. 4-292—4-315. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - EXCISE TAXES[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Local excise taxes on malt beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-80; excise taxes on malt beverages to be paid by wholesale dealer, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-81; prohibition on requirement for markings on beverage containers regarding excise taxes, O.C.G.A. § 35-5-82; local excise taxes on wine, O.C.G.A. § 3-8-60. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 4-316. - Levy. 
The city imposes an excise tax on all alcoholic beverages sold within the city at the maximum rate permitted by state law. 
(Ord. of 10-6-1992(3), § 401) 
State Law reference— Imposition of excise tax on malt beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-80; imposition of excise tax on wine, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-60; imposition by municipalities of excess taxes on distilled spirits sold by the drink, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-130. 
Sec. 4-317. - Collection and payment of excise taxes on malt beverages and wine. 
(a)	The excise taxes assessed herein on malt beverages, wine, and distilled spirits shall be collected by the wholesale distributor selling, shipping, or delivery malt beverages or wine to any retailer located within the city. 
(b)	Each wholesale distributor shall furnish to the city a summary of all purchase invoices for malt beverages, wine, and distilled spirits sold to each retailer in the city on or before the tenth of each month following such purchases. The invoices shall show the amount of excise tax paid. 
(c)	The city shall have the right to audit and to require production of records from each wholesaler supplying retailers in the city and each retailer so supplied. 
(d)	It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any wholesaler to sell, ship or deliver in any manner, any malt beverages, wine, and distilled spirits to a retail dealer without collecting such tax. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter for any retail dealer to possess, own, hold, store, display or sell any wine on which such tax has not been paid. 
Sec. 4-318. - Nonpayment of taxes as grounds for revocation. 
Failure to pay the tax imposed on malt beverages and wines shall be cause for immediate revocation of license. 
(Ord. of 10-6-1992(3), § 402) 
Sec. 4-319. - Taxes to be paid as prerequisite to acceptance of delivery. 
Each retail dealer shall accept the delivery of any shipment of malt beverages and wines, only if the tax for each container thereof has been paid. Any violation of this section by any retail dealer shall be cause for the immediate revocation of the license of said retail dealer. 
(Ord. of 10-6-1992(3), § 403) 
State Law reference— Possession of alcoholic beverages upon which taxes have not been paid, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-8. 
Sec. 4-320. - Delivery to be accepted only within county. 
No dealer shall purchase or accept any delivery of malt beverages or wines at any place outside of the county. Any violation of this section by any retail dealer shall be cause for the immediate revocation of the license of said retail dealer. 
(Ord. of 10-6-1992(3), § 404) 
Secs. 4-321—4-343. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 4-344. - Inspection and audit of books and records; failure to make reports. 
(a)	The city shall have the right to inspect and audit and to require production of records from each wholesaler supplying retailers in the city and each retailer so supplied. 
(b)	Such books and records shall, for wholesalers, contain information showing deliveries of any of such beverages to persons upon whom the tax hereby assessed and levied is imposed, and the monthly reports of such wholesalers shall show deliveries made to each retailer, separately, so that sales of any of the beverages described in this section may be identified with respect to each retailer upon whom the tax is imposed by this section. 
(c)	The failure to make a timely report and remittance under this article shall render the dealer liable for a penalty equal to ten percent of the total amount during the first 30-day period following a date such report and remittance were due, and an additional penalty of five percent of the amount of such remittance for each successive 30-day period, or any portion thereof, during which such report and remittance are not filed. 
(d)	The filing of a false, fraudulent, inaccurate, or misleading report shall render the dealer making such report liable for a penalty equal to 25 percent of the amount of the remittance which would be required under an accurate and truthful report. 
(e)	Any retail or wholesale dealer's failure to make a timely report or remittance or filing of a false, fraudulent, misleading, or inaccurate report shall also constitute grounds for the suspension or revocation of any licenses issued to said dealer by the city. 
Sec. 4-345. - Deficiency determinations. 
(a)	Computation. If the city or the city's designee is not satisfied with the return of the tax levied under this article or the amount of the tax levied under this division required to be paid to the city by any person, the city may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information within the city's possession or that may come into the city's possession. One or more than one deficiency determination may be made of the amount due for one or more than one monthly period. 
(b)	Interest on deficiency. The amount of the determination, exclusive of penalties, shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month or any fraction of a month from the tenth day after the close of the monthly period for which the amount or any portion thereof should have been returned until the date of payment. 
(c)	Offsetting of overpayments. In making a determination, the administrator may offset overpayments for a period against underpayments for another period and against penalties and interest on underpayments. 
(d)	Penalties for negligence or disregard of rules. If any part of the deficiency for which a deficiency determination has been made is due to negligence or disregard of rules and regulations, a penalty of 15 percent of the amount of the deficiency shall be added thereto. 
(e)	Penalties for fraud or intent to evade. If any part of the deficiency for which a deficiency determination is made is due to fraud or an intent to evade any section of this division or other authorized rules and regulations, a penalty of 25 percent of the deficiency shall be added thereto. 
(f)	Notice of deficiency determination. The city and the city's designee shall give to the licensee written notice of the city's deficiency determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail, the service shall be addressed to the licensee at the licensee's address as it appears in the licensing records of the city. For service by mail or any notice required by this division, the service is complete at the time of deposit in the United States Post Office. 
(g)	Time limits. Except for a fraud, intent to evade this division or authorized rules or regulations or failure to make a return, every notice of a deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the tenth day of the calendar month following the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period shall last expire. 
Sec. 4-346. - Determination if no return made. 
(a)	Estimate of gross receipts. If any licensee fails to make a return for the tax levied under this division, the administrator shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the licensee or, as the case may be, of the amount of the total sales in this city which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period in respect to which the licensee failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information that is or may come into the possession of the administrator. Upon the basis of this estimate, the administrator shall compute and determine the amount required to be paid by the city, adding to the sum thus determined a penalty equal to 15 percent thereof. One or more determinations may be made for one or for more than one period. 
(b)	Offsets; interest. In making a determination, the mayor or the mayor's designee may offset overpayments for a period against penalties and interest on underpayments for the same or other periods. The interest on underpayments shall be computed in the manner set forth in subsection (c) of this section. 
(c)	Interest on amount due. The amount of the determination, exclusive of penalties, shall bear interest, until the date of payment at the rate of one percent per month or any fraction of a month from the tenth day after the close of the monthly period for which the amount or any portion thereof should have been returned. 
(d)	Penalty for fraud or intent to evade. If the failure of any person to file a return is due to fraud or an intent to evade this division or rules and regulations, a penalty of 25 percent of the amount required to be paid by the person, exclusive of penalties, shall be added thereto in addition to the 15-percent penalty provided herein. 
(e)	Notice. Promptly after making a determination, the administrator shall give to the person written notice to be served personally or by mail in the manner prescribed for service of notice of a deficiency determination. 
Sec. 4-347. - Penalties and interest for failure to pay. 
Any licensee who fails to pay the tax imposed under this division to the city or who fails to pay any amount of the tax required to be collected and paid to the city within the time required shall pay a penalty of 15 percent of the tax or amount of the tax, in addition to the tax or amount of the tax, plus interest on the unpaid tax or any portion thereof. 
Sec. 4-348. - Collection of unpaid tax. 
(a)	Action for collection. At any time within three years after any tax levied under this division or any amount of tax required to be collected under this division becomes due and payable and at any time within three years after the delinquency of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected, the administrator may bring an action in the courts of this state or any other state of the United States in the name of the city to collect the amount delinquent together with penalties and interest, court fees, filing fees, attorney's fees and other legal fees incident thereto. 
(b)	Duties of successors or assigns. If any licensee liable for any amount under this division sells or terminates the business, the licensee's successors or assigns shall withhold sufficient of the purchase price to cover the amount until the former owner produces a receipt from the license division, department of finance, showing that the amount has been paid or a certificate stating that no amount is due. 
(c)	Liability for failure to withhold. If the purchaser of a business fails to withhold purchase price as required, the purchaser becomes personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld by the purchaser to the extent of the purchase price, valued in money. Within 30 days after receiving a written request from the purchaser for a certificate, the license division, department of finance, shall either issue the certificate or mail notice to the purchase at the purchaser's address as it appears on the records of the license division, department of finance, of the amount that must be paid as a condition of issuing the certificate. The time within which the obligation of a successor may be enforced shall start to run at the time the operator sells the business or at the time that the determination against the operator becomes final, whichever event shall last occur. 
Sec. 4-349. - Overpayments. 
If the amount of any tax, penalty or interest has been paid more than once or has been erroneously collected or received by the city under this division, it may be offset as provided in this article. If the operator or person determines that the person has overpaid or paid more than once, which fact has not been determined by the administrator, the person will have three years from the date of payment to file claim in writing stating the specific ground upon which claim is founded. The claim shall be audited. If the claim is approved, the excess amount paid the city may be credited on any amounts due and payable from the person by whom it was paid or the person's successors. 
Chapter 6 - AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENT 
(RESERVED) 
Chapter 8 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Licensing and registration of animals by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-3; livestock running at large, O.C.G.A. § 4-3-1 et seq.; permitting dogs in heat to roam or run free, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-6; disposal of diseased, disabled, or dead animals, O.C.G.A. § 4-5-1 et seq.; dogs generally, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-1; dangerous dog control, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq.; vicious dogs, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-40 et seq.; animal protection, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-1 et seq.; cruelty to animals, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4; cruelty to dogs, authorized killing of dogs, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-5; rabies control, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-1; liability of owner or keeper of vicious or dangerous animal for injuries caused by animal, O.C.G.A. § 51-2-6. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 8-1. - Adoption of county animal control provisions; enforcement. 
The city adopts the animal control provisions enacted by the county as fully set forth in full in this chapter. The adopted animal regulations shall be enforced by the animal control officer designated by the city or the county. 
Secs. 8-2—8-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ANIMAL CONTROL REGULATIONS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Printed in this article are the animal control regulations of Liberty County, Georgia, originally adopted by the county on December 6, 1988, as amended through the date of adoption of this chapter. A uniform system of headings, catchlines, numbering, punctuation and capitalization has been used and editorial corrections have been incorporated as necessary and without comment. This article has been adopted by the city in the form printed here on the date of adoption of this Code and any future amendment by the county to its animal control regulations will not be reflected in this chapter. Any amendments to this chapter in the future will be by city ordinance and noted in section history notes. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 8-21. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Animal means and includes all animals customarily vaccinated against the disease of rabies. This shall include but not be limited to dogs and cats. 
At large means off the premises of the owner and not under restraint. 
Court means the county court of competent jurisdiction. 
Humane manner means care of an animal to include protection from injury, adequate coolness and heat, ventilation, sanitary shelter, wholesome food and water consistent with the normal requirements and breeding habits of the animal's size, species, and breed. 
Kennel means an establishment kept for the purpose of breeding, selling, or boarding animals or those engaged in training animals. 
Licensing authority means the Liberty County Board of Commissioners or any designated representative thereof that has been charged with administering the issuance and/or revocation of the permits and licenses under the provisions of this chapter. 
Nuisance means an animal which damages, defiles, or defecates on private property, on public walks and recreational areas (unless such waste is immediately removed and properly disposed of by the animal's owner) or causes an unsanitary, dangerous, or offensive condition, or causes a disturbance by excessive barking or other noisemaking, or chases vehicles or molests, attacks or interferes with persons or other domestic animals on public property. 
Owner, caretaker, possessor means any person having a right of property of an animal, or who keeps or harbors an animal, or who has it in his care, or acts as its custodian, or who permits an animal to remain on or about his premises. 
Tethered means an animal attached to a stationary object by a chain, cable or similar device commonly used for the size and type of animal involved. An animal is not considered tethered when the animal is attached to a stationary object, as long as the owner or custodian is physically within reach of the animal. 
Under restraint means secured by a leash or lead held by an able-bodied person. 
Vicious animal means one that constitutes a physical threat to humans or other domestic animals. 
Sec. 8-22. - Livestock on public ways. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to allow or permit any horses, cattle, sheep, goats, or other livestock to run at large on the streets or to be staked so that they can go upon the streets or to drive or lead any such animal along or on the sidewalks unless fastened to a rope, chain or other substantial leading device, which rope, chain or other substantial leading device is securely held by a responsible person during all the time that such animals are being led or driven along and over the streets. 
Sec. 8-23. - Vicious animals. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any owner or other person to maintain or harbor within the city a manifestly vicious dog or other animal unless the same is validly registered, securely but humanely confined, or restrained in such manner as to prevent such dog or other animal from attacking or biting a person or another animal. It shall be prima facie evidence of viciousness if a dog or other animal, without provocation, fiercely attacks or bites persons or other animals not on the owner's premises. Clearly visible signs (including a symbol designed to inform children) should be posted warning there is a dangerous dog on the property by the owner. 
(b)	An animal shall be deemed "vicious" which has a verified record with the animal control office as having bitten any person. No owner or custodian of a vicious animal kept in the city, who when notified in writing by certified mail by the county animal control office of the animal's viciousness or who has knowledge of same, shall permit the animal to leave his property unless such animal is muzzled and leashed so as to make it impossible for it to bite. 
(c)	An animal may be classified vicious and a threat to the general public when it has been involved in one or more unprovoked attacks where bodily injury resulted. Such classification shall be determined by an animal control officer and licensed veterinarian. In the discretion of such animal control officer and veterinarian, classified animals shall be surrendered to and put to death by the animal control officer to prevent further injury to the public. Any fees or other costs will be payable by the owner. 
Sec. 8-24. - Cruelty to animals and fowl. 
(a)	No person shall perform a cruel act on any animal, nor maim or kill any domestic animal or attempt to do so. 
(b)	Fresh food and fresh water, according to the size and weight of the animal, must be provided on a daily basis. The shelter of the animal must be large enough, well-constructed, have a complete roof, and must provide for protection from inclement weather. The sheltered area must be kept in a clean, sanitary condition free of excrement and unreasonable objectionable odors. All animals must have access to shade in hot weather. Animal owners are required to provide the needed medical care, to include vaccinations mandatory by law. Enclosures must provide adequate room for sufficient housing of animals including living space and running area. 
(c)	When harnessed, all animals and fowl shall be harnessed in such a manner that will not cause injury to the animal, and the animal shall be given plenty of room on a harness to exercise. 
(d)	Female animals in heat shall be confined in a building or securely enclosed in a manner that shall not allow contact with a male animal except for planned breeding. 
Sec. 8-25. - Poisoning animals. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to put out or cause to be put out any poison within the city for the killing of any dog or other domestic animal. 
Sec. 8-26. - Removal of dead animals. 
(a)	From public ways. The owner of a dead animal upon the public streets and ways shall remove the same so as not to constitute a nuisance. If the owner fails to do so, the city or county shall remove and dispose of such carcass, and charge the cost of such removal and disposal to the owner of the carcass, if known. 
(b)	From private property. When any animal is found on private property, the owner of the dead animal or the owner of the premises upon which such animal is located shall remove the same immediately at his own cost. Upon failure to do so within a reasonable time, the city or county shall remove the same, the cost to be collected from the owner of the dead animal or the property. 
Sec. 8-27. - Mobile home parks, apartments and condominiums or townhouses. 
The allowance of animals inside mobile home parks, apartments, and condominiums or townhouses is discouraged by this chapter. Where those property owners have not taken action to prohibit pets, they shall be charged a stray pickup fee when it is ascertained that the animal belongs to a tenant or occupant in the park, apartment, condominium or townhouse, especially when pet ownership by a tenant or occupant was known by the landlord. 
Sec. 8-28. - Prohibited conditions. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain any animal or fowl in the city in such manner as to create an unsanitary or obnoxious condition, or to become noisy, offensive or a nuisance to the neighbors or citizens of the city, or to disturb the peace of the city. 
(b)	Should a complaint arise from the causes referred to in subsection (a) of this section, the person involved will be properly notified of a hearing to be held on said complaint before the county court of competent jurisdiction. 
(c)	In city subdivisions, it shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain any pen, coop or enclosure for animals or fowl, or to permit any animal or fowl to be kept, maintained or grazed, within 300 feet of any house or building where people reside or work. This subsection (c) shall not apply to household pets such as dogs and cats, but it shall apply to commercial dog kennels, where more than one dog is kept. 
(d)	Tethering of an animal is prohibited, except that as a secondary means of restraint to a proper enclosure an animal may be attached to a running cable line or trolley system provided that: 
(1)	Only one animal may be attached to each running cable line or trolley system. 
(2)	A running cable line or trolley system must have a swivel installed at each end and be attached to a stationary object that cannot be moved by the animal. 
(3)	The running cable line or trolley system must be at least ten feet in length and mounted at least four feet and no more than seven feet above ground level. 
(4)	The length of the tether from the running cable line or trolley system to the animal's collar should allow access to the maximum available exercise area and allow the animal free access to food, water, and shelter. In no event shall the tether running from a cable line or trolley system to the animal's collar be less than ten feet long. 
(5)	The animal is attached to a properly fitted harness or collar not used for the display of a current rabies tag and other identification, and with enough room between the collar and the dog's throat through which two fingers may fit. Choke collars and pinch collars are prohibited for the purpose of tethering an animal to a running cable line or trolley system. 
(6)	The animal is tethered at sufficient distance from any other objects to prevent the tangling of the cable by extending over an object or an edge that could result in injury or strangulation of the animal, and be of sufficient distance from any fence so as to prohibit the animal access to the fence. 
(7)	The animal has proper food, water, and shelter. 
Secondary means of restraint such as proper enclosures may also be engaged, such as a properly installed fence or kennel. 
Sec. 8-29. - Nuisances. 
No person shall allow any animal or fowl over which he has custody or control to remain on his property or premises if the same shall constitute a nuisance as the term is defined in this section. For purposes of this section, it shall constitute a nuisance for an animal or fowl to bark, howl, whine, or emit any noises whatsoever in a continuous manner for a period of one hour or longer so as to disturb any occupant of any adjoining or adjacent property within hearing distance of such property, or for a condition to result from the keeping of such animal or fowl whereby an obnoxious odor emits therefrom, detectable beyond the limits of the property of such owner or keeper. 
Sec. 8-30. - Animals running at large—Impoundment. 
(a)	It shall be the duty of the animal control officer to apprehend any animal found running at large contrary to the provisions of this chapter and to impound such animal in the animal shelter. 
(b)	The owner of an impounded registered animal shall be notified to appear within seven days from the date of the notice to the owner, to redeem the animal by payment of the required fees. Unregistered animals shall be held for a period of three working days. The term "days" means days the animal shelter is open.) 
(c)	Any animal not claimed within the times provided may be either destroyed or sold. 
(d)	In addition to, or in lieu of, apprehending and impounding an animal found at large, the animal control officer, upon determining the owner, may return the animal to the owner and issue a summons requiring the owner to appear in the county court of competent jurisdiction for determination of whether there has been a violation within the meaning of this chapter. 
Sec. 8-31. - Same—Authority to kill. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of section 8-30, if any animal found at large in violation of this chapter cannot be safely taken and impounded, such animal may be slain by any law enforcement officer or animal control officer when placed in danger, or animal control officer when in the presence of and having had permission given by a law enforcement officer. 
Sec. 8-32. - Impounding and other fees in connection with animal shelter. 
The county board of commissioners has established fees for the seizure, impoundment, adoption and disposal of animals. The county fees shall apply to animals seized and disposed of pursuant to this chapter. 
Sec. 8-33. - Enforcement. 
(a)	Violation. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to comply with the requirements of this article and any person who violates the provisions contained herein shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall, unless otherwise specifically provided herein, be punished by a fine of not less than $25.00 nor more than $500.00. 
(b)	County court jurisdiction. The county court of competent jurisdiction shall have jurisdiction over violations of this chapter and all procedures for enforcement hereof shall be as provided by state law. Complaints of violations of any provision contained herein shall be brought before the court on a citation issued by the: 
(1)	County administrator or his designee; 
(2)	Any animal control officer or law enforcement officer within the county; or 
(3)	Any other person specifically authorized by law; 
and shall be prosecuted through that court. 
(c)	Violations of this chapter will be tried upon citations either with or without a prosecuting attorney as determined by the county administrator or his designee. Service of citation shall be performed in the manner provided by state law. Citations shall meet all the official requirements as specified in the O.C.G.A. § 15-10-63, as amended. 
Sec. 8-34. - Certain animals prohibited from entering county recreational land or facilities. 
(a)	No person shall cause or permit a dog or other domestic animal, except service animals and other animals participating in county-approved recreational events (e.g., dog shows, fairs, etc.) or engaged in law enforcement duties, to enter any land or facility owned, operated, or controlled by the city for public recreational purposes. 
(b)	Any person who violates the provisions contained herein shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than $25.00 nor more than $500.00. 
(c)	The county court of competent jurisdiction shall have jurisdiction over violations of this section and all procedures for enforcement of this section shall be as provided by state law. Complaints of violations of any provision contained herein shall be brought before the court on a citation issued by any person designated in this chapter or by law to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(d)	Violations of this section will be tried upon citations either with or without a prosecuting attorney as determined by the animal control officer. Service of citation shall be performed in the manner provided by state law. Citations shall meet all the official requirements as specified in O.C.G.A. § 15-10-63, as amended. 
Secs. 8-35—8-58. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RABIES CONTROL 

Sec. 8-59. - Confinement or leashing required. 
Except for hunting dogs that are in designated hunting areas and with licensed hunters for the specific prey sought, any person owning or having custody of a dog within the city shall confine such dog on the premises of the owner of the dog, or on the premises of some responsible person authorized by the owner. Dogs shall not be permitted to run at large on any streets, alleys, or any other place in the city other than the premises of the guardian or owner of the dog, except on a leash not more than six feet in length or in the care of a competent person to whom the dog will respond through voice command. 
Sec. 8-60. - Vaccination of animals. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep or harbor any animal in the city that has not been vaccinated against rabies as required by the rules and regulations established in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 31-19-5. 
(b)	Evidence of such vaccination shall consist of a certificate bearing the owner's name and address, number of the vaccination tag issued, date of vaccination, date the animal shall be revaccinated, description, name, age and sex of the animal vaccinated, type and lot number of the vaccine administered and the signature of the person administering the vaccine. 
(c)	The certificate shall be prepared in triplicate, the original to be given to the owner, the first copy filed in the office of the county board of health, and the second copy retained by the person administering the vaccine. 
(d)	All vaccinations shall be administered by or under the supervision of a veterinarian licensed by the state board of veterinary medical examiners to practice veterinary medicine in the state or by other persons qualified under state law for that purpose. 
Sec. 8-61. - Registration of cats and dogs; fee. 
All city residents owning, keeping or harboring any cat or dog over three months of age shall pay to the county board of health, or their designated representative, a yearly registration fee of in the amount established by the county from time to time. Registration fees are due upon receiving rabies vaccinations of the animal; provided that no fee will be levied for: 
(1)	Animals that have expired within 30 days of their annual vaccination anniversary; 
(2)	Animals specifically trained, certified, and actively engaged as government services dogs (e.g. patrol, narcotic, explosive detection, search and rescue, etc.); or 
(3)	Guide/medical animals for owners medically declared in need of said service. 
Sec. 8-62. - Registration certificate. 
Upon receipt of the registration fee required by section 8-61 and the exhibition of any unexpired certificate of rabies vaccination, the animal control officer or his representative shall affix a stamp, which states "Liberty County License Fee Paid," to the rabies certificate. 
Sec. 8-63. - Quarantine. 
(a)	When any warm-blooded animal capable of being infected with rabies has bitten any person, or is suspected of having bitten any person, or is suspected of being infected with rabies, the county board of health shall cause such animal to be quarantined for such time as may be deemed necessary, but not less than ten days from the day the person was bitten. No such animal shall be killed or destroyed or removed from the city, except upon authorization of the county board of health or its duly authorized representative. 
(b)	Only dogs and other animals which appear well shall be released from quarantine or impoundment. No person shall hide, kill, conceal or aid or assist in hiding, killing or concealing any such animal defined in this section or shall conceal or permit the same to be removed from the city for the purpose of preventing its quarantine as provided herein. 
Sec. 8-64. - Destruction or quarantine of animals in contact with a rabid animal. 
(a)	All warm-blooded animals capable of being infected with rabies that have come in contact with a rabid animal shall be destroyed by a humane method or shall be quarantined and/or vaccinated as follows: 
(1)	If no vaccination has been given within the previous period of 12 months, the dog or other domestic animal may be vaccinated and then quarantined for 90 days. 
(2)	If vaccinated within the previous 12 months, the dog or other domestic animal shall be revaccinated and then quarantined for 30 days. 
(b)	There shall be placed in a conspicuous place in plain view of all entrances to the place of quarantine under this section a placard on which shall be printed, in letters not less than two inches high, the words "Rabies-Quarantine." Such quarantine shall be at the expense of the owner. The place of quarantine shall be cleaned and disinfected to the satisfaction of the animal control officer. 
Sec. 8-65. - Report required when any person is bitten by an animal. 
Whenever a person is bitten by a dog or other animal capable of being infected with rabies, prompt report of such bite shall be made to the appropriate law enforcement department. Such report shall be made by any physician attending the person bitten or, if such person is received at a hospital or dispensary for treatment, the report shall be made by the person in charge of the hospital or dispensary. The report shall contain information required by the county board of health. When a physician was not consulted or the person was not taken to a hospital or dispensary, the report shall be made by the person bitten or any other person who has knowledge of the facts. 
Sec. 8-66. - Veterinarians to report results of examination of animal. 
Whenever a veterinarian is called upon to examine a dog or other animal capable of transmitting rabies and that has bitten a person, he shall promptly report the results of his examination to the county board of health. 
Sec. 8-67. - Forwarding head of animal to state-approved laboratory. 
When an animal under quarantine has been diagnosed as being rabid, or suspected by a licensed veterinarian as being rabid, and dies while under quarantine, the county board of health shall send the head of such animal to the state-approved laboratory for pathological examination. 
Sec. 8-68. - Surrender and examination of carcasses of animals. 
The carcass of any dead animal found within the city shall, upon demand, be surrendered to the county board of health for examination if, in the opinion of the county board of health, such examination is necessary or advisable. 
Sec. 8-69. - Reporting violations and giving testimony in court. 
Any person who has personal knowledge of the violation of any portion of this regulation shall notify any law enforcement officer or animal control office designated to enforce the provisions of this chapter and shall also make known his willingness to appear and give testimony concerning any such violation in the county court of competent jurisdiction upon being summoned thereto, at the time and place specified in such summons. 
Chapter 10 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal home rule, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II; O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; standards and requirements for construction, alteration, etc., of buildings and other structures, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-1 et seq.; building trade contractors, O.C.G.A. § 43-14-1 et seq.; enforcement of adopted codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26; state minimum standards codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-21; county building, electrical, and other codes, O.C.G.A. § 36-13-1 et seq.; local government code enforcement boards, O.C.G.A. § 36-74-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - County building regulations adopted. 
The city has adopted as though fully set forth herein all building and construction regulations enacted by the Liberty Consolidated Planning Commission (LCPC), such regulations to be enforced by the city officials designated by the council or by any person designated by the county, except to the extent that they conflict with the provisions of this chapter. 
Secs. 10-2—10-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - UNSAFE BUILDINGS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-21. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to provide a procedure for the city to identify and deal with the existence or occupancy of dwellings or other buildings or structures which are unfit for human habitation, commercial, industrial, or business occupancy or use and are inimical to the welfare and are dangerous and injurious to the health, safety, and welfare of the people of the city. 
(Ord. of 3-10-1987; Ord. of 1-5-1988, § 1) 
Sec. 10-22. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Closing means securing and causing a dwelling, building or structure to be vacated. 
Dwellings, buildings, or structures means any building or structure or part thereof used and occupied for human habitation, commercial, industrial or business uses, or intended to be so used, and includes any outhouses and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith and also includes any building or structure of any design. 
Housing official means the county health department employees designated by the county to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
Owner means the holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee of record. 
Parties in interest means persons in possession of said property and all individuals, associations and corporations who have interest of record in the county where the property is located in a dwelling, building or structure, including executors, administrators, guardians and trustees. 
Public authority means any state, county or city housing authority, officer or employee, or their agents, relating to health, fire or building regulations. 
Public officer means the officers who are authorized by this article to exercise the powers prescribed herein including, without limitation, the housing official. 
Repair means alteration or closing of a dwelling, building or structure or the cleaning or removal of debris, trash and other materials present and accumulated that create a health or safety hazard in or about any dwelling, building or structure. 
(Ord. of 3-10-1987; Ord. of 1-5-1988, § 3) 
Sec. 10-23. - Eminent domain. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed as preventing the owner of any property from receiving just compensation for the taking of property by the power of eminent domain under the laws of this state or as permitting any property to be condemned or destroyed except in accordance with the police power of this state. 
(Ord. of 1-5-1988, § 9) 
Sec. 10-24. - Authority to make appropriations and accept grants and donations. 
The city is authorized to make such appropriations from its revenues as it may deem necessary and may accept and apply grants or donations to assist it in carrying out the provisions of this article in connection with the exercise of the powers granted hereunder. 
(Ord. of 1-5-1988, § 10) 
Sec. 10-25. - Adoption of housing code. 
The city has adopted the 1985 edition of the Standard Housing Code with amendments is hereby adopted by reference, the same as though it were copied fully herein. 
(Ord. of 3-10-1987) 
Sec. 10-26. - Authority of public officer. 
The public officer shall have such powers as may be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purpose and provisions of this article, including the following powers in addition to others herein granted: 
(1)	To investigate the dwelling conditions in the city in order to determine which dwellings, buildings or structures therein are unfit for human habitation or are unfit for current commercial, industrial or business use; 
(2)	To administer oaths and affirmations, to examine witnesses, and to receive evidence; 
(3)	To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations; provided, however, that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession; 
(4)	To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents and employees as he deems necessary to carry out the purposes of the ordinances; and 
(5)	To delegate any of his functions and powers under this article the ordinance to such officers and agents as he may designate. 
(Ord. of 1-5-1988, § 6) 
Sec. 10-27. - Prima facie evidence. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 41-2-8 et seq., a finding by any authorized city or county official or employee that a property within the city is a health or safety hazard shall constitute prima facie evidence that the property is in violation of this article. 
(Ord. of 1-5-1988, § 2) 
Secs. 10-28—10-57. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURE 

Sec. 10-58. - Preliminary investigation; notice of violation. 
Whenever a request is filed with the public officer by a public authority or by at least five residents of the city charging that any dwelling, building or structure is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial or business use, or whenever it appears to the public officer, on his own motion, that any dwelling, building or structure is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial or business use, the public officer shall, if his preliminary investigation discloses a basis for such charges, issue and cause to be served upon the owner or any parties in interest in such dwelling, building or structure a complaint stating the charges in that respect and containing a notice that: 
(1)	A hearing will be held before the public officer or his designated agent at a place within the county in which the property is located therein, fixed not less than ten days or more than 30 days after the serving of said complaint; 
(2)	The owner and any parties in interest shall be given the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person, or otherwise, and give testimony at the place and time fixed in the complaint; and 
(3)	The rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not be controlling in hearings before the public officer. 
(Ord. of 1-5-1988, § 4(1)) 
Sec. 10-59. - Standards to be considered in making determination. 
The public officer may determine that a dwelling, building or structure is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial or business use if he finds that conditions exist in such building, dwelling or structure which are dangerous or injurious to the health, safety or morals of the occupants of such dwelling, building or structure; of the occupant of neighborhood dwellings, buildings or structures; or of other city residents. Conditions that may be considered include the following (without limiting the generality of the foregoing): 
(1)	Defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accidents or other calamities; 
(2)	Lack of adequate ventilation, light or sanitary facilities; 
(3)	Dilapidation; 
(4)	Disrepair; 
(5)	Structural defects; and 
(6)	Uncleanliness. 
(Ord. of 1-5-1988, § 5) 
Sec. 10-60. - Findings; issuance of order. 
(a)	If, after such notice and hearing, the public officer determines that the dwelling, building or structure under consideration is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial or business use, he shall state in writing his findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owners thereof an order: 
(1)	If the repair, alteration or improvement of the dwelling, building, or structure can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the value of the dwelling, building or structure, requiring the owner or parties in interest, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter or improve such dwelling, building or structure so as to render it fit for human habitation or for current commercial, industrial or business use or to vacate and close the dwelling, building or structure as a human habitation; or 
(2)	If the repair, alteration or improvement of the dwelling, building or structure cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the value of the dwelling, building or structure, requiring the owner or parties in interest, within the time specified in the order, to remove or demolish such dwelling, building, or structure. 
(b)	In no event shall the city require removal or demolition of any dwelling, building or structure except upon a finding that the cost of repair, alteration or improvement thereof exceeds one-half the value such dwelling, building or structure will have when repaired to satisfy the minimum requirements of this law. 
(Ord. of 1-5-1988, § 4(2)) 
Sec. 10-61. - Copy of complaints and orders to be filed with county. 
A copy of any complaint or order filed or issued pursuant to this article shall also be filed in the proper office for the filing of lis pendens notice in the county in which the dwelling, building or structure is located and such filing of the complaint or order shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices provided by law. Any such complaint or order or an appropriate lis pendens notice may contain a statement to the effect that a lien may arise against the described property and that an itemized statement of such lien is maintained on a lien docket maintained by the city clerk. 
(Ord. of 1-5-1988, § 7(6)) 
Sec. 10-62. - Manner of service for complaints and orders; sufficient evidence shown. 
(a)	Complaints or orders issued by a public officer pursuant to this article shall be served in the manner provided in this section or, in the event of conflict, in the manner prescribed by state law. Such complaints or orders shall, in all cases, be served upon each person in possession of said property, each owner, and each party in interest; and the return of service signed by the public officer or his agent or an affidavit of service executed by any citizen of this state, reciting that a copy of such complaint or order was served upon each person in possession of said property, each owner, and each party in interest personally or by leaving such copy at the place of his residence, shall be sufficient evidence as to the service of such person in possession, owner and party in interest. 
(b)	If any of the owners and parties in interest shall reside out of the city, service shall be perfected by causing a copy of such complaint or orders to be served upon such parties by the sheriff or any lawful deputy of the county of the residences of such parties or such service may be made by any citizen; and the return of such sheriff or lawful deputy or the affidavit of such citizen, that such parties were served either personally or by leaving a copy of the complaint or orders at the residence, shall be conclusive as to such service. 
(c)	Nonresidents of this state shall be served by publishing the same once each week for two successive weeks in a newspaper printed and published in the city or, in the absence of such newspaper, in one printed and published in the county and circulated in the city in which the dwellings, buildings or structures are located. A copy of such complaint or orders shall be posted in a conspicuous place on premises affected by the complaint or order. Where the address of such nonresidents is known, a copy of such complaint or orders shall be mailed to them by registered or certified mail. 
(d)	In the event either the owner or any party in interest is a minor or an incompetent person or person laboring under disabilities, the guardian or other personal representative of such person shall be served and if such guardian or personal representative resides outside the city or is a nonresident of the state, he shall be served as provided for in subsection (c) of this section for nonresidents. 
(e)	If such minor or incompetent person or person laboring under disabilities has no guardian or personal representative or in the event such minor or incompetent person lives outside the city or is a nonresident, service shall be perfected by serving such minor or incompetent person personally or by leaving a copy at the place of his residence, which shall be sufficient evidence as to the service of such person. In the case of other persons who live outside of the city or are nonresidents of the state, service shall be perfected by serving the judge of the county court of competent jurisdiction located in the county in which such property is located who shall stand in the place of and protect the rights of such minor or incompetent person or appoint a guardian ad litem for such person. 
(f)	In the event the whereabouts of any owner or party in interest is unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by the public officer in the exercise of reasonable diligence and the public officer shall make an affidavit to that effect, then the service of such complaint or order upon such persons shall be made in the same manner as provided in this article or service may be perfected upon any person holding himself out as an agent for the property involved. 
(Ord. of 1-5-1988, § 7(1)—(5)) 
Sec. 10-63. - Placarding. 
If the owner or parties in interest fail to comply with an order to vacate and close or demolish the dwelling, building or structure, the public officer may cause such dwelling, building or structure to be repaired, altered or improved or to be vacated and closed or demolished; and that the public officer may cause to be posted on the main entrance of any building, dwelling or structure so closed a placard with the following words: 
"This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial or business use; the use or occupation of this building for human habitation or for commercial, industrial or business use is prohibited and unlawful." 
(Ord. of 1-5-1988, § 4(3)) 
Sec. 10-64. - Removal or demolition by city. 
If the owner fails to comply with any order to remove or demolish the dwelling, building or structure, the public officer may cause such dwelling, building or structure to be removed or demolished; provided, however, that the duties of the public officer, set forth in this article, shall not be exercised until the city council shall have by ordinance ordered the public officer to proceed to effectuate the purpose of this article with respect to the particular property which the public officer shall have found to be unfit for human habitation or unfit for its current commercial, industrial or business use, which property shall be described in this article. 
(Ord. of 1-5-1988, § 4(4)) 
Sec. 10-65. - Lien on property for costs. 
The amount of the cost of such vacating and closing or removal or demolition by the public officer shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. The lien shall attach to the real property upon the payment of all cost of demolition by the city and the filing of an itemized statement of the total sum of said costs by the public officer in the office of the city clerk on a lien docket maintained by the clerk for such purposes. 
(Ord. of 1-5-1988, § 4(5)) 
Sec. 10-66. - Sale of salvage; application of sale proceeds. 
If the dwelling, building or structure is removed or demolished by the public officer, he shall sell the materials of such dwellings, buildings or structures and shall credit the proceeds of such sale against the cost of the removal or demolition and any balance remaining shall be deposited with the county court of competent jurisdiction by the public officer, shall be secured in such manner as may be directed by such court, and shall be disbursed by such court to the persons found to be entitled thereto by final order or decree of such court. 
(Ord. of 1-5-1988, § 4(5)) 
Sec. 10-67. - Other remedies preserved. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the city to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise. 
(Ord. of 1-5-1988, § 4(5)) 
Sec. 10-68. - Lien foreclosure and collection. 
The city may enforce the collection of any amount due on a lien established pursuant to this article for removal or demolition of dwellings, buildings or structures only in the following manner: 
(1)	The owner or parties in interest shall be allowed to satisfy the amount due on such lien by paying to the city, within 30 days after the perfection of said lien, a sum of money equal to 25 percent of the total amount due and by further paying to said city the remaining balance due on such lien, together with interest at the rate of seven percent per annum, in three equal annual payments, each of which shall become due and payable on the anniversary date of the initial payment. 
(2)	Should the property upon which such lien is perfected be sold, transferred or conveyed by the owner or parties in interest at any time prior to the termination of the three-year period, then the entire balance due on such lien shall be due and payable to the city. 
(3)	Should the amount due on such lien, or any portion thereof, be unpaid after the passage of the three-year period, or upon the occurrence of sale, transfer or other conveyance, the city may enforce the collection of any amount due on such lien for alteration, repair, removal or demolition of dwellings, buildings or structures in the same manner as provided in this article and other applicable state statutes. 
(4)	The procedure set forth in this section shall be subject to the right of redemption by any persons having any right, title or interest in or lien upon said property. 
(Ord. of 1-5-1988, § 4(6)) 
Sec. 10-69. - Appeal. 
Any person aggrieved by an order issued pursuant to this article may seek injunctive relief and review as provided by state law. 
(Ord. of 1-5-1988, § 8) 
Chapter 12 - BUSINESSES AND BUSINESS REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— For additional regulations applicable to specific types of businesses, see other chapters of this Code applicable to specific businesses. 
State Law reference— Authority of cities and counties to license self-service motor fuel dispensing pumps, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-1; certain persons required to provide proof of licensure state licensure before issuance of city or county business license, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-6; limitations regarding persons performing investigations related to city and county business licenses, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-9; taxation of insurers, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-1 et seq.; licensing and taxation of certain businesses, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-1 et seq.; municipal and county occupation taxes for certain traveling salespersons, merchants, and dealers, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-354. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 12-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Administrative fee means a component of an occupation tax which approximates the reasonable cost of handling and processing the occupation tax. 
Dominant line means the type of business, within a multiple-line business, that the greatest amount of income is derived from. 
Gross receipts. 
(1)	The term "gross receipts" means the total revenue of the business or practitioner for the period, including, without limitation, the following: 
a.	Total income without deduction for the cost of goods or expenses incurred; 
b.	Gain from trading in stocks, bonds, capital assets, or instruments of indebtedness; 
c.	Proceeds from commissions on the sale of property, goods, or services; 
d.	Proceeds from fees for services rendered; and 
e.	Proceeds from rent, interest, royalty, or dividend income. 
(2)	The term "gross receipts" shall not include the following: 
a.	Sales, use, or excise tax; 
b.	Sales returns, allowances, and discounts; 
c.	Interorganizational sales or transfers between or among the units of a parent-subsidiary controlled group of corporations as defined by 26 USC 1563(a)(1), or between or among the units of a brother-sister controlled group of corporations as defined by 26 USC 1563(a)(2); 
d.	Payments made to a subcontractor or an independent agent; and 
e.	Governmental and foundation grants, charitable contributions, or the interest income derived from such funds received by a nonprofit organization which employs salaried practitioners otherwise covered by this chapter, if such funds constitute 80 percent or more of the organization's receipts. 
Location or office shall not include a temporary work site which serves a single customer or project. 
Occupation tax means a tax levied on persons, partnerships, corporations, or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession, or business for revenue-raising purposes. 
Person means and includes sole proprietors, corporations, partnerships, nonprofits, or any other form of business organization, but specifically excludes charitable nonprofit organizations which utilize 50 percent of their proceeds for charitable purposes. 
Practitioner of profession or practitioner of occupation means one who by state law requires state licensure regulating such profession or occupation. 
Regulatory fees means payments, whether designated as license fees, permit fees, or by another name, which are required by a local government as an exercise of its police power and as a part of or an aid to regulation of an occupation, profession, or business. The amount of a regulatory fee shall approximate the reasonable cost of the actual regulatory activity performed by the city. A regulatory fee may not include an administration fee. Development impact fees as defined by O.C.G.A. § 36-71-2(8) or other costs or conditions of zoning or land development are not regulatory fees. 
(Ord. of 12-7-1994, § 19-37) 
Sec. 12-2. - Duty to keep information current. 
Any person required by this chapter or any other provision of this Code to obtain a license for or otherwise register a business with the city, or to pay occupation tax with regard to any business within the city, is required to notify the city clerk in writing within 30 days of any of the following changes: 
(1)	Change of address of the business; 
(2)	Change of ownership of the business; or 
(3)	Termination of the business. 
Sec. 12-3. - Administrative and regulatory fee. 
A nonprorated, nonrefundable administrative fee in the amount provided in the city fee schedule shall be required on all business license and occupation tax certificate accounts for the initial start-up, renewal or reopening of those accounts. 
(Ord. of 12-7-1994, § 19-38) 
Sec. 12-4. - Revenue collection officer; subpoena and arrest powers. 
The revenue collection agency and its duly designated officer and inspectors or its successors shall be classified as deputy marshals/business inspectors with full subpoena and arrest powers in conjunction with any violation pertaining to this chapter. 
(Ord. of 12-7-1994, § 19-54) 
Secs. 12-5—12-26. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OCCUPATION TAX[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Taxation of businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one or more locations in a county or municipality, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-6; taxes on businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with no location in state, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7; prohibited practices in levying tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-13. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 12-27. - Violations; liability of officers and agents. 
(a)	All persons subject to the occupation tax levy pursuant to this article shall be required to obtain the necessary registration for said business as described in this article, and in default thereof the officer or agent soliciting for or representing such persons shall be subject to the same penalty as other persons who fail to obtain a registration. 
(b)	Every person commencing business in the city after January 1 of each year shall likewise obtain the registration herein provided for before commencing the same; and any person transacting, or offering to transact, in the city any of the kinds of business, trade, profession, or occupation without first having so obtained said registration shall be subject to penalties provided thereof. 
(Ord. of 12-7-1994, § 19-51) 
Secs. 12-28—12-57. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LEVY AND COLLECTION 

Sec. 12-58. - Purpose and scope of tax. 
The occupation tax levied herein is for revenue purposes only and is not for regulatory purposes, nor is the payment of the tax made a condition precedent to the practice of any such profession, trade, or calling. The occupation tax only applies to those businesses and occupations that are covered by the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-5 to 48-13-26. All other applicable businesses and occupations are taxed by the city pursuant to the pertinent general law. 
(Ord. of 12-7-1994, § 19-45) 
Sec. 12-59. - Levied. 
(a)	For the year 1995 and succeeding years thereafter, each person engaged in any business, trade, profession, or occupation in the city, whether with a location in the city or in the case of an out-of-state business with no location in this state exerting substantial efforts within the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, shall pay an occupation tax for said business, trade, profession, or occupation, which tax and any applicable registration shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in the place of business, if the taxpayer has a permanent business location in the city. 
(b)	If the taxpayer has no permanent business location in the city, such business tax registration shall be shown to the revenue collection officer or this officer's deputies or to any city law enforcement officer upon request. 
(Ord. of 12-7-1994, § 19-36) 
Sec. 12-60. - Requirement of public hearing before tax increase. 
The city council shall conduct at least one public hearing before adopting any ordinance or resolution which will increase the rate of occupation tax as set forth in this article. 
(Ord. of 12-7-1994, § 19-71) 
Sec. 12-61. - Exemptions. 
(a)	Generally. The following businesses are not covered by the provisions of this chapter but may be assessed an occupation tax or other type of tax pursuant to the provisions of other general or local law: 
(1)	Businesses regulated by the Georgia Public Service Commission. 
(2)	Electrical service businesses organized under O.C.G.A. § 46-3-1 et seq. 
(3)	Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including agribusiness. 
(4)	Cooperative marketing associations governed by O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105. 
(5)	Insurance companies governed by O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8 et seq. 
(6)	Motor common carriers governed by O.C.G.A. § 46-7-15. 
(7)	Businesses governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355 (businesses that purchase carload lots of guano, meats, meal, flour, bran, cottonseed, or cottonseed meal and hulls). 
(8)	Agricultural products and livestock raised in the state governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356. 
(9)	Depository financial institutions governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 
(10)	Facilities operated by a charitable trust governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-55. 
(b)	Charitable purpose exemption; limitation. No business on which a business registration or occupation tax is levied by this article shall be exempt from said registration or tax on the ground that such business is operated for a charitable purpose, unless 75 percent or more of the entire proceeds from said business are devoted to such purpose. 
(c)	Governmental practitioners exception. Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by a municipal, county or state government, or an instrumentality of such governmental units shall not be required to obtain a license or pay an occupation tax for that practice. 
(Ord. of 12-7-1994, §§ 19-44, 19-48, 19-55) 
Sec. 12-62. - Tax inapplicable if prohibited or exempted by state or federal law. 
An occupation tax under this article shall not apply to the gross receipts of any part of a business where such levy is prohibited or exempted by state or federal law. 
(Ord. of 12-7-1994, § 19-56) 
Sec. 12-63. - Option to establish exemption or reduction in occupation tax. 
The city council may by subsequent ordinance or resolution provide for an exemption or reduction in occupation tax to one or more types of businesses or practitioners of occupations or professions as part of a plan for economic development or attracting or encouraging selected types of businesses or practitioners of selected occupations or professions. Such exemptions or reductions in occupation tax shall not be arbitrary or capricious, and the reasons shall be set forth in the minutes of the city council. 
(Ord. of 12-7-1994, § 19-72) 
Sec. 12-64. - Manner of calculating; proration. 
(a)	An occupation tax shall be levied upon those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one or more locations or offices in the corporate limits of the city or upon the applicable out-of-state businesses with no location or office in this state, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, based upon the profitability ratio determined as provided in this section. 
(b)	Profitability ratio for the type of business, profession, or occupation is measured by nationwide averages derived from statistics, classifications, or other information published by the U.S. Office of Management and Budget, the U.S. Internal Revenue Service, or successor agencies of the United States. 
(c)	The tax rate determined by profitability ratios for each business, trade, profession, or occupation is developed and updated from time to time by the city. The most current rates are as provided in the city fee schedule. Any new business established after July 1 shall pay one-half of the annual amount provided in the city fee schedule. 
(Ord. of 12-7-1994, § 19-39) 
Sec. 12-65. - Alternative rates for practitioners of certain professions. 
(a)	Practitioners of professions as described in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1) through (18) shall elect as their entire occupation tax one of the following: 
(1)	The occupation tax based on the profitability ratio; or 
(2)	A flat tax in the amount provided in the city fee schedule per practitioner who is licensed to provide the service, such tax to be paid at the practitioner's office or location; provided, however, that a practitioner paying according to this subsection (a)(2) shall not be required to provide information to the city relating to the gross receipts of the business or practitioner. The per-practitioner fee applies to each person in the business who qualifies as a practitioner under the state's regulatory guidelines and framework. 
(b)	The election permitted under this section is to be made annually, no later than November 1 of each year. 
(Ord. of 12-7-1994, § 19-43) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-9 and 48-13-10. 
Sec. 12-66. - Criteria for determining applicability of levy to out-of-state entities. 
Registration and assessment of an occupation tax is required under this article for those businesses and practitioners of professions with no location or office in this state if the business's largest dollar volume of business in the state is in the city, and the business or practitioner: 
(1)	Has one or more employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within the jurisdiction of the city for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients; or 
(2)	Owns personal or real property which generates income and which is located within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Ord. of 12-7-1994, § 19-40) 
Sec. 12-67. - Dominant line of business to be disclosed. 
The business registration of each business operated in the city shall identify the dominant line of business that the business conducts. 
(Ord. of 12-7-1994, § 19-41) 
Sec. 12-68. - More than one place or line of business. 
Where a business is operated at more than one place or where the business includes more than one line, said business shall be required to obtain the necessary registration for each location and line and pay an occupation tax in accordance with the prevailing taxing method and tax rate for each location and line. 
(Ord. of 12-7-1994, § 19-61) 
Sec. 12-69. - Allocation of gross receipts of business with multiple intrastate or interstate locations. 
(a)	For those businesses that have multiple locations inside and outside the city where the gross receipts can be allocated to each location, the gross receipts used to determine the occupation tax assessed will be those gross receipts attributed to each location in the city. 
(b)	Where the dollar amount of gross receipts attributed locally cannot be determined in those businesses with multiple locations, the total gross receipts will be divided by the total number of locations in the city and elsewhere and allotted equally to all locations. 
(c)	Upon request, a business or practitioner with a location or office situated in more than one jurisdiction shall provide to the city financial information necessary to allocate the gross receipts of the business or practitioner and information relating to the allocation of the business's or practitioner's gross receipts by other local governments. 
(d)	Where the business has locations outside of the city and taxation is levied for criteria other than gross receipts in the other local governments, the city shall not assess more than the allotted share of gross receipts for the local operation. 
(Ord. of 12-7-1994, § 19-47) 
Sec. 12-70. - Evidence and display of state registration required where applicable. 
Each person who is licensed by the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. title 43 shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before the city registration may be issued. Each person who is licensed by the state shall post the state license in a conspicuous place in the licensee's place of business and shall keep the license there at all times while the license remains valid. 
(Ord. of 12-7-1994, § 19-49) 
Sec. 12-71. - Returns confidential. 
(a)	Except in the case of judicial proceedings or other proceedings necessary to collect the occupation tax hereby levied, it shall be unlawful for any city officer, employee, agent, clerk, or any other person to divulge or make known in any manner the amount of gross receipts or any particulars set forth or disclosed in any occupation tax return required under this article. 
(b)	All contents of said return shall be confidential and open only to the officials, employees, agents, or clerks of the city using said returns for the purpose of this occupation tax levy and the collection of the tax. Independent auditors or bookkeepers employed by the city shall be classed as "employees." 
(c)	Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the publication by city officials of statistics, so classified as to prevent the identification of particular reports or returns and items thereof, or the inspection of the records by duly qualified employees of federal, state or other local government tax departments. 
(Ord. of 12-7-1994, § 19-62) 
Sec. 12-72. - When tax due and payable; delinquency penalty. 
(a)	The occupation tax levied in this article shall be payable January 1 of each year and shall, if not paid by February 1 of each year, be subject to penalties for delinquency as prescribed in this article. 
(b)	On any new profession, trade, or calling begun in the city, the registration and tax shall be delinquent if not obtained immediately upon beginning business, and a ten-percent penalty shall be imposed. 
(c)	The tax registration herein provided for shall be issued by the revenue collection officer, and it is unlawful and a violation of this chapter for any person whose duty it is to obtain a registration to transact in the city any of the kind of profession, trade, or calling subject to this article without having first obtained said registration. 
(d)	In addition to the remedies in this section, the city may proceed to collect in the same manner as provided by law for tax executions. 
(Ord. of 12-7-1994, § 19-46) 
Sec. 12-73. - Lien taken for delinquent occupation tax. 
(a)	In addition to the other remedies herein provided for the collection of the occupation tax herein levied, the revenue collection officer of the city, upon any tax or installment of said tax becoming delinquent and remaining unpaid, shall issue execution for the correct amount of said tax against the person liable for said tax, which said execution shall bear interest at the rate of 12 percent per annum from the date when such tax or installment becomes delinquent, and the lien shall cover the property of the person liable for said tax, located within the city, all as provided in this article and state law. 
(b)	The lien of said occupation tax shall become fixed on and date from the time when such tax or any installment thereof becomes delinquent. 
(c)	The execution shall be levied as provided by law by the city upon the property of defendant located in said jurisdiction, and sufficient property shall be advertised and sold to pay the amount of said execution, with interest and costs. 
(d)	All other proceedings in relation thereto shall be had as is provided by this article and state law and the defendant in said execution shall have rights of defense, by affidavit of illegality and otherwise which are provided by the applicable laws in regard to tax executions. 
(e)	When a nulla bona entry has been entered by proper authority upon an execution issued by the revenue collection officer against any person defaulting on the occupation tax, the person against whom the entry was made shall not be allowed or entitled to have or collect any fees or charges whatsoever for services rendered after the entry of the nulla bona. 
(f)	If, at any time after the entry of nulla bona has been made, the person against whom the execution issues pays the tax in full together with all interest and costs accrued on the tax, the person may collect any fees and charges due him as though he had never defaulted in the payment of the taxes. 
(Ord. of 12-7-1994, § 19-66) 
Sec. 12-74. - Revocation of certificate or license; other penalties. 
(a)	Upon the failure of any business to pay the occupation tax or any part thereof levied under this chapter before it becomes delinquent, or upon failure to make any return within the time required herein, or upon failure to make a true return, or upon failure to amend a return to set forth the truth, or upon failure to permit inspection of its books as provided in section 12-71, any business tax registration granted by the city under this chapter permitting the owner of said business to do business for the current year shall be, ipso facto, revoked. 
(b)	No new business tax registration shall be granted by the city for the operation of a business for which any part of the occupation tax herein provided for is at that time unpaid, or to an individual, firm, or corporation who has failed to submit adequate records as requested by the revenue collection officer in accordance with this article. 
(c)	In the case of those practitioners where the local government cannot suspend the right of the practitioner to conduct business, the imposition of civil penalties shall be permitted and pursued by the city in the case of delinquent occupation tax. 
(d)	In addition to revocation as provided in this section, any person violating the requirements of this article shall be subject to all other applicable penalties under this Code and as otherwise permitted by law. 
(Ord. of 12-7-1994, § 19-64) 
Secs. 12-75—12-91. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - INSURER LICENSES AND TAXES 

Sec. 12-92. - Insurer defined. 
For the purposes of this article, the term "insurer" means a company which is authorized to transact business in the classes of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5. 
(Ord. of 1-8-1991, § 1) 
Sec. 12-93. - Insurers with business location in city. 
The city has levied annual license fees in the amount provided in the city fee schedule upon each insurer doing business within the city, including the first and each separate business location in excess of one. 
(Ord. of 1-8-1991, § 1) 
Sec. 12-94. - License fee for insurers insuring certain risks at additional business locations. 
For each separate business location, not otherwise subject to a license fee hereunder, operated and maintained by a business organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing and in connection with such loans or sales, offers, solicits or takes application for insurance through a licensed agent of an insurer for insurance, said insurer shall pay an additional annual license fee per location in the amount provided in the city fee schedule. 
(Ord. of 1-8-1991, § 2) 
Sec. 12-95. - License fee for agencies and other insurers. 
The city has levied an annual license fee upon independent agencies and brokers for each separate business location from which an insurance business is conducted and that is not subject to the company license fee imposed under this article, in the amount provided in the city fee schedule for each such location within the city. 
(Ord. of 1-8-1991, § 3) 
Sec. 12-96. - Gross premiums tax—On life insurers. 
(a)	The term "gross direct premiums," as used in this section, means gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. 
(b)	The city has levied an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer writing life, accident and sickness insurance within the city in an amount equal to one percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fee otherwise imposed by this article. 
(Ord. of 1-8-1991, § 4) 
Sec. 12-97. - Same—On other insurers. 
(a)	The term "gross direct premiums," as used in this section, means gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2(a). 
(b)	The city has levied an annual tax upon each insurer, other than an insurer transacting business in the class of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5(1), doing business within the city in an amount equal to 2½ percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year, in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. 
(Ord. of 1-8-1991, § 5) 
Sec. 12-98. - Due date. 
License fees and taxes imposed in this article shall be due and payable on January 1 of each year. 
(Ord. of 1-8-1991, § 6) 
Chapter 14 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AND SERVICES 
(RESERVED) 
Chapter 16 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Conservation and natural resources, O.C.G.A. § 12-1-1 et seq.; water resources, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-1 et seq.; control of soil erosion and sedimentation, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; control of water pollution and surface water use, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 16-1—16-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 16-19. - Statutory authorization. 
O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(a) delegates the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. 
(Ord. of 7-17-2008, art. 1, § A) 
Sec. 16-20. - Findings of fact. 
(a)	The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)	These flood losses are caused by the occupancy in flood hazard areas of uses vulnerable to floods, which are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages and by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities. 
(Ord. of 7-17-2008, art. 1, § B) 
Sec. 16-21. - Statement of purpose. 
It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)	Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)	Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
(3)	Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; 
(4)	Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; and 
(5)	Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters. 
(Ord. of 7-17-2008, art. 1, § C) 
Sec. 16-22. - Objectives. 
The objectives of this article are: 
(1)	To protect human life and health; 
(2)	To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(3)	To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood prone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas; 
(4)	To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(5)	To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(6)	To minimize prolonged business interruptions; and 
(7)	To ensure that potential homebuyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Ord. of 7-17-2008, art. 1, § D) 
Sec. 16-23. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accessory structure means a structure having minimal value and used for parking, storage and other nonhabitable uses, such as garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns, hay sheds and the like. 
Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition, which is connected by a firewall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall, shall be considered new construction. 
Appeal means a request for a review of the administrator's interpretation of any provision of this article. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of special flood hazard means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. In the absence of official designation by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, areas of special flood hazard shall be those designated by the local community and referenced in section 16-25. 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Basement means that portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Building means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. 
Critical facility means any public or private facility, which, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the disaster or would increase the hazard to life and health. Critical facilities include: 
(1)	Structures or facilities that produce, use, or store highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic, or water-reactive materials; 
(2)	Hospitals and nursing homes, and housing for the elderly, which are likely to contain occupants who may not be sufficiently mobile to avoid the loss of life or injury during flood and storm events; 
(3)	Emergency operation centers or data storage centers which contain records or services that may become lost or inoperative during flood and storm events; 
(4)	Generating plants, and other principal points of utility lines. 
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, and permanent storage of materials or equipment. 
Elevated building means a nonbasement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
Existing construction means any structure for which the start of construction commenced before December 1, 1983, which is the effective date of the first floodplain management regulations adopted by the county. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before December 1, 1983. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)	The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(2)	The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been designated as Zone A. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study means the official report by the Federal Insurance Administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
Floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Freeboard means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. Freeboard tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed foundation of a building. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)	Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)	Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)	Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)	Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.	By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
b.	Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this Code. 
Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of this article, the term is synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD). 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) means a vertical control as corrected in 1929 used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
New construction means any structure (see definition) for which the start of construction commenced after December 1, 1983 (i.e., the effective date of the first floodplain management ordinance adopted by the community as a basis for community participation in the (NFIP)) and includes any subsequent improvements to the structure. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after December 1, 1983. 
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) means a vertical control as corrected in 1988 used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle, which is: 
(1)	Built on a single chassis; 
(2)	400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)	Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and 
(4)	Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Start of construction means the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. 
(1)	The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. 
(2)	Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. Accessory structures are not exempt from any ordinance requirements. 
(3)	For a substantial improvement, the term "actual start of construction" means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, or a gas or liquid storage tank. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement. 
(1)	The term "substantial improvement" means any combination of repairs, reconstruction, alteration, or improvements to a structure, taking place during a five-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the start of construction of the improvement. The term "substantial improvement" includes structures, which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. 
(2)	The term "substantial improvement" does not, however, include either: 
a.	Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to ensure safe living conditions; or 
b.	Any alteration of a historic structure provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
For the purposes of this definition, substantial improvement is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the structure commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions means where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Variance means a grant of relief from the requirements of this article, which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this article. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, or other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this article is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Ord. of 7-17-2008, art. 6) 
Sec. 16-24. - Applicability. 
This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Ord. of 7-17-2008, art. 2, § A) 
Sec. 16-25. - Basis for area of special flood hazard. 
(a)	The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in its Flood Insurance Study (FIS), dated September 20, 2007, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared a part of this article. For those land areas acquired by the city through annexation, the current effective FIS, supporting data and any revision thereto, for Liberty County, dated September 20, 2007, are hereby adopted by reference. 
(b)	Areas of special flood hazard may also include those areas known to have flooded historically or which are so defined through standard engineering analysis by governmental agencies or private parties but not yet incorporated in a FIS. 
(c)	The repository for public inspection of the Flood Insurance Study (FIS), accompanying maps and other supporting data is located at the Liberty County Courthouse Annex Building, Room 105, 112 N. Main Street, Hinesville, Georgia. 
(Ord. of 7-17-2008, art. 2, § B) 
Sec. 16-26. - Establishment of development permit. 
A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this article prior to the commencement of any development activities. 
(Ord. of 7-17-2008, art. 2, § C) 
Sec. 16-27. - Compliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. of 7-17-2008, art. 2, § D) 
Sec. 16-28. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing ordinance, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this article and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. of 7-17-2008, art. 2, § E) 
Sec. 16-29. - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this article, all provisions shall be: 
(1)	Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)	Liberally construed in favor of the city council; and 
(3)	Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. of 7-17-2008, art. 2, § F) 
Sec. 16-30. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the city or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Ord. of 7-17-2008, art. 2, § G) 
Sec. 16-31. - Penalties for violation. 
Failure to comply with the provisions of this article or with any of its requirements, including conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions, shall constitute a violation. Any person who violates this article or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $1,000.00 or imprisoned for not more than 60 days, or both, and, in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful actions as are necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. of 7-17-2008, art. 2, § H) 
Secs. 16-32—16-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 16-51. - Designation of administrator. 
The Liberty Consolidated Planning Commission (LCPC) is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 7-17-2008, art. 3, § A) 
Sec. 16-52. - Permit procedures. 
(a)	Application for a development permit shall be made to the county building and licensing department on forms furnished by the community prior to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to the following: 
(1)	Plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the elevations of the area in question; and 
(2)	The nature, location, dimensions, of existing or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, storage of materials or equipment, and drainage facilities. 
(b)	Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)	Application stage. 
a.	Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
b.	Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed; 
c.	Design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any proposed nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet the floodproofing criteria of section 16-104(2); 
d.	Design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any new construction or substantial improvement placed in a coastal high hazard area will meet the criteria of section 16-107(5); 
e.	Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of a proposed development. 
(2)	Construction stage. 
a.	For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit holder shall provide to the administrator an as-built certification of the regulatory floor elevation or floodproofing level immediately after the lowest floor or floodproofing is completed. Where a structure is subject to the provisions applicable to coastal high hazards areas, said certification shall be provided after placement of the lowest horizontal structural members. Any regulatory floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by the same. When floodproofing is utilized for nonresidential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by the same. 
b.	Any work undertaken prior to submission of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. 
c.	The LCPC shall review the above-referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make said corrections required hereby, shall be cause to issue a stop work order for the project. 
(Ord. of 7-17-2008, art. 3, § B) 
Sec. 16-53. - Duties and responsibilities of the administrator. 
(a)	Duties of the LCPC shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)	Review all development permits to ensure that the permit requirements of this article have been satisfied. 
(2)	Review proposed development to ensure that all necessary permits have been received from governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including section 404 of the federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1344 et seq. Require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file. 
(3)	Review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(4)	When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 16-25, obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other sources in order to administer the provisions of division 3 of this article. 
(5)	Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the regulatory floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures in accordance with section 16-52(b). 
(6)	Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any new or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed, in accordance with sections 16-52(b) and 16-106(2). 
(7)	When floodproofing is utilized for a structure, obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect in accordance with sections 16-52(b)(1)(c) and 16-153 or 16-106(2). 
(8)	Obtain design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any new construction or substantial improvement placed in a coastal high hazard area will meet the criteria of section 16-107. 
(9)	Make substantial damage determinations following a flood event or any other event that causes damage to structures in flood hazard areas. 
(10)	Notify adjacent communities and the state department of natural resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
(11)	For any altered or relocated watercourse, submit engineering data/analysis within six months to FEMA to ensure accuracy of community flood maps through the letter of map revision process. Ensure flood-carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse is maintained. 
(12)	Make the necessary interpretation where interpretation is needed, as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this article. 
(b)	All records pertaining to the provisions of this article shall be maintained in the office of the administrator and shall be open for public inspection. 
(Ord. of 7-17-2008, art. 3, § C) 
Secs. 16-54—16-79. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 16-80. - General standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard, compliance with the following provisions is required: 
(1)	New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure. 
(2)	New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage. 
(3)	New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 
(4)	Elevated buildings. All new construction or substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by the foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. This subsection is not applicable in coastal high hazard areas. 
a.	Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
1.	Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2.	The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and 
3.	Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices, provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both directions; 
b.	So as not to violate the lowest floor criteria of this article, the unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure shall only be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; and 
c.	The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
(5)	All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
(6)	Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces. 
(7)	New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system. 
(8)	New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters. 
(9)	On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(10)	Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure which is not compliant with the provisions of this article shall be undertaken only if the nonconformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. 
(Ord. of 7-17-2008, art. 4, § A) 
Secs. 16-81—16-103. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Specific Standards 

Sec. 16-104. - Standards applicable to areas A1-30, AE, AH, A. 
In all areas of special flood hazard designated as A1-30, AE, AH, A (with estimated BFE), the following provisions are required: 
(1)	New construction and/or substantial improvements. 
a.	Where base flood elevation data are available, new construction and/or substantial improvement of any structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. 
b.	Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 16-80(4), regarding elevated buildings. 
c.	All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing and other service facilities shall be elevated at or above one foot above the base flood elevation. 
(2)	Nonresidential construction. 
a.	New construction and/or the substantial improvement of any structure located in A1-30, AE, or AH zones may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. 
b.	The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to one foot above the base flood elevation, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. 
c.	A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and in section 16-53(a)(7). 
(3)	Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. Where base flood elevation data are available: 
a.	All manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved on: 
1.	Individual lots or parcels; 
2.	In new or substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions; 
3.	In expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions; or 
4.	A site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision where a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as the result of a flood; 
must have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. 
b.	Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision may be elevated so that: 
1.	The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than one foot above the level of the base flood elevation; or 
2.	The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
c.	All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. (See section 16-80(6).) 
d.	All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
1.	Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; and 
2.	Be fully licensed and ready for highway use (meaning it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick-disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or 
3.	Meet all the requirements for new construction, including the anchoring and elevation requirements of subsection (3)a. through c. of this section. 
(4)	Floodway. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 16-25 are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, the area must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
a.	Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway. Development may be permitted, however, provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels or floodway widths during a base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof. 
b.	Only if subsection (4)a of this section is satisfied, then any new construction or substantial improvement shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this section and sections 16-80 and 16-105 through 16-109. 
(Ord. of 7-17-2008, art. 4, § B) 
Sec. 16-105. - Building standards for streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodway delineation. 
The following provisions apply to areas located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 16-25 where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A zones), or where base flood data have been provided but a floodway has not been delineated: 
(1)	When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 16-25, then the administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any scientific or historic base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source in order to administer the provisions of this section and sections 16-80, 16-104 and 16-106 through 16-109. Only if data are not available from these sources, then subsections (2) and (3) of this section shall apply. 
(2)	No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to the width of the stream or 25 feet, whichever is greater, measured from the top of the stream bank, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in more than one foot increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(3)	In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site, except that the lowest floor is required to be elevated one foot above the estimated base flood elevation in A zone areas where a limited detail study has been completed. 
a.	Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 16-80(4) regarding elevated buildings. 
b.	All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. 
The administrator shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(Ord. of 7-17-2008, art. 4, § C) 
Sec. 16-106. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO zones). 
Areas of special flood hazard established in section 16-25 may include designated AO shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. The following provisions apply: 
(1)	All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated above the highest adjacent grade to the flood depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM). 
a.	If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 16-80(4), regarding elevated buildings. 
b.	The administrator shall certify the lowest floor elevation level, and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(2)	New construction or the substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one foot above highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and as required in section 16-52(b)(1)c and (b)(2)a. 
(3)	Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(Ord. of 7-17-2008, art. 4, § D) 
Sec. 16-107. - Coastal high hazard areas (V zones). 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 16-25 are areas designated as coastal high hazard areas (V zones). These areas have special flood hazards associated with wave action and storm surge; therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)	All new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be located landward of the reach of mean high tide; 
(2)	All new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be elevated on piles, columns, or shear walls parallel to the flow of water so that the bottom of the lowest supporting horizontal structural member (excluding pilings or columns) is located no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation level. All space below the lowest supporting member shall remain free of obstruction. Open lattice work or decorative screening may be permitted for aesthetic purposes only and must be designed to wash away in the event of abnormal wave action and in accordance with subsection (6) of this section; 
(3)	All new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be securely anchored on pilings, columns, or shear walls; 
(4)	All pile and column foundations and the structures attached thereto shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement due to the combined effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously on all building components, both (nonstructural and structural). Water loading values shall equal or exceed those of the base flood. Wind loading values shall be in accordance with the most current edition of the building code adopted by the city; 
(5)	A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design, specifications and plans for construction are in compliance with the provisions contained in subsections (2), (3) and (4) of this section; 
(6)	All space below the lowest horizontal supporting member must remain free of obstruction. Open lattice work or decorative screening may be permitted for aesthetic purposes only and must be designed to wash away in the event of abnormal wave action without causing structural damage to the supporting foundation or elevated portion of the structure. The following design specifications shall apply: 
a.	No solid walls shall be allowed; 
b.	Material shall consist of lattice or mesh screening only; 
c.	If aesthetic lattice work or screening is utilized, any enclosed space shall not be used for human habitation, but shall be designed to be used only for parking of vehicles, building access, or limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises; 
(7)	Prior to construction, plans for any structures having latticework or decorative screening must be submitted to the administrator for approval; 
(8)	Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to any structure shall not enclose the space below the lowest floor, except with latticework or decorative screening as provided in this section; 
(9)	There shall be no fill used as structural support. Noncompacted fill may be used around the perimeter of a building for landscaping/aesthetic purposes provided the fill will wash out from storm surge (thereby rendering the building free of obstruction) prior to generating excessive loading forces, ramping effects, or wave deflection. The administrator shall approve design plans for landscaping/aesthetic fill only after the applicant has provided an analysis by an engineer, architect, and/or soil scientist, which demonstrates that the following factors have been fully considered: 
a.	Particle composition of fill material does not have a tendency for excessive natural compaction; 
b.	Volume and distribution of fill will not cause wave deflection to adjacent properties; and 
c.	Slope of fill will not cause wave run-up or ramping; 
(10)	There shall be no alteration of sand dunes or mangrove stands, which alteration would increase potential flood damage; and 
(11)	The placement of manufactured homes (mobile homes), except in an existing manufactured homes park or subdivision is prohibited. A replacement manufactured home may be placed on a lot in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision provided the anchoring standards of this section are met. 
(Ord. of 7-17-2008, art. 4, § E) 
Sec. 16-108. - Standards for subdivisions. 
Compliance with the following standards for subdivisions is required: 
(1)	All subdivision and/or development proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
(2)	All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
(3)	All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; and 
(4)	For subdivisions and/or developments greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is less, base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision and all other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions. Any changes or revisions to the flood data adopted herein and shown on the FIRM shall be submitted to FEMA for review as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. Upon completion of the project, the developer is responsible for submitting the as-built data to FEMA in order to obtain the final letter of map revision (LOMR). 
(Ord. of 7-17-2008, art. 4, § F) 
Sec. 16-109. - Standard for critical facilities. 
Compliance with the following standards for critical facilities is required: 
(1)	Critical facilities shall not be located in the 100-year floodplain or the 500-year floodplain. 
(2)	All ingress and egress from any critical facility must be protected to the 500-year flood elevation. 
(Ord. of 7-17-2008, art. 4, § G) 
Secs. 16-110—16-131. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - VARIANCE PROCEDURES 

Sec. 16-132. - City council authority. 
(a)	The city council shall hear and decide requests: 
(1)	For appeals or variance from the requirements of this article. 
(2)	When it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision, or determination is made by the administrator in the enforcement or administration of this article. 
(b)	Any person aggrieved by the decision of the council may appeal such decision to the county court of competent jurisdiction in accordance with state law. 
(Ord. of 7-17-2008, art. 5(A)—(C)) 
Sec. 16-133. - Historic structures. 
Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(Ord. of 7-17-2008, art. 5(D)) 
Sec. 16-134. - Functionally dependent uses. 
Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this article are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(Ord. of 7-17-2008, art. 5(E)) 
Sec. 16-135. - Restrictions. 
Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(Ord. of 7-17-2008, art. 5(F)) 
Sec. 16-136. - Criteria for review. 
In reviewing such requests, the city council shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this article. 
(Ord. of 7-17-2008, art. 5(G)) 
Sec. 16-137. - Conditions of issuance. 
(a)	A variance shall be issued only when there is: 
(1)	A finding of good and sufficient cause; 
(2)	A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
(3)	A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(b)	The provisions of this article are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore, any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of a historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
(c)	Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(d)	The administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(Ord. of 7-17-2008, art. 5(H)) 
Sec. 16-138. - Option to attach conditions. 
Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this article, the council may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this article. 
(Ord. of 7-17-2008, art. 5(I)) 
Secs. 16-139—16-159. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SOIL EROSION, SEDIMENTATION AND POLLUTION CONTROL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 16-160. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Best management practices (BMPs) means and includes sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
Board means the state board of natural resources. 
Buffer means the area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
Certified personnel means persons who have successfully completed the appropriate certification course approved by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission. 
Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control ( CPESC) means a professional having current certification by Certified Profession in Erosion and Sediment Control, Inc., a corporation registered in North Carolina, which is also referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc. 
Commission means the state soil and water conservation commission. 
Concrete washout means residue and contaminants from washing down equipment such as concrete trucks, pumps, chutes, hand tools, and wheelbarrows. 
Cut means a portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; or the depth below original ground surface to the excavated surface; also known as "excavation." 
Department means the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
Design professional means a professional licensed by the state in the field of: engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying; or a person that is a Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control (CPESC) with a current certification by Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control, Inc. 
Director means the director of the environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources. 
District means the state coastal soil and water conservation district. 
Division means the environmental protection division (EPD) of the state department of natural resources. 
Drainage structure means a device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for stormwater management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
Erosion means the process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan means a plan required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, O.C.G.A. ch. 12-7, that includes, as a minimum protections at least as stringent as the state general permit, best management practices, and requirements in sections 16-217, 16-243, and 16-244 through 16-251. 
Fill means a portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground surface or an excavation. 
Final stabilization means all soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that, for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that has been certified by the EPD for waste disposal, 100 percent of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of 70 percent or greater, or equivalent permanent stabilization measures (such as the use of rip rap, gabions, permanent mulches or geotextiles) have been used. Permanent vegetation shall consist of planted trees, shrubs, perennial vines, a crop of perennial vegetation appropriate for the time of year and region, or a crop of annual vegetation and a seeding of target crop perennials appropriate for the region. Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction. 
Finished grade means the final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Grading means altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Ground elevation means the original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Hazardous waste means any solid, liquid, or contained gaseous materials which are no longer used and, if not handled or disposed of properly, could damage or pollute the land, air or water. They can also cause injury or death to exposed individuals. A waste is hazardous if it exhibits one or more of the following characteristics, but designation as hazardous is not limited to these characteristics alone: 
(1)	Ignitability. Ignitable vapors can create fires under certain conditions. Examples include liquids such as solvents that readily catch fire and friction-sensitive substances. 
(2)	Corrosivity. Corrosive wastes include those that are acidic and those that are capable of corroding metal, such as found in tanks, containers, drums, and barrels. 
(3)	Reactivity. Reactive wastes are unstable under normal conditions. They can create explosions and/or toxic fumes, gases, and vapors when mixed with water. 
(4)	Toxicity. Toxic wastes are harmful or fatal when ingested or absorbed. When toxic wastes are disposed of on land, contaminated liquid may drain from the waste and pollute groundwater. 
Illicit discharge means any activity or event which results in a release, leak, flow, escape, or the placement of any material other than rainwater (including liquids and solids) into the storm drain system. Each illicit discharge has a unique frequency, composition and mode of entry in the storm drain system. Examples of illicit discharge are listed below but are not limited to these characteristics: 
(1)	Motor oil drained from vehicles into a ditch line or storm drain system. 
(2)	Gray-water discharges (household laundry/wash water that is not being drained into an approved septic or sewage system). 
(3)	Discharges from commercial/manufacturing operations, such as manufacturing byproducts (i.e., oil, cooking grease, gasoline, petroleum-based products, or other industrial waste). 
(4)	Dumpsters left open that would leach water that has been contaminated with refuse. 
Land-disturbing activity means any activity which may result in soil erosion from water, wind, ice or gravity and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land, but not including agricultural practices as described in section 16-161(5). 
Larger common plan of development or sale means a contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this definition, the term "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation, such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation, such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
Local issuing authority (LIA) means the governing authority of any county or municipality which is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). 
Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA) means the state law referenced as O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq., which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
Natural ground surface means the ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
Nephelometric turbidity units (NTUs) means numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed or suspended particles are present. 
NOI means the notice of intent form provided by EPD for coverage under the state general permit. 
NOT means a notice of termination form provided by EPD to terminate coverage under the state general permit. 
Operator means the party that has: 
(1)	Operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or 
(2)	Day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
Outfall means the location where stormwater in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, leaves a facility or site or, if there is a receiving water on site, becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water. 
Permit means the authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this article. 
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Pervious area means an area that is open to passage or entrance; permeable. 
Pollution control means preventing the contamination of the environment with materials that interfere with human health, the quality of life, or the natural functioning of ecosystems (living organisms and their physical surroundings). 
Project means the entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
Properly designed means designed in accordance with the design requirements and specifications contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia (the "Manual") published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted and amendments to the Manual as approved by the commission up until the date of NOI submittal. 
Refueling station means a place where the activity of supplying or taking on fuel is performed. 
Roadway drainage structure means a device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled roadway consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Sanitary waste means general household/lavatory waste that may be disposed of through the sanitary sewer system. 
Sediment means solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation means the process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
Soil and Water Conservation District approved plan means an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan approved in writing by the soil and water conservation district. 
Stabilization means the process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
State general permit means the National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) general permit for stormwater runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 USC 1251 et seq., and O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f). 
State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
Structural erosion, sedimentation and pollution control practices means practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures, and sediment traps, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Trout streams means all streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the wildlife resources division of the state department of natural resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 and in the rules and regulations for water quality control, Ga. Comp. Rules and Regs. R 391-3-6 et seq. (accessible at www.gaepd.org.): 
(1)	Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as waters supporting a self-sustaining population of Rai, brown or brook trout. 
(2)	Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures means measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
(1)	Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover; 
(2)	Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or 
(3)	Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
Such measures are described in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Watercourse means any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a defined channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Wetlands means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
(Ord. of 9-7-2010, § 5-72) 
Sec. 16-161. - Applicability; exemptions. 
This article shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
(1)	Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72, a part of the Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968; 
(2)	Granite quarrying and land-clearing for such quarrying; 
(3)	Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
(4)	The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre and not otherwise exempted under this section; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 and this section. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this subsection, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq. In any such buffer zone, no land-disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, but the director may grant variances to no less than 25 feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least 25 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b) and the buffer zones provided by this subsection shall be enforced by the local issuing authority; 
(5)	Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including but not limited to cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits, or for use in the production of poultry, including but not limited to chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aquaculture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds; 
(6)	Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land-disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in sections 16-243 and 16-244, no other land-disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three years after completion of such forestry practices; 
(7)	Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
(8)	Any project involving less than one acre of disturbed area; provided, however: 
a.	That this exemption shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre or within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters; and 
b.	For purposes of this subsection (8), the term "state waters" excludes channels and drainageways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them yearround; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one acre, which involves land-disturbing activity, and which is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainageway, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the local issuing authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by subsection (1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7), (9) or (10) of this section; 
(9)	Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed, or both, in whole or in part by the department of transportation, the state highway authority, or the state road and tollway authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of the department of transportation or the state road and tollway authority which disturb one or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7.1, except where the department of transportation, the state highway authority, or the state road and tollway authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the local issuing authority, the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; 
(10)	Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and 
(11)	Any public water system reservoir. 
(Ord. of 9-7-2010, § 5-73) 
Sec. 16-162. - Amendments required. 
The local issuing authority must amend its ordinances to the extent appropriate within 12 months of any amendments to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975. 
(Ord. of 9-7-2010, § 5-77(b)) 
Sec. 16-163. - Education requirements and certification. 
(a)	Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(b)	For each site on which land-disturbing activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary, secondary, or tertiary permittee, as defined in the state general permit, shall have as a minimum one person who is in responsible charge of erosion and sedimentation control activities on behalf of said entity or person and meets the applicable education or training certification requirements developed by the commission present on site whenever land-disturbing activities are conducted on that site. A project site shall in this subsection be defined as any land-disturbance site or multiple sites within a larger common plan of development or sale permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the state general permit. 
(c)	Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit but otherwise requiring certified personnel on site may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of this article. 
(d)	If a state general permittee who has operational control of land-disturbing activities for a site has met the certification requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19(b)(1), then any person or entity involved in land-disturbing activity at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee shall meet those educational requirements specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19(b)(4) and shall not be required to meet any educational requirements that exceed those required by O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19(b)(4). 
(Ord. of 9-7-2010, § 5-79) 
Secs. 16-164—16-194. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - STANDARDS 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 16-195. - General requirements. 
Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land-disturbing activities if requirements of this article and the NPDES general permit are not met. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities which are not exempted by this article shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of 16-214 through 16-217 and 16-243 through 16-248. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion, sedimentation and pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity in accordance with requirements of this article and the NPDES general permit. 
(Ord. of 9-7-2010, § 5-74(a)) 
Secs. 16-196—16-213. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Minimum Requirements/BMPs 

Sec. 16-214. - BMPs required. 
Best management practices as set forth in this section, sections 16-215 through 16-217 and 16-243 through 16-248 shall be required for all land-disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with section 16-215(a) or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of stormwater issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. As used in this subsection, the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b). 
(Ord. of 9-7-2010, § 5-74(b)(1)) 
Sec. 16-215. - Violations. 
(a)	A discharge of stormwater runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. This subsection shall not apply to any land-disturbance associated with the construction of single-family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five acres. 
(b)	Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, for each day on which such failure occurs. 
(Ord. of 9-7-2010, § 5-74(b)(2), (3)) 
Sec. 16-216. - Monitoring of turbidity level. 
(a)	The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land-disturbing activities occur. 
(b)	The local issuing authority may set more stringent buffer requirements than stated in sections 16-243 through 16-248, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(c). 
(Ord. of 9-7-2010, § 5-74(b)(4)) 
Sec. 16-217. - State law and rules as minimum requirements. 
The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. for the purpose of governing land-disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit; and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
(1)	Stripping of vegetation, regrading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; 
(2)	Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum; 
(3)	Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practical erosion potential; 
(4)	Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; 
(5)	The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
(6)	Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; 
(7)	Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
(8)	Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; 
(9)	To the extent necessary, sediment in run-off water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this subsection, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; 
(10)	Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills; 
(11)	Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property; 
(12)	Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
(13)	Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; 
(14)	Land-disturbing activity plans for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in section 16-215(a). 
(Ord. of 9-7-2010, § 5-74(c)(1)—(14)) 
Secs. 16-218—16-242. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Buffers 

Sec. 16-243. - Establishment of 25-foot buffer—Specifications. 
Except as provided in sections 16-246 through 16-248, there is required a 25-foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, or where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; or along any ephemeral stream. 
(1)	As used in this provision, the term "ephemeral stream" means a stream: 
a.	That under normal circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; 
b.	That has the channel located above the groundwater table yearround; for which ground water is not a source of water; and 
c.	For which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow. 
(2)	Unless exempted as along an ephemeral stream, the buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to part 6 of article 5, chapter 5 of title 12, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act (Protection of Metropolitan Rivers, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq.), shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director as provided in this division. A 25-foot buffer shall also exist adjacent to all saltwater marsh as delineated by the department of natural resources. A ten-foot buffer shall also exist adjacent to all jurisdictional wetlands as delineated by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
(Ord. of 9-7-2010, § 5-74(c)(15)) 
Sec. 16-244. - Same—Restrictions. 
The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
(1)	No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. 
(2)	Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed. 
(Ord. of 9-7-2010, § 5-74(c)(15)(a)) 
Sec. 16-245. - Same—Exemptions. 
The buffer requirements shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: 
(1)	Stream crossings for water lines; or 
(2)	Stream crossings for sewer lines. 
(Ord. of 9-7-2010, § 5-74(c)(15)(b)) 
Sec. 16-246. - Establishment of 50-foot buffer—Specifications. 
There is required a 50-foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" pursuant to article 2 of chapter 5 of title 12, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act (Control of Water Pollution and Surface Water Use, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq.), except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of 25 gallons per minute or less shall have a 25-foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land-disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The requirements of sections 16-247 and 16-248 shall apply to such buffer. 
(Ord. of 9-7-2010, § 5-74(c)(16)(intro.)) 
Sec. 16-247. - Same—Restrictions. 
No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed. 
(Ord. of 9-7-2010, § 5-74(c)(16)(a)) 
Sec. 16-248. - Same—Exemptions. 
The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: 
(1)	Stream crossings for water lines; or 
(2)	Stream crossings for sewer lines. 
(Ord. of 9-7-2010, § 5-74(c)(16)(b)) 
Sec. 16-249. - On-site construction site waste management. 
(a)	Container locations specified; maintenance methods of site. Upon attaining a land-disturbing activity permit, on-site construction site waste management will be required to specify the locations of containers and abide by the following good housekeeping methods: 
(1)	Dumpsters. 
a.	Dumpster containers which are used to store unwanted litter, and discarded building materials must have lids or covers that can be placed over the container prior to rainfall. 
b.	All trash and construction debris from the site will be deposited in the dumpster. Waste collection shall occur before the containers overflow. 
c.	The waste disposal company will be a licensed solid waste management company and shall meet all local and any state solid waste management regulations. 
(2)	Hazardous waste receptacles. If a land-disturbing activity identifies, contains, proposes or otherwise includes chemicals or waste, a hazardous material data sheet must be provided for each chemical or waste material. The manufacturer's guidance will be required for the containment of these materials. This hazardous waste must be disposed of on a regular basis and in the appropriate manner according to the guidelines of the manufacturer. 
(3)	Refueling stations. 
a.	These areas should be dedicated to refueling any construction equipment and precautions must be implemented to prevent the release of hazardous pollutants into the environment. 
b.	Construction sites must have equipment on site or on board maintenance fueling vehicles to contain and clean up petroleum spills in fuel storage areas. 
(4)	Petroleum storage facility. 
a.	If the applicant chooses to store petroleum products on site, a fuel storage facility must be provided. All on-site fuel storage facilities must be monitored for leaks and receive regular preventative maintenance to reduce the chance of leakage. 
b.	All fuel products shall be stored in tightly sealed containers that are clearly labeled. 
c.	Petroleum products must be stored in covered areas, where possible. 
(5)	Chemical storage. 
a.	Chemicals will be stored in a dry covered area. Chemical storage containers must be located in a retaining (diked) area, not exposed to precipitation or stormwater. 
b.	Each site that has a chemical storage facility where flammable and combustible chemicals are stored must ensure that storage tanks and venting systems are equipped with all necessary safeguards to prevent chemical leaks into the atmosphere or explosion. 
(6)	Concrete washout location. Excess concrete and washwater should be contained in an area that prevents contact between these materials and stormwater that will be discharged from the site. After excess concrete and washwater has hardened they should be disposed of properly. 
(7)	Sanitary waste disposal units. The developer/contractor should ensure servicing of sanitary waste disposal units on a regular basis. 
(b)	Proper working conditions at outset of land-disturbing activity. All on-site waste disposal systems, storage facilities, washout locations, and refueling stations shall be in proper working condition at the inception of the land-disturbing activity. 
(c)	Impairments or contamination during land-disturbing activity. On-site waste disposal systems, storage facilities, washout locations, and refueling stations shall be located to avoid impairments to them or contamination from them during the land-disturbing activity. 
(Ord. of 9-7-2010, § 5-74(d)) 
Sec. 16-250. - Same—Plan. 
Prior to obtaining a land-disturbing activity permit, a plan to prevent pollution and manage construction site waste must be prepared and approved by the governing authority. Construction site operators will control waste at the construction site, such as discarded building materials, concrete truck washout, chemicals, litter, and sanitary waste. The plan must include the following items: 
(1)	Waste receptacle locations (construction and permanent). 
a.	Used to store unwanted litter, and discarded building materials. 
b.	Dumpster containers for putrescible or leachable waste shall have lids or covers that can be placed over the container prior to rainfall. 
c.	All trash and construction debris from the site will be deposited in the waste receptacle. Waste collection shall occur before the containers overflow. 
d.	The waste disposal company will be a licensed solid waste management company and shall meet all local and any State solid waste management regulations. 
(2)	Hazardous waste receptacles. If a land-disturbing activity identifies, contains, proposes or otherwise includes any hazardous waste, the manufacturer's guidance will be followed for the containment of these materials. This hazardous waste must be disposed of on a regular basis and in the appropriate manner according to the guidelines of the manufacturer. Hazardous waste is defined as any solid, liquid, or contained gaseous materials which are no longer used and, if not handled or disposed of properly, could damage or pollute the land, air, or water. They can also cause injury or death to exposed individuals. A waste is hazardous if it exhibits one or more, but not limited to, the following characteristics: 
a.	Ignitability. Ignitable vapors can create fires under certain conditions. Examples include liquids, such as solvents that readily catch fire, and friction sensitive substances. 
b.	Corrosivity. Corrosive wastes include those that are acidic and those that are capable or corroding metal, such as tanks, containers, drums, and barrels. 
c.	Reactivity. Reactive wastes are unstable under normal conditions. They can create explosions and/or toxic fumes, gases, and vapors when mixed with water. 
d.	Toxicity. Toxic wastes are harmful or fatal when ingested or absorbed. When toxic wastes are disposed of on land, contaminated liquid may drain from the waste and pollute ground water. 
(3)	On-site construction refueling stations or refueling areas. 
a.	All refueling stations or refueling areas shall comply with Rules of Safety Fire Commissioner, Chapter 120-3-11, Rules and Regulations for Flammable and Combustible Liquids and other applicable codes and regulations. 
b.	A refueling area shall be designated on the plans for refueling any construction equipment. The plan must include precautions and actions that must be implemented to prevent the release of hazardous pollutants into the environment. 
c.	Construction sites will have equipment on-site or on-board maintenance fueling vehicles to contain and clean up petroleum spills. 
d.	If petroleum products are stored on-site, a fuel storage facility must be provided and approved. All on-site fuel storage facilities will be monitored for leaks and receive regular preventative maintenance to reduce the chance of leakage. The plan should identify petroleum storage facilities and address inspections and maintenance. 
e.	All fuel products shall be stored in tightly sealed containers that are clearly labeled. 
f.	Petroleum products will be stored in covered areas, where possible. 
g.	If the on-site refueling station is to be used for a period greater than two years, it will be considered as a permanent fueling station subject to site plan review and approval. 
(4)	On-site construction chemical storage. 
a.	Chemicals will be stored in a dry covered area. Chemical storage containers should be located in a retaining (diked) area, not exposed to precipitation or stormwater. 
b.	Each site that has a chemical storage facility where flammable and combustible chemicals are stored must ensure that storage tanks and venting systems are equipped with all necessary safeguards to prevent chemical leaks into the atmosphere or explosion. 
(5)	Concrete washout location. Excess residue and contaminants from washing down equipment such as, but not limited to, concrete trucks, pumps, mixers, chutes, hand tools, and wheelbarrows containing or having contained concrete should be contained in an area that prevents contact between these residues and contaminants, and stormwater that will be discharged from the site. After excess concrete and wash water has hardened, they should be disposed of properly. 
(6)	On-site construction sanitary waste disposal units. 
a.	All construction sites are required to have on-site sanitary waste disposal units. 
b.	The developer/contractor should ensure servicing of sanitary waste disposal units on a regular basis. 
(7)	[Condition and location.] All on-site waste disposal systems, storage facilities, washout locations, and refueling stations shall be in proper working condition as soon as practicable. On-site waste disposal systems, storage facilities, washout locations, and refueling stations shall be located to avoid impairments to them or contamination from them during the land-disturbing activity. 
(Ord. No. 2015-1, § I(5-74(c)(17)), 9-1-2015) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-1, § I(5-74(c)(17)), adopted Sept. 1, 2015, enacted provisions which, at the discretion of the editor, have been designated as § 16-250 in order to maintain the format of the Code. Former §§ 16-250 and 16-251 have been redesignated as §§ 16-251 and 16-252. 
Sec. 16-251. - Authority to exceed minimum requirements. 
Nothing contained in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. shall prevent any local issuing authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain stream buffer requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in sections 16-214 through 16-217 and 16-243 through 16-248. 
(Ord. of 9-7-2010, § 5-74(e); Ord. No. 2015-1, § I(5-74(c)(17)), 9-1-2015) 
Editor's note— See editor's note to § 16-250. 
Sec. 16-252. - Injury to property of another. 
The fact that land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(Ord. of 9-7-2010, § 5-74(f); Ord. No. 2015-1, § I(5-74(c)(17)), 9-1-2015) 
Editor's note— See editor's note to § 16-250. 
Secs. 16-253—16-260. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ILLICIT DISCHARGES AND ILLEGAL CONNECTIONS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Section I(5-75) of Ord. No. 2015-1, adopted Sept. 1, 2015, repealed former Subd. IV, §§ 16-281, 16-282, which pertained to prohibition of illicit discharge and connections, and derived from Ord. No. 2007-002, § V, adopted March 6, 2007; and an ordinance adopted Sept. 7, 2010, § 5-75(a),(b). Section I(6.6) of said ordinance, enacted new similar provisions which have been included as Div. 3, §§ 16-261—16-266, 16-275, 16-276, 16-284—16-286, 16-295—16-303, at the discretion of the editor, in order to maintain the format of the Code. Former Divs. 3 and 4 have been redesignated as Divs. 4 and 5. 

Subdivision I. - Generally 

Sec. 16-261. - Title. 
This subdivision, as the same may be amended from time to time, shall be known as the "Riceboro Illicit Discharge and Illegal Connection Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 2015-1, § I(6.6(6.6.1)), 9-1-2015) 
Sec. 16-262. - Findings of fact. 
(a)	Discharges to the city separate storm sewer system that are not composed entirely of stormwater runoff contribute to increased nonpoint source pollution and degradation of receiving waters. 
(b)	These non-stormwater discharges occur due to spills, dumping and improper connections to the city separate storm sewer system from residential, industrial, commercial or institutional establishment. 
(c)	The impacts of these discharges adversely affect public health and safety, drinking water supplies, recreation, fish and other aquatic life, property values and other uses of lands and waters. 
(d)	These impacts can be minimized through the regulation of spills, dumping and discharges into the city separate storm sewer system. The regulation of spills, improper dumping and discharges to the city separate storm sewer system is in the public interest and will prevent threats to public health and safety, and the environment. 
(Ord. No. 2015-1, § I(6.6(6.6.2)), 9-1-2015) 
Sec. 16-263. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this subdivision is to protect the public health, safety, environment and general welfare through the regulation of non-stormwater discharges to the city separate storm sewer system to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal law. This subdivision establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the city separate storm sewer system in order to comply with requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process. The objectives of this subdivision are to: 
(1)	Regulate the contribution of pollutants to the city separate storm sewer system by any person; 
(2)	Prohibit illicit discharges and illegal connections to the city separate storm sewer system; 
(3)	Prevent non-stormwater discharges, generated as a result of spills, inappropriate dumping or disposal, to the city separate storm sewer system; and 
(4)	Establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance, monitoring and enforcement procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 2015-1, § I(6.6(6.6.3)), 9-1-2015) 
Sec. 16-264. - Applicability and scope. 
This subdivision applies throughout the city and is intended to supplement the following: 
(1)	Chapter 42—The Zoning Ordinance of Riceboro, Georgia; 
(2)	Appendix B—Subdivision regulations of the Riceboro; 
(3)	Chapter 10—Buildings and building regulations; 
(4)	Chapter 16, art. IV—Drainage control. 
(Ord. No. 2015-1, § I(6.6(6.6.4)), 9-1-2015) 
Sec. 16-265. - Compatibility with other regulations. 
This subdivision is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, other provision of law. The requirements of this subdivision are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, and where any provision of this subdivision imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
(Ord. No. 2015-1, § I(6.6(6.6.5)), 9-1-2015) 
Sec. 16-266. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this subdivision, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accidental discharge means a discharge prohibited by this subdivision which occurs by chance and without planning or thought prior to occurrence. 
City separate storm sewer system means any facility designed or used for collecting and/or conveying stormwater, including but not limited to any roads with drainage systems, highways, city streets and roads, curbs, gutters, inlets, catch basins, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, structural stormwater controls, ditches, swales, natural and manmade or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures, and which is: 
(1)	Owned or maintained by the county or municipality with intergovernmental agreement for maintenance not otherwise covered by separate ordinance; 
(2)	Not a combined sewer; and 
(3)	Not part of a publicly owned treatment works. 
Clean Water Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 USC 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
Construction activity means activities subject to the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act or NPDES general construction permits. These include construction projects resulting in land disturbance. Such activities include but are not limited to clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition. 
Illegal connection means either of the following: 
(1)	Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illicit discharge to enter the storm drain system, including but not limited to any conveyances which allow any non-stormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain system, regardless of whether such pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance has been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency; or 
(2)	Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance connected to the city separate storm sewer system which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency. 
Illicit discharge means any direct or indirect non-stormwater discharge to the city separate storm sewer system, except as exempted elsewhere in this subdivision. 
Industrial activity means activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as defined in 40 CFR 122.26(b)(14). 
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) stormwater discharge permit means a permit issued by the State Environmental Protection Division, under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC 1342(b) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis. 
Non-stormwater discharge means any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
Person means, except to the extent exempted from this subdivision, any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, city or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Pollutant means anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; petroleum hydrocarbons; automotive fluids; cooking grease; detergents (biodegradable or otherwise); degreasers; cleaning chemicals; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; liquid and solid wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; concrete and cement; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind. 
Pollution means the contamination or other alteration of any water's physical, chemical or biological properties by the addition of any constituent and includes but is not limited to, a change in temperature, taste, color, turbidity, or odor of such waters, or the discharge of any liquid, gaseous, solid, radioactive, or other substance into any such waters as will or is likely to create a nuisance or render such waters harmful, detrimental or injurious to the public health, safety, welfare, or environment, or to domestic, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational, or other legitimate beneficial uses, or to livestock, wild animals, birds, fish or other aquatic life. 
Premises means any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface and subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single person. 
Stormwater runoff or stormwater means any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation. 
Structural stormwater control means a structural stormwater management facility or device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow. 
(Ord. No. 2015-1, § I(6.6(6.6.6)), 9-1-2015) 
Secs. 16-267—16-274. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Prohibitions 

Sec. 16-275. - Prohibition of illicit discharges. 
No person shall throw, drain, or otherwise discharge, cause, or allow others under its control to throw, drain, or otherwise discharge into the city separate storm sewer system any pollutants or waters containing any pollutants, other than stormwater. The following discharges are exempt from the prohibition provision above: 
(1)	Water line flushing performed by a government agency, other potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream flows, rising groundwater, groundwater infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped groundwater, foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs, non-commercial washing of vehicles, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows, swimming pools (if de-chlorinated - typically less than one PPM chlorine), and any other water source not containing pollutants; 
(2)	Discharges or flows from firefighting, and other discharges specified in writing by the city as being necessary to protect public health and safety; 
(3)	Dye testing is an allowable discharge, but requires a verbal notification to the authorized enforcement agency prior to the time of the test; 
(4)	The prohibition provision above shall not apply to any non-stormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit or order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the state and the Federal Environmental Protection Agency; provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations; and, provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the city separate storm sewer system. 
(Ord. No. 2015-1, § I(6.6(6.6.20)), 9-1-2015) 
Sec. 16-276. - Prohibition of illegal connections. 
The construction, connection, use, maintenance or continued existence of any illegal connection to the city separate storm sewer system is prohibited. This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illegal connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. A person violates this subdivision if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the city separate storm sewer system, or allows such a connection to continue. Improper connections in violation of this subdivision must be disconnected and redirected, if necessary, to an approved onsite wastewater management system or the sanitary sewer system upon approval of the city. Any drain or conveyance that has not been documented in plans, maps or equivalent, and which may be connected to the storm sewer system, shall be located by the owner or occupant of that property upon receipt of written notice of violation from the city requiring that such locating be completed. Such notice will specify a reasonable time period within which the location of the drain or conveyance is to be completed, that the drain or conveyance be identified as a storm sewer, sanitary sewer or other, and that the outfall location or point of connection to the storm sewer system, sanitary sewer system or other discharge point be identified. Results of these investigations are to be documented and provided to the city. 
(Ord. No. 2015-1, § I(6.6(6.6.22)), 9-1-2015) 
Secs. 16-277—16-283. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Requirements 

Sec. 16-284. - Industrial or construction activity discharges. 
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the city prior to allowing discharges to the city separate storm sewer system. 
(Ord. No. 2015-1, § I(6.6(6.6.30)), 9-1-2015) 
Sec. 16-285. - Access and inspection of properties and facilities. 
The city shall be permitted to enter and inspect properties and facilities at reasonable times as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this subdivision. 
(1)	If a property or facility has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the owner or operator shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of the city. 
(2)	The owner or operator shall allow the city representative ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, photography, videotaping, examination and copying of any records that are required under the conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater. 
(3)	The city shall have the right to set up on any property or facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the city to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of flow discharges. 
(4)	The city may require the owner or operator to install monitoring equipment and perform monitoring as necessary, and make the monitoring data available to the city. This sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the owner or operator at his own expense. All devices used to measure flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy. 
(5)	Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the property or facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the owner or operator at the written or oral request of the city and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the owner or operator. 
(6)	Unreasonable delays in allowing the city access to a facility is a violation of this subdivision. 
(7)	If the city has been refused access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and the city is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this subdivision, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this subdivision or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, environment and welfare of the community, then the city may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 2015-1, § I(6.6(6.6.31)), 9-1-2015) 
Sec. 16-286. - Notification of accidental discharges and spills. 
(a)	Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility, activity or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility, activity or operation has information of any known or suspected release of pollutants or non-stormwater discharges from that facility or operation which are resulting or may result in illicit discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the city separate storm sewer system, state waters, or waters of the U.S., said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release so as to minimize the effects of the discharge. 
(b)	Said person shall notify the authorized enforcement agency in person or by phone, facsimile, electronic mail or in person no later than 24 hours of the nature, quantity and time of occurrence of the discharge. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the city engineering department within three business days of the phone or in person notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years. Said person shall also take immediate steps to ensure no recurrence of the discharge or spill. 
(c)	In the event of such a release of hazardous materials, emergency response agencies and/or other appropriate agencies shall be immediately notified. 
(d)	Failure to provide notification of a release as provided in this section is a violation of this subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 2015-1, § I(6.6(6.6.32)), 9-1-2015) 
Secs. 16-287—16-294. - Reserved. 
Subdivision VI. - Violations, Enforcement and Penalties 

Sec. 16-295. - Violations. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this subdivision. Any person who has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this subdivision, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this subdivision or may be restrained by injunction or otherwise abated in a manner provided by law. In the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, the city is authorized to enter upon the subject private property, without giving prior notice, to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. The city is authorized to seek costs of the abatement as outlined in this subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 2015-1, § I(6.6(6.6.41)), 9-1-2015) 
Sec. 16-296. - Notice of violation. 
Whenever the city finds that a violation of this subdivision has occurred, the city may order compliance by written notice of violation. 
(1)	The notice of violation shall contain: 
a.	The name and address of the alleged violator; 
b.	The address when available or a description of the building, structure or land upon which the violation is occurring, or has occurred; 
c.	A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
d.	A description of the remedial measures necessary to restore compliance with this subdivision and a time schedule for the completion of such remedial action; 
e.	A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
f.	A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the city by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days of service of the notice of violation. 
(2)	Such notice may require without limitation: 
a.	The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting; 
b.	The elimination of illicit discharges and illegal connections; 
c.	That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist; 
d.	The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; 
e.	Payment of costs to cover administrative and abatement costs; and 
f.	The implementation of pollution prevention practices. 
(Ord. No. 2015-1, § I(6.6(6.6.42)), 9-1-2015) 
Sec. 16-297. - Appeal of notice of violation. 
Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination to the city. The notice of appeal must be received within 30 days from the date of the notice of violation. Hearing on the appeal before the mayor and Riceboro City Council shall take place within 30 days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of the Riceboro City Council shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 2015-1, § I(6.6(6.6.43)), 9-1-2015) 
Sec. 16-298. - Enforcement measures after appeal. 
If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within ten days of the decision of the Riceboro City Council upholding the decision of the city, then representatives of the city may enter upon the subject private property and are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the government agency or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above. 
(Ord. No. 2015-1, § I(6.6(6.6.44)), 9-1-2015) 
Sec. 16-299. - Costs of abatement of the violation. 
Within 30 days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The property owner may file a written protest objecting to the assessment or to the amount of the assessment within 30 days of such notice. If the amount due is not paid within 30 days after receipt of the notice, or if an appeal is taken, within 30 days after a decision on said appeal, the charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment. Any person violating any of the provisions of this subdivision shall become liable to the city by reason of such violation. 
(Ord. No. 2015-1, § I(6.6(6.6.45)), 9-1-2015) 
Sec. 16-300. - Civil penalties. 
In the event the alleged violator fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days, or such greater period as the city shall deem appropriate, after the city has taken one or more of the actions described above, the city may impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 for each day the violation remains un-remedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(Ord. No. 2015-1, § I(6.6(6.6.46)), 9-1-2015) 
Sec. 16-301. - Criminal penalties. 
For intentional and flagrant violations of this subdivision, the city may issue a citation to the alleged violator requiring such person to appear in the Magistrate Court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 60 days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2015-1, § I(6.6(6.6.47)), 9-1-2015) 
Sec. 16-302. - Violations deemed a public nuisance. 
In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this subdivision is a threat to public health, safety, welfare, and environment and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 2015-1, § I(6.6(6.6.48)), 9-1-2015) 
Sec. 16-303. - Remedies not exclusive. 
The remedies listed in this subdivision are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law and the city may seek cumulative remedies. The city may recover attorney's fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with the enforcement of this subdivision, including sampling and monitoring expenses. 
(Ord. No. 2015-1, § I(6.6(6.6.49)), 9-1-2015) 
Secs. 16-304—16-312. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PERMIT PROCEDURE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— See editor's note to Div. 3. 

Sec. 16-313. - Basic design and review criteria. 
The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall design and review development plans before submittal. The local issuing authority shall review the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall consult the zoning regulations, stormwater management regulations, subdivision regulations, flood damage prevention regulations, this article, and any other ordinances, rules, regulations or permits, which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. However, the owner and/or operator are the only parties who may obtain a permit. 
(Ord. of 9-7-2010, § 5-76(a)) 
Sec. 16-314. - Permit and application requirements. 
(a)	No person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of the county without first obtaining a permit from the Liberty Consolidated Planning Commission (LCPC) to perform such activity and providing a copy of notice of intent submitted to EPD if applicable. 
(b)	The application for a permit shall be submitted to the LCPC and must include the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in section 16-315. Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans, together with supporting data, must demonstrate affirmatively that the land-disturbing activity proposed will be carried out in such a manner that the provisions of sections 16-214 through 16-217 and 16-243 through 16-248 will be met. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by copies of the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan EPD Rule 391-3-7-.10. 
(c)	A fee as published by the LCPC shall be charged for each acre or fraction thereof in the project area. 
(d)	In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-23(a)(5), provided that such fees shall not exceed $80.00 per acre of land-disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land-disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land-disturbance permit. In a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a), half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the division; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17(9) or (10) shall be submitted in full to the division, regardless of the existence of a local issuing authority in the jurisdiction. 
(e)	Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the local issuing authority shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. The district shall approve or disapprove a plan within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the district to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the local issuing authority. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by sections 16-243 through 16-248 have been obtained, all fees have been paid, and bonding, if required as per subsection (g) of this section have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the local issuing authority and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the local issuing authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. Failure of the local issuing authority with plan review authority to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the revised plan submittal. 
(f)	If a permit applicant has two or more violations of previous permits, this article section, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three years prior to the date of filing the application under consideration, the local issuing authority may deny the permit application. 
(g)	The local issuing authority may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land-disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this section or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the local issuing authority with respect to alleged permit violations. 
(Ord. of 9-7-2010, § 5-76(b)) 
Sec. 16-315. - Plan requirements. 
(a)	Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in sections 16-214 through 16-217 and 16-243 through 16-248; or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia is hereby incorporated by reference into this article. The plan for the land-disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and stormwater management facilities, local ordinances and state laws. Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature and seal of the certified design professional. Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspections or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on his level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission and in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(b)	Data required for site plan shall include all the information required from the appropriate erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan review checklist established by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
(Ord. of 9-7-2010, § 5-76(c)) 
Sec. 16-316. - Permits. 
(a)	Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than 45 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary and all applicable fees have been paid prior to permit issuance. The permit shall include conditions under which the activity may be undertaken. 
(b)	No permit shall be issued by the local issuing authority unless the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan has been approved by the district and the local issuing authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this article, any variances required by sections 16-243 through 16-248 are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per section 16-314(g) are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(c)	Any land-disturbing activities by a local issuing authority shall be subject to the same requirements of this article, and any other ordinances relating to land development, as are applied to private persons, and the division shall enforce such requirements upon the local issuing authority. 
(d)	If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
(e)	The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the local issuing authority, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this article. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
(f)	The local issuing authority (LIA) may reject a permit application if the applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act permit requirements within three years prior to the date of the application, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(f)(1). 
(Ord. of 9-7-2010, § 5-74(d)) 
Secs. 16-317—16-335. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - ENFORCEMENT[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— See editor's note to Div. 3. 

Sec. 16-336. - Inspection; notice to comply. 
(a)	The Liberty Consolidated Planning Commission (LCPC) will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. 
(b)	Also, the local issuing authority shall regulate primary, secondary and tertiary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. 
(1)	Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. 
(2)	Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. 
(3)	Tertiary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance where the tertiary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. 
(c)	If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this article, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article. 
(Ord. of 9-7-2010, § 5-77(a)) 
Sec. 16-337. - Investigation. 
The Liberty Consolidated Planning Commission (LCPC) shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land-disturbing activities. 
(Ord. of 9-7-2010, § 5-77(c)) 
Sec. 16-338. - Right of entry. 
No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the local issuing authority, the commission, the district, or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(Ord. of 9-7-2010, § 5-77(d)) 
Sec. 16-339. - Penalties and incentives. 
(a)	Failure to obtain a permit for land-disturbing activity. If any person commences any land-disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbing permit as prescribed in this article without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. 
(b)	Stop work orders. 
(1)	For the first and second violations of the provisions of this article, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five days, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a stop work order requiring that land-disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land-disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop work order in lieu of a warning; 
(2)	For a third and each subsequent violation, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop work order; and 
(3)	All stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. 
(4)	When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the local issuing authority or by the director or his designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop work order shall be issued by the local issuing authority or by the director or his designee. 
All such stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop work orders shall apply to all land-disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. 
(c)	Bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of 16-314(g). The local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(d)	Monetary penalties. Any person who violates any provisions of this article, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this article, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director issued as provided in this article shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article, notwithstanding any provisions in any city Charter to the contrary, municipal courts shall be authorized to impose a penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of county ordinances, any magistrate court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of this article under county ordinances approved under this article shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
(Ord. of 9-7-2010, § 5-78) 
Sec. 16-340. - Administrative remedies. 
The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the local issuing authority, upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion, sediment and pollution control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance, shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the county board of commissioners within 45 days after receipt by the issuing authority of written notice of appeal. 
(Ord. of 9-7-2010, § 5-80(a)) 
Sec. 16-341. - Judicial review. 
Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of the local issuing authority, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal de novo to the county court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. of 9-7-2010, § 5-80(b)) 
Secs. 16-342—16-371. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DRAINAGE CONTROL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 16-372. - Findings of fact. 
(a)	The city is subject to periodic inundation which could result in loss of life or property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)	These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities and by occupancy in flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods or hazardous to other lands which are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or otherwise protected from flood damages. 
(c)	Increased velocities and quantities of water draining off developed land causes erosion, sedimentation and maintenance problems resulting in significant damages. 
(d)	Uncontrolled stormwater drainage can increase the incidence of flooding and the level of floods which occur, endangering roads, other public and private property and human life. 
(e)	Altered land surfaces can change the rate and volume of runoff. 
(f)	Many future problems can be avoided through proper stormwater management. 
(g)	Every parcel of real property, both public and private, either uses or benefits from the maintenance of a storm sewer system. 
(h)	Current and anticipated growth will contribute to and increase the need for improvement and maintenance of the storm sewer system. 
(Ord. of 2-4-1997, § 2) 
Sec. 16-373. - Statement of purpose. 
It is the purpose of these regulations to promote, protect, maintain and enhance the short-term and long-term public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)	Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion, flood heights or velocities; 
(2)	Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damages at the time of initial construction; 
(3)	Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, wetlands, and natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters; 
(4)	Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; and 
(5)	Comply with state (DNR) and federal (EPA) stormwater regulations developed pursuant to the Clean Water Act. These requirements include: 
a.	Controlling the contribution of pollutants to the storm sewer system by stormwater discharges associated with commercial and industrial activity and the quality of stormwater discharged from sites of commercial and industrial activity; 
b.	Prohibiting illicit connections to storm sewers; 
c.	Controlling discharge to storm sewers of spills, dumping or disposal of materials other than stormwater; and 
d.	Controlling, through intergovernmental agreements, contribution of pollutants from one city system to another. 
(Ord. of 2-4-1997, § 3) 
Sec. 16-374. - Scope. 
This article supplements the following: 
(1)	The subdivision regulations of the county. 
(2)	The county zoning regulations. 
(3)	Ordinances related to buildings, construction and related activities. 
(4)	Erosion and sediment control regulations. 
(5)	Flood control regulations. 
(6)	Any other ordinance relating to the regulation and control of surface and or floodwaters. 
(Ord. of 2-4-1997, § 4) 
Sec. 16-375. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accidental discharge means a discharge prohibited by this article into the city storm sewer system which occurs by chance and without planning or consideration prior to occurrence. 
Appeal means a request for a review of the counties interpretation of any provision of these drainage control regulations or a request for a variance. 
Best management practices (BMPs) means a wide range of management procedures, activities, and prohibitions or practices which control the quality and/or quantity of stormwater runoff and which are compatible with the planned land use. 
Clean Water Act means the federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended (33 USC 1251 et seq.). 
Construction means any alteration of land for the purpose of achieving its development or changed use, including, particularly, any preparation for, building of or erection of a structure. 
Conveyance means stormwater features designed for the movement of stormwater through the drainage system, such as concrete or metal pipes, ditches, depressions, swales, etc. 
Cooling water means water used exclusively as a cooling medium in an appliance, device or apparatus. 
Detention facility means a facility which provides for storage of stormwater runoff and controlled release of this runoff during a storm. This facility only contains water during the storage period. 
Developer means any person who acts in his own behalf or as the agent of an owner of property and engages in alteration of land or vegetation in preparation for construction activity. 
Development means any action in preparation for construction activities which results in alteration of either land or vegetation. This definition shall not apply to individual single-family dwelling unit construction or to alteration, modification or additions to single-family dwelling units except for, in either case, individual single-family lots where site plans for each are required by special designation on the recorded plat or such lots as are located within the intermediate regional floodplain. For the purpose of this article, only the alterations of the drainage system shall be deemed to be development on individual single-family lots. 
Discharge means the release of treated or untreated water to the city storm sewer system. 
Drainage means a general term applied to the removal of surface or subsurface water from a given area either by gravity or by pumping, commonly applied herein to surface water. 
Drainage plan means a plan prepared by a professional engineer using appropriate and commonly accepted engineering standards which specifies the means for alteration or development of a drainage system. Also referred to as a stormwater management plan. 
Drainage system means the surface and subsurface system for the removal of water from the land, including both the natural elements of streams, marshes, swales and ponds whether of an intermittent or continuous nature, and the manmade element which includes culverts, ditches, channels, detention facilities, retention facilities, all parts of the storm sewer system and easements in which the facilities are contained. 
Easement means an acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others. 
Erosion means the process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice and or gravity. 
Flood means a temporary rise in the level of rivers, streams, drainageways and lakes which results in inundation of areas not ordinarily covered by water. 
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard have been designated as Zone A. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study means the official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration. The report contains flood profiles, as well as the Flood Hazard Boundary-Floodway Map and the water surface elevation of the base flood. 
Hydrology means the science that treats the occurrence, circulation, distribution, and properties of the waters of the earth, and their reaction with the environment. 
Illicit connection means a connection to a storm sewer system which results in discharge that is not composed entirely of stormwater runoff not including discharges pursuant to a NPDES permit. 
Intermediate floodplain (100-year floodplain) means the land areas within the intermediate regional floodplain elevation contours as defined on the flood hazard map. 
Intermediate regional flood (100-year flood) means a 100-year frequency flood as defined on the flood hazard map which has a probability of occurring once every 100 years or having a one-percent chance of occurring each year. 
Land-disturbing activity means any land change which may result in soil erosion from water, wind, ice or gravity and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land. 
Live retention means that quantity of water capable of being effectively contained by a designated facility for stormwater storage for a specified period of time. 
Maintenance means any action necessary to preserve stormwater management facilities in proper working condition in order to serve the intended purposes set forth in this article or to prevent structural failure of such facilities. 
Maintenance of retention facility means preserving the enclosing walls or impounding embankment of the retention facility in good condition; insuring structural soundness, functional adequacy and freedom from sediment; and rectifying any unforeseen erosion problems. 
Owner means the person in whom is vested the fee ownership, dominion or title of property, the proprietor. The term "owner" may also include a tenant, if chargeable under his lease for the maintenance of the property, and any agent of the owner or tenant including a developer. 
Pollution means the contamination or other alteration of any water's physical, chemical or biological properties, including change in temperature, taste, color, turbidity, or odor of such waters or the discharge of any liquid, gaseous, solid, radioactive, or other substance into any such waters which will or is likely to create a nuisance or render such waters harmful, detrimental or injurious to the public health, safety or welfare or to domestic, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational, or other legitimate beneficial uses, or to livestock, wild animals, birds, or fish or other aquatic life. 
Private means property or facilities owned by individuals, corporations, and other organizations and not by the county, city, state, or federal government. 
Procedure means a process adopted by the city, by and through the city council, to implement a regulation adopted under this article, or to carry out other responsibilities as may be required by this Code or other codes, ordinances or resolutions of the city or other agencies. 
Reach means the length of a drainage channel uniform with respect to discharge, depth, area, and slope. 
Record drawing means final site plans specifying the locations, dimensions, elevations, capacities and operational capabilities of road and drainage structures and facilities as they have been constructed. 
Regulation means any rule or requirement prepared by the engineering department and adopted by the city pursuant to the requirements of this article. 
Retention facility means a facility which provides for storage of stormwater runoff and controlled release of this runoff during and after a flood or storm. This facility normally contains water at all times. 
Runoff means the portion of precipitation on the land which reaches the drainage system. 
Runoff coefficient means the ratio of runoff to rainfall. 
Sanitary sewerage system means a complete sanitary sewerage system which discharges sewage directly or indirectly into the sewage treatment plant, including sanitary sewer pipelines, manholes, flushing inlets and appurtenances to the foregoing, but shall exclude any portion or facilities of the sewage treatment plant. 
Sedimentation means the processes that operate at or near the surface of the ground to deposit earth, debris and other materials either on other ground surfaces or in water channels. 
Sedimentation facility means a retention or detention facility specifically developed for the purpose of allowing the deposit of sediment resulting from the land development process which may be constructed as part of or separately from a retention facility. 
Site means any lot, plot, parcel or tract of land. 
Site plan means that plan required to obtain a development, construction or building permit which shows the means by which the developer will conform with applicable provisions of this article and other applicable ordinances. 
Stabilization means the process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation and/or mulch or other ground cover which may be in combination with installing temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Storm sewer system means a conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, highways, rights-of-way, city streets, catchbasins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, storm drains, detention ponds, other stormwater (facilities) which is owned or maintained by the city; designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater; not a combined sewer and not part of a Publicly Owned Treatment Works (POTW)). 
Stormwater means stormwater runoff, snowmelt runoff, and surface runoff and drainage. 
Stormwater management means the collection, conveyance, storage, treatment and disposal of stormwater runoff in a manner to meet the objectives of this article and which shall include a system of vegetative or structural measures, or both, that control the increased volume and rate of stormwater runoff and water quality impacts caused by manmade changes to the land. 
Stormwater management facilities means constructed or natural components of a stormwater drainage system, designed to perform a particular function, or multiple functions, including, but not limited to, pipes, swales, ditches, culverts, street gutters, detention basins, retention basins, constructed wetlands, infiltration devices, catchbasins, oil/water separators, sediment basins, natural systems and modular pavement. 
Stormwater runoff means the direct response of a land surface to precipitation and includes the surface and subsurface runoff that enters a ditch, stream, storm drain or other concentrated flow during and following the precipitation. 
Stream means natural, running water flowing continuously or intermittently in a channel on or below the surface of the ground. 
Used for. The term "used for" includes the phrases "arranged for," "designed for," "intended for," "maintained for," and "occupied for." 
Variance means the modification of the minimum stormwater management requirements for specific circumstances where strict adherence of the requirements would result in unnecessary hardship and not fulfill the intent of this article. 
Water quality means those characteristics of stormwater runoff that relate to the physical, chemical, biological or radiological integrity of water. 
Water quantity means those characteristics of stormwater runoff that relate to the rate and volume of the stormwater runoff. 
Watercourse means any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
(Ord. of 2-4-1997, § 5) 
Sec. 16-376. - Statement of policy objectives. 
The enactment and enforcement of this article are intended to address the following policy objectives: 
(1)	To recognize the necessity of and to encourage joint action and a full exchange of information by the city and the development industry in resolution of existing drainage problems, the prevention of their worsening or recurrence, and the implementation of these objectives; 
(2)	To work in a cooperative relationship with the development industry to accomplish the above-stated objective by encouraging through this article and other public actions the development of on-site self-maintaining retention/detention facilities and for off-site centrally located regional retention/detention facilities; 
(3)	To maintain, where feasible, the natural environment of city streams through reduction of flow quantities resulting from new development and, where feasible, restore the floodplain to its natural functional purpose to resolve existing flooding problems, but recognize the necessity of using urban streams for stormwater runoff in those situations where maintenance of the natural stream environment would result in continuation or worsening of flooding conditions; 
(4)	To incrementally assume maintenance responsibility for the public drainage system; 
(5)	To require of the development industry the responsibility to maintain the functioning of the storm drainage system; 
(6)	To encourage the construction of joint retention/detention ponds serving several properties which can be accepted for maintenance by the city upon completion of project development. The city encourages (where engineering judgment so warrants) the location of these retention facilities off the site of the property under development and may participate in the construction of major retention facilities which would serve not only the needs of the property under development, but would assist in resolving existing flooding problems; 
(7)	To encourage innovative design solutions to the effective retention and reduction of runoff. Drainage control measures to retain, reduce and regulate the rate of stormwater discharge which shall be acceptable shall include, but need not be limited to, retention/detention ponds percolation facilities, parking lots, open space areas, and oversized storm drains with restricted outlets. In addition, the city encourages the development of retention facilities in such a manner that they will become aesthetically and recreationally beneficial to the community in which they are located; and 
(8)	To require any development to retain any runoff which exceeds an allowable increase of one cubic foot per second per acre caused by the development and to utilize the parking area or privately owned retention/detention facility. 
(Ord. of 2-4-1997, § 6) 
Secs. 16-377—16-395. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PLAN SUBMISSION AND REVIEW 

Sec. 16-396. - Standards. 
All persons proposing development or construction shall, prior to beginning any construction activity, submit to the county engineering department site plans prepared in accordance with this article illustrating the means by which conformance with this article is to be achieved and illustrating compliance with applicable development standards before issuance of a development or building permit. 
(Ord. of 2-4-1997, § 20) 
Sec. 16-397. - Utilities. 
Electric, telephone and gas utilities shall submit plans and obtain a development permit only for major transmission installations located within rights-of-way or easements devoted exclusively to installations of utility facilities. Individual single-family lots within approved subdivisions shall be exempt from these requirements for new residential construction, with the exception of individual single-family lots located within the 100-year floodplain which shall be subject to review and approval in accordance with this and other applicable code provisions. 
(Ord. of 2-4-1997, § 20) 
Sec. 16-398. - Grading and drainage. 
The grading and drainage portion of a site plan shall be prepared under the supervision of a currently licensed state-registered professional engineer. The plan shall include a site location map of the project area indicating the location of the project in relation to rivers and streams, a topographic map showing existing and proposed contours at one-foot intervals, proposed drainageways and drainage structures, in addition to the requirements established in other ordinances. 
(Ord. of 2-4-1997, § 20) 
Sec. 16-399. - Hydraulics/hydrologic engineering. 
When the hydraulic/hydrologic engineering analysis includes applications of the principles of flood routing, super critical flow, high-energy dissipation or conversion, backwater curves, floodplain studies or other advanced hydraulic/hydrologic engineering techniques, the analysis shall be made by a currently licensed state-registered professional engineer proficient in hydraulics/hydrology. 
(Ord. of 2-4-1997, § 20) 
Sec. 16-400. - Variances. 
(a)	The county engineering department may grant a variance from the requirements of this article if exceptional circumstances applicable to a site exist such that strict adherence to provisions of this article will result in unnecessary hardship and will not fulfill the intent of this article. 
(b)	The county engineering department may grant a variance from requirements of this article if the proposed development will not: 
(1)	Change the rate or volume of runoff significantly; 
(2)	Have a significant, negative impact on any wetland, watercourse or water body; or 
(3)	Contribute to degradation of water quality. 
(c)	Site plans and supporting documentation to show conformance with the requirements of this article shall be submitted in accordance with applicable provisions of the subdivision regulations and shall include: 
(1)	Evidence of conformance with the requirements of this article for grading and drainage system alteration or development. Grading plans shall illustrate existing and proposed contours to the one-foot interval. Golf courses and other open space areas shall be exempt from this requirement, but general grading plans shall be submitted. Related plans shall show locations of structures, roads, surface drainage, existing and proposed drainage conduits and proposed alterations to the existing site or facilities; 
(2)	A hydrologic engineering analysis of stormwater runoff under existing and proposed developed site conditions and a detailed evaluation of the projected effects on upstream and downstream properties within the affected drainage basin. This analysis shall include a determination of the culvert, floodplain and channel cross section area required to carry the affected stream at the 25- and 100-year flood stage levels. The requirements for a complete hydrologic study may be waived by the county engineer for any development where the site plan submitted illustrates existing or proposed improvements sufficient to ensure compliance with applicable provisions of this article; 
(3)	Delineation of the boundaries and contour elevations of the 100-year floodplain as represented on the county's flood hazard maps prepared by FEMA. The actual building site in relation to the 100-year floodplain boundaries shall be shown. Any structure located in the 100-year floodplain shall show the finished floor elevation of the first floor. The same information shall be indicated by the seller to the purchaser of each property so affected. The elevation contours representing the intermediate regional flood conditions shall be shown when they are located outside established ditch banks. A benchmark suitable for determining 100-year flood elevations shall be established and shown on the plan; and 
(4)	The projected sequence of work represented by the grading and drainage plans as related to other major items of construction. 
(d)	Upon development/project completion, location, size and invert elevations of pipe segments of the storm drainage system, of control weirs, and maximum water surface elevations in retention ponds shall be shown on the final plat for a subdivision, and on a final plat for other developments which shall be submitted to the county engineer. The professional engineer reviewing the construction shall provide a certification that the development is in substantial compliance with approved plans for the project. 
(Ord. of 2-4-1997, § 20) 
Sec. 16-401. - Plan approval process. 
(a)	Unless granted an exemption, any person planning a development shall submit to the county engineering department four copies of a drainage plan, prepared in accordance with this article for review and approval. 
(b)	The county engineer or his designee shall review the plan. 
(1)	The county engineer shall issue a decision approving, rejecting or conditionally approving the plan with modification. 
(2)	The county engineer's decision will be based on conformance with requirements included in the city drainage regulations. No plan shall be approved unless it conforms with the requirements included in this article. The county engineer may require such additional documents or other items necessary to make this determination. 
(3)	If rejected, changes, additional analysis or other information needed to approve the next submittal of the plan shall be identified. 
(c)	If the drainage plan involves any stormwater management facilities or land to be dedicated to public use, the drainage plan shall be submitted to the engineering department for review and approval. 
(d)	Approved plans shall be valid for one year from the date of approval. 
(1)	Extensions or renewals of plan approvals shall be granted by the county engineering department upon written request by the person responsible for the development activity. 
(2)	A stormwater management plan shall not be considered approved without the inclusion of an approval stamp with a signature and date on the plans from the county engineering department. The stamp of approval on the plans is solely an acknowledgement of satisfactory compliance with the requirements of these regulations. The approval stamp does not constitute a representation or warranty to the applicant or any other person concerning the safety, appropriateness or effectiveness of any provision, or omission from the stormwater management plan. 
(Ord. of 2-4-1997, § 21) 
Sec. 16-402. - Permit suspension and revocation. 
(a)	Any development-related (subdivision/utility/other) permit may be suspended or revoked if one or more of the following violations are committed: 
(1)	Violation of the conditions of the drainage plan approval; 
(2)	Construction is not in strict accordance with the intent of approved plans; 
(3)	Noncompliance with any correction notice or stop work order; or 
(4)	Existence of immediate danger in the downstream area, as judged by the county engineering department. 
(b)	If one or more of the above are found, a written notice of violations shall be served upon the owner or his authorized representative, and an immediate stop work order may be issued. 
(1)	The written notice shall set forth measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan; and 
(2)	Correction of the violations must be started immediately, or the owner shall be deemed in violation of this article. 
(Ord. of 2-4-1997, § 22) 
Secs. 16-403—16-432. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS 

Sec. 16-433. - County minimum requirements applicable. 
All engineering design items for storm drainage and erosion control and sedimentation control and delineation of the 100-year floodplains shall meet the applicable minimum requirements available from the county engineering department. Rainfall intensities used in hydrologic computations shall not be less than shown by applicable rainfall curves published by the National Weather Service for the affected area. 
(Ord. of 2-4-1997, § 30(1)) 
Sec. 16-434. - Combined storage and controlled release required for certain development. 
A combination of storage and controlled release of stormwater runoff shall be required for all development and construction which will increase the peak rate of runoff from the site by more than one cubic foot per second per acre for a 25-year frequency (type II) storm. This shall not apply to individual single-family lots of less than two acres. 
(Ord. of 2-4-1997, § 30(2)) 
Sec. 16-435. - Release rate. 
The release rate of stormwater from all developments where detention is required shall: 
(1)	Not exceed the peak stormwater runoff rate from the area in its existing state for all intensities up to and including the 25-year frequency for all durations of rainfall; or 
(2)	Not be greater than that calculated for a 25-year (type II) frequency storm with a runoff coefficient of 0.20, 0.25 and 0.35 for land with an average slope of up to two percent. 
(Ord. of 2-4-1997, § 30(3)) 
Sec. 16-436. - Adequate capacity required. 
The drainage system being developed shall have adequate capacity to accommodate the flow from all upstream areas for a type II storm of 25-year design frequency except for areas considered to be major drainage canals. The major drainage canals shall have adequate capacity to accommodate the flow from all upstream areas for a storm of 100-year frequency. 
(Ord. of 2-4-1997, § 30(4)) 
Sec. 16-437. - Impact of land use restricted. 
Land uses within the 100-year floodplain shall not diminish or restrict the capacity of the channels or floodplains of the stream, its tributaries, drainage ditches or any other drainage facilities or systems and shall not increase the 100-year elevation or velocity or concentration of flow in downstream areas. If the required hydrologic studies reveal that a request for filling or grading within the 100-year floodplain would overload the capacity of the channel downstream or increase flood stages upstream, the development permit shall be denied unless equivalent flow and storage capacity is replaced and maintained by the owner within the 100-year floodplain. Altered sections of the 100-year floodplain shall have a positive slope so as to provide positive drainage back to the stream flow line and this section must be maintained by the owners in perpetuity so as to prevent or remove silt build-up. 
(Ord. of 2-4-1997, § 30(5)) 
Sec. 16-438. - Live retention storage. 
The live retention storage to be provided shall be calculated on the basis of the 25-year frequency rainfall as published by the National Weather Service for the affected areas. The retention system required shall be that necessary to handle the runoff of a 25-year rainfall, for any and all durations from the proposed development, with a release rate that does not exceed the pre-development runoff. Retention control structures and other drainage improvements shall be located and designed to prevent erosion damage to adjacent property owners. Retention/detention control structures shall be sized for the release rate as presented in this article and will have provisions for overflow of the 100-year storm without damage to the structure. 
(Ord. of 2-4-1997, § 30(6)) 
Sec. 16-439. - Joint construction. 
When the developer requests and the county engineering department determines that development and construction projects are too small, or that engineering and economic factors make combined retention or other drainage facilities more practical, the city may authorize the joint construction of these facilities to serve two or more properties by two or more developers. This authorization shall be granted by the county engineering department upon application for approval being submitted through the planning commission. Where joint retention facilities serving two or more properties are approved for construction, no use of land or occupancy of buildings within the properties served by these facilities shall be permitted until completion of the retention facility, except upon approval of the county engineering department. 
(Ord. of 2-4-1997, § 30(7)) 
Sec. 16-440. - Available capacity. 
When adequacy of existing drainage structures are being considered in association with proposed development, the overall capacity of the structure will be evaluated and divided among upstream properties. The available capacity will be divided among property owners based on acreage in the basin. Under no condition will the available capacity of the structure be exceeded. Should the developer desire to replace the structure in lieu of retention/detention, all downstream structures should be evaluated and deemed adequate. The developer will be responsible for providing calculations and studies needed to evaluate downstream structures. If an existing structure not being modified by the development is found to be inadequate to handle the pre-development flows, the developer shall provide calculations to show the structure size required to handle the pre-development flows of the entire basin area. The city at that time will evaluate its ability to modify that structure. This evaluation will take into consideration available funds, required permits, capabilities of downstream structures and current workloads. Based on the county's findings, the developer will be notified within 45 days of the county's intentions for modification and any schedule required for modification of structures. 
(Ord. of 2-4-1997, § 30(8)) 
Sec. 16-441. - Installation, development, and maintenance. 
The following requirements shall apply to the installation, development and maintenance of all retention, detention and sedimentation control facilities designed for temporary storage of stormwater runoff: 
(1)	Permanent chainlink fencing at least six feet in height shall be required around all these facilities. This fencing shall be designed, installed and maintained to allow the free flow of runoff and sediment (if intended) into the facility. The fence shall include a lockable gate of sufficient size (12-foot minimum) to permit entrance of equipment necessary to allow periodic maintenance activities. Different fencing material may be substituted for chain link upon approval of the county engineering department. Requirements for fencing may be waived if deemed necessary by the city council. 
(2)	These facilities shall be located on tracts of land designated for this use on the recorded plat, with sufficient area around the perimeter to provide access for maintenance purposes and shall be immediately adjacent to or be provided with an access easement to a public street. The access easement shall provide at least 20 feet of width outside of aboveground obstructions including trees, utility poles, fences, buildings, headwalls, weirs, settling basins, top of slope or other drainage structures. 
(3)	Perforated standpipes or a French drain, as approved by the county engineer, or other methods which will achieve equal performance to prevent standing of water and/or inadequate drainage shall be installed within all these facilities. 
(4)	Except as provided in subsection (5) of this section the property owner shall be responsible for the maintenance of these retention facilities during grading, construction and following final approval of the completed project. This maintenance obligation shall be binding on future owners, successors and assigns of the property. 
(5)	In the case of single-family residential subdivisions approved after the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived, the city shall assume maintenance responsibility two years after the release of subdivision streets. A special drainage district as authorized by O.C.G.A. § 36-31-12 will be established for property in a single-family residential subdivision at the time the plat is finally recorded and will be so noted on the plat. Upon completion of developer maintenance, all detention ponds shall have a positive slope to the outlet in order to facilitate complete drainage. 
(6)	Those facilities in single-family residential subdivisions constructed under permits issued prior to the adoption of this article will not be accepted for the city maintenance unless individually approved and accepted by the city council and suitable access easements are provided. At the time the city council accepts a retention facility for city maintenance, a special drainage district may be established that includes all properties for which the retention facility is designed. 
(7)	Pursuant to the creation of special drainage districts by the city as authorized by O.C.G.A. § 36-31-12, revenues to fund city maintenance of retention facilities may be obtained by an ad valorem tax on all properties for which the retention facilities are designed. Such ad valorem millage rates may be set annually by the LCPC when other ad valorem millage rates are set. No assessment will be made in a special drainage district in the calendar year in which it is established. 
(Ord. of 2-4-1997, § 30(9)) 
Sec. 16-442. - Drainage plan. 
Items required to be included in the drainage plan: 
(1)	A vicinity map with an indicating north arrow, scale, boundary lines of site, the land lot and district numbers, and other information necessary to locate the development site. 
(2)	Existing and proposed topography of the development site. 
(3)	A description of all watercourses, waterbodies, and wetlands on or adjacent to the site or into which stormwater flows. 
(4)	A description of physical improvements on the site, including present development and proposed development. 
(5)	Proposed dimensions, elevations, characteristics of all stormwater management facilities. 
(6)	Location of BMPs for water quality control, including temporary and permanent vegetative and structural measures, processes, procedures, prohibitions on practices, and other management practices that prevent or reduce discharge of pollutants in stormwater runoff. 
(7)	Identification of all areas within the site which will be included in land-disturbing activities and the expected date final stabilization will be completed. 
(8)	The anticipated starting and completion dates of various stages of land-disturbing activities and the expected date final stabilization will be completed. 
(9)	A determination that no occupied first-floor elevation of any structure is below the 100-year flood elevation. 
(10)	The designation of all easements needed for inspection and maintenance of the drainage system and stormwater management facilities and BMPs. 
(11)	All engineering calculations needed to design the system and associated structures, including: 
a.	Pre- and post-development runoff flows velocities; 
b.	Peak rates of discharge; and 
c.	Inflow and outflow hydrograph of runoff at all existing and proposed points of discharge from the site. 
(12)	A description of site conditions around all points of surface water discharge. This description shall include, but not be limited to: 
a.	Vegetation; and 
b.	The method of flow conveyance from any land-disturbing activity. 
(13)	Construction and design details for structural controls. 
(14)	An assessment of activities, materials, and physical features of the proposed development that have a reasonable potential to contribute significant amounts of pollutants to stormwater. Any such activities, materials, or features must be addressed by the measures and controls subsequently described in other portions of the stormwater management plan. 
(15)	Inclusion in the hydrologic-hydraulic study of an analysis of all stormwater management facilities and all major portions of the conveyance system through the proposed development for design conditions and operating conditions reasonably expected during the life of that facility. 
(16)	If the plan and/or design report indicates there may be a drainage or flooding problem at the exit to the proposed development, the county engineering department may require the following: 
a.	Water surface profiles of pre- and post-development conditions for design storms; and 
b.	Elevations of all structures potentially damaged by design-year flows. 
(17)	Certification by the person responsible for the land-disturbing activity that the activity will be accomplished pursuant to the approved plan, and responsible personnel will be assigned to the project. 
(18)	The name, address and telephone number of the developer/owner. 
(19)	The name, address and telephone number of a 24-hour, local contact responsible for stormwater runoff controls. 
(20)	The following maintenance statement: 
Stormwater runoff control measures will be maintained at all times. Additional stormwater runoff control measures will be installed if deemed necessary by on-site inspection. 
(21)	All maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature/seal of a professional engineer. 
(Ord. of 2-4-1997, § 30(10)) 
Sec. 16-443. - County regulations applicable to 100-year floodplain. 
All buildings located adjacent to or in the 100-year floodplain shall be constructed in accordance with the county flood damage prevention regulations. 
(Ord. of 2-4-1997, § 30(11)) 
Sec. 16-444. - Special drainage system maintenance requirements. 
The following are special drainage system maintenance requirements: 
(1)	No impoundment of water which retains in excess of 0.5 acre feet of runoff shall be removed without first obtaining a development permit, which shall only be issued after competent engineering studies provided by the developer show that this removal will not adversely affect downstream properties. 
(2)	Trash, garbage, construction materials, construction by-products or other debris shall not be deposited in any part of the drainage system. 
(3)	No restrictions or barriers, including fences, may be placed in the drainage system without first obtaining a development permit. When on- or off-site debris has accumulated within a floodplain in such a manner as to interfere with the free flow of water so as to increase the risk of hazardous inundation of upstream properties adjacent to the floodplain, the city shall require the owner of the property where this debris was generated, if its source can be identified, to clear and remove the debris so as to permit the free flow of water. 
(Ord. of 2-4-1997, § 30(12)) 
Sec. 16-445. - Water system design and location to minimize flood damage. 
The following are water system design and location requirements to minimize flood damage: 
(1)	All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system. 
(2)	All new and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharges from the system into floodwaters. 
(3)	All on-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(4)	All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
(Ord. of 2-4-1997, § 30(13)—(16)) 
Sec. 16-446. - Off-site drainage facilities. 
(a)	The county engineering department may allow stormwater runoff that otherwise is of unacceptable quality or which would be discharged in volumes or at rates in excess of those otherwise allowed by this article, to be discharged into drainage facilities off site of the development, provided the applicant has demonstrated: 
(1)	Off-site drainage facilities and channels leading to them are designed, constructed and maintained in accordance with requirements of this article; 
(2)	Adequate provision is made for sharing of construction, maintenance and operating costs of facilities. The developer may be required to pay a portion of the cost of constructing facilities as a condition to receiving approval of the drainage plan; and 
(3)	It is not feasible to completely manage runoff on site in a manner that meets the design and performance standards found in this article. 
(b)	A request to use off-site drainage facilities and all information related to proposed off-site facilities should be made a part of the developer's drainage plan. 
(Ord. of 2-4-1997, § 31) 
Sec. 16-447. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-1, § I(6.5-32), adopted Sept. 1, 2015, repealed former § 16-447, which pertained to prohibitions, exemptions and illicit connections, and derived from an ordinance adopted Feb. 4, 1997, § 32. See Ch. 16, Art. III, Div. 3. 
Secs. 16-448—16-477. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 16-478. - Administration. 
(a)	The county engineering department will administer and enforce the provisions of this article. 
(b)	The county engineering department shall: 
(1)	Review all development permits to ensure that the permit requirements of this article have been satisfied; 
(2)	Advise permittee when additional federal or state permits may be required and, if specific federal or state permits are known to be required, ensure that copies of such permits are provided and maintained on file with the development permit; 
(3)	Notify adjacent communities, the Federal Emergency Management Agency and the state department of natural resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration; 
(4)	Administer, coordinate and oversee acquisition, design, construction, and operations and maintenance (O and M) of municipal/county stormwater facilities and conveyances; 
(5)	Establish or oversee establishment of development standards and guidelines; 
(6)	Determine the manner in which stormwater facilities should be operated; 
(7)	Inspect private systems which discharge to the county and city storm sewer systems; 
(8)	Advise the city and other departments on issues related to stormwater; 
(9)	Protect facilities and properties controlled by the city and prescribe how they are used by others; 
(10)	Require new, increased, or significantly changed stormwater contributions to comply with the terms of this article; 
(11)	Develop programs or procedures to control the discharge of pollutants into the city storm sewer system. 
(Ord. of 2-4-1997, § 40(1)) 
Sec. 16-479. - Enforcement. 
The county engineer or his representative shall administer and enforce those provisions of this article which apply to developed and occupied areas and to undeveloped areas which affect the city's responsibility for maintenance of the storm drainage system. The county engineer shall ensure that any altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained so that flood-carrying capacity is not diminished. 
(Ord. of 2-4-1997, § 40(2)) 
Sec. 16-480. - Flood hazard map preparation. 
The county engineer shall prepare and maintain the flood hazard map using the most current flood insurance study prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency with accompanying maps or by using engineering studies prepared under the supervision of a currently licensed state-registered professional engineer, who, by using common and appropriate engineering procedures, shall deem such studies accurate and acceptable for floodplain definition. 
(Ord. of 2-4-1997, § 41) 
Sec. 16-481. - Inspection and right-of-way. 
(a)	Upon presentation of identification to the developer, contractor, owner, owner's agent, operator or occupants, employees of the city may enter during all reasonable hours any property under proposed or existing development and construction. These employees may make inspections of the facilities for the purpose of determining plan requirements or compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)	Designees of the county engineer may inspect any drainage system within or outside of an existing drainage easement. All drainage facilities located on private property, whether dedicated to the city or not, shall be accessible at all times for city inspection. 
(c)	Where drainage facilities are accepted by the city for maintenance, public access easements shall be provided. Reasonable access shall be provided to all drainage easements for inspection and maintenance functions. 
(d)	Where an easement does not exist for the drainage system, the permission of the owner shall be obtained before entrance. However, in the event of emergency maintenance requirements, permission of the owner shall not be mandatory. 
(Ord. of 2-4-1997, § 42) 
Sec. 16-482. - Ownership, maintenance, and inspections. 
(a)	Any stormwater management facility which services a single lot or commercial and industrial development shall be privately owned and maintained. The owner shall maintain a perpetual, nonexclusive easement which allows for access for maintenance. 
(b)	All other stormwater management control facilities shall be publicly owned and/or maintained only if accepted for maintenance by the city. 
(c)	The county engineering department may require dedication of privately owned stormwater facilities which discharge to the city storm sewer system. 
(d)	The county engineering department shall determine inspection schedules necessary to enforce the provisions of this article. Inspections may include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)	An initial inspection prior to drainage plan approval; 
(2)	A bury inspection prior to burial of any underground drainage structure; 
(3)	Erosion control inspections as necessary to ensure effective control of erosion and sedimentation; and 
(4)	A final inspection when all work, including installation of drainage facilities, has been completed. 
(e)	The county engineer or his designee, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter, in accordance with state and federal law, all properties for regular inspections, periodic investigations, observation, measurement, enforcement, sampling and testing, in accordance with provisions of this article. The engineer or his designee shall duly notify the owner of said property or the representative on site, except in the case of an emergency. 
(f)	The county engineer or designated employee of the city, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter, in accordance with state and federal law, all properties for which the city holds a negotiated easement for repairs, maintenance and other purposes related to any portion of the stormwater management facilities lying within said easement. The county engineer or his designee shall duly notify the owner of said property or the representative on site, except in the case of an emergency. 
(g)	If, after inspection, the condition of a facility presents an immediate danger to the public health, safety or general welfare because of unsafe conditions or improper maintenance, the city shall have the right, but not the duty to take action as may be necessary to protect the public and make the facility safe. 
(h)	The county engineering department shall inspect the work and shall either approve it or notify the applicant in writing in what respects there has been failure to comply with the requirements of the approved drainage plan. Any portion of the work which does not comply shall be promptly corrected by the applicant, or said applicant shall be subject to a penalty. 
(i)	The county engineering department shall prepare an inventory of detention/retention structures located in the city that are installed after the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived. The structures on this list shall be inspected once per year to ensure proper maintenance. An annual report shall be given to the city stating the condition of detention/retention structures within the city limits. 
(Ord. of 2-4-1997, § 43) 
Sec. 16-483. - Emergency maintenance. 
(a)	The city may conduct emergency maintenance operation on private land and on drainage systems where emergency conditions exist. Emergency maintenance shall constitute the removal of trees and other debris, which in the judgment of the county engineer or his representative create a condition potentially injurious to life, property and the public road system. 
(b)	Emergency maintenance conducted on any drainage system shall not be construed as constituting a continuing maintenance obligation on the part of the city. 
(Ord. of 2-4-1997, § 44) 
Sec. 16-484. - Notice of violation/stop work order. 
(a)	Whenever the county engineer or his representative determines that activity on a property does not comply with the approved development and construction plans, he may issue a notice of violation and/or a stop work order. 
(b)	Whenever the county engineer determines that the drainage system has been unlawfully altered, causing inadequate drainage, he may issue a notice of violation and/or a stop work order. 
(c)	A stop work order or notice of violation of the provisions of this article or of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto shall be directed to the owner of the property or his agent and shall: 
(1)	Be in writing; 
(2)	Include a description of the property sufficient to identify where the violation has occurred; 
(3)	State that, if repairs, construction or alterations are not completed within a reasonable time period specified by the inspector, summons shall be issued for the owner to appear in court. 
Each day the violation continues shall constitute a new and separate violation. However, in the judgment of the county engineer, where the violation is willful, in wanton disregard of the provisions of this article, or constitutes a public health and safety hazard, he may issue a court summons in lieu of a notice of violation. 
(Ord. of 2-4-1997, § 45) 
Sec. 16-485. - Administrative appeal. 
(a)	Any person aggrieved by a decision of the county engineering department (including any decision with reference to the granting or denial of a variance from the terms of this article) may appeal the same by filing a written notice of appeal with the county engineer within 15 days of the issuance of said decision by the engineer. 
(b)	The county engineer can then reverse his decision or send this notice to the LCPC. A notice of appeal shall state the specific reasons why the decision of the county engineer is alleged to be in error, and the county engineer shall prepare and send to the LCPC and appellant a written response to said notice of appeal within 30 days of receipt of the notice of appeal. 
(c)	The LCPC will then make a recommendation to the city with regards to the appeal. The city will make the final decision regarding the appeal. 
(d)	All appeals shall be heard by the city council in accordance with city bylaws. The hearing shall be held within 60 days after receipt of notice of appeal or a date mutually agreed upon in writing by the appellant and the chairperson of the city council. The city council shall then make its findings within 30 days of the appeal hearing. Decisions of the city council shall be based on guidelines for appeals established by the city council and amended from time to time, with guidelines published in a newspaper of general circulation. 
(e)	If the appellant is dissatisfied with the city council decision, he can appeal said decision to the county court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. of 2-4-1997, § 46) 
Sec. 16-486. - Civil penalties. 
Any person violating any provision of this article, permitting conditions, or stop work order shall be liable for a civil penalty of not less that $100.00 per day or more than $500.00 per day, by a sentence of imprisonment not exceeding 60 days in jail, or both fine and jail. Each day the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 2-4-1997, § 47) 
Sec. 16-487. - Legal status provisions. 
The provisions of this article shall apply to all development activity within the city. The provisions shall not, however, be construed as repealing or modifying any condition attached to the issuance of any development permit issued prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. Further, this article shall not be construed so as to require any department of the city government to amend any development permit issued prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. However, the standards set forth in this article shall apply to all development, as defined in section 16-375, subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(Ord. of 2-4-1997, § 48) 
Sec. 16-488. - Cooperation with other governments. 
The city may enter into agreements with other local governments to carry out the purpose of this article. These agreements may include, but are not limited to, enforcement of provisions, resolution of disputes, cooperative monitoring and cooperative management of stormwater system and management programs. 
(Ord. of 2-4-1997, § 49) 
Sec. 16-489. - Property owner liability; supplemental charges. 
Any person in violation of any portion of this article shall pay for all costs to the city associated with the violation, including, but not limited to, containment, cleanup, injury, death, legal and other costs. 
(Ord. of 2-4-1997, § 50) 
Secs. 16-490—16-516. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - WELLHEAD PROTECTION 

Sec. 16-517. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to ensure the provision of a safe and sanitary drinking water supply for the city by the establishment of wellhead protection zones surrounding the wellheads for all wells which are the supply sources for the city water system and by the designation and regulation of property uses and conditions which may be maintained within such zones. 
(Ord. of 12-11-1996, § 1) 
Sec. 16-518. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Hazardous waste or material means any waste or material which because of its quantity, concentration or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may: 
(1)	Cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible or incapacitating reversible illness; or 
(2)	Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or to the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of or otherwise managed. 
Sanitary landfill means a disposal site where solid wastes, including putrescible wastes, are disposed of on land by placing earth cover thereon. 
Wellhead means the upper terminal of a well, including adapters, ports, seals, valves and other attachments. 
(Ord. of 12-11-1996, § 2) 
Sec. 16-519. - Establishment of wellhead protection zone. 
There is hereby established a use district to be known as a wellhead protection zone, identified and described as all the area within a circle, the center of which is the center of any city water supply wellhead and the radius of which is 100 feet. 
(Ord. of 12-11-1996, § 3) 
Sec. 16-520. - Permitted uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted within wellhead protection zones: 
(1)	Any use permitted within existing agricultural or single-family residential districts, except that the minimum residential lot size for a lot any portion of which lies within the wellhead protection zone shall not be less one acre; and 
(2)	Any other open land use where any building located on the property is incidental and accessory to the primary open land use. 
(Ord. of 12-11-1996, § 4) 
Sec. 16-521. - Prohibited uses. 
The following uses or conditions shall be and are hereby prohibited within wellhead protection zones, whether or not such use or condition may otherwise be ordinarily included as a part of a use permitted under section 16-520: 
(1)	Surface use or storage of hazardous material, expressly including commercial use of agricultural pesticides; 
(2)	Septic tanks or drain fields appurtenant thereto; 
(3)	Impervious surfaces other than roofs of buildings, streets, driveways and walks serving buildings permitted under section 16-520; 
(4)	Sanitary landfills; 
(5)	Hazardous waste disposal sites; 
(6)	Stormwater infiltration basins; 
(7)	Underground storage tanks; 
(8)	Sanitary sewer lines within 150 feet of a wellhead. 
(Ord. of 12-11-1996, § 5) 
Sec. 16-522. - Administration. 
The policies and procedures for administration of any wellhead protection zone established under this article, including without limitation those applicable to nonconforming uses, exceptions, enforcement and penalties, shall be the same as provided in existing zoning regulations for the city, as the same are presently enacted or may from time to time be amended. 
(Ord. of 12-11-1996, § 6) 
Secs. 16-523—16-552. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - WETLAND PROTECTION 

Sec. 16-553. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Jurisdictional wetlands means an area that meets the definitional requirements for wetlands as determined by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
Jurisdictional wetlands determination means a delineation of jurisdictional wetlands boundaries by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, as required by section 404 of the Clean Water Act, 33 USC 1344, as amended. 
Regulated activity means any activity, which will, or which may reasonably be expected to result in the discharge of dredged or fill material into waters of the United States excepting those activities exempted in section 404 of the Federal Clean Water Act. 
Wetland means an area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophilic vegetation. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
Wetlands map means the current U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service national Wetlands Inventory Maps for the City of Riceboro, Georgia. 
Wetlands protection district means all wetlands within the jurisdiction of the city as indicated on the wetlands map; provided, however, that the wetlands map does not necessarily represent the boundaries of jurisdictional wetlands within the city and cannot serve as a substitute for a delineation of wetland boundaries by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers as required by section 404 of the Clean Water Act, as amended (Federal Water Pollution Control Act, 33 USC 1251 et seq.). Any local government action under this article does not relieve the landowner from federal or state permitting requirements. 
(Ord. of 4-3-2001, § 5-100) 
Sec. 16-554. - Permitting determination. 
(a)	The Liberty Consolidated Planning Commission (LCPC) shall compare proposals for land disturbance or development with the generalized wetlands map and decide whether local permitting should proceed or be deferred pending U.S. Army Corps of Engineers determination. 
(b)	Upon review of project proposals or plans submitted, one of two actions should result: 
(1)	A local permit is issued without requiring jurisdictional wetlands determination by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. This action should be taken when the activity being proposed meets either of the following tests: 
a.	It is not the type of activity that would cause the alteration of wetlands; or 
b.	The proposed location of the activity is not near or within a protected wetland boundary as shown on the generalized wetlands map adopted by the local government. 
(2)	The local permit is deferred pending a jurisdictional wetlands determination by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. This action should be taken when the activity being proposed fails both of the above tests (i.e., it is a type of activity that would cause alteration of wetlands and the proposed location of the activity is near or within a wetland boundary). In this case, the local permit is issued only after a letter of permission or section 404 Permit is obtained from the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
(Ord. of 4-3-2001, § 5-101) 
Secs. 16-555—16-573. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - LANDSCAPE AND TREE PROTECTION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 16-574. - Purpose. 
The purposes of this article are to: 
(1)	Protect and maintain the urban forest by managing the impact of development. 
(2)	Preserve the environment and aesthetic assets of the community by requiring tree planting and landscaping for development. 
(3)	Provide protection from removal for all trees without a permit within the areas covered by this article unless exempted. 
(4)	Maintain where possible a minimum 50-percent canopy tree cover across the city. 
(Ord. of 7-6-2010, § 5-104) 
Sec. 16-575. - Exemptions. 
The following developments are exempted from compliance with the permitting requirements of this article: 
(1)	Utility easements for power lines, pipelines, or similar facilities, except where such utilities cross tree easements, set-asides, or natural buffers. 
(2)	Those portions of airport and heliports which require clear areas for safety purposes, including runways and taxiways, approach and departure clear zones. 
(3)	Land currently zoned and used for agricultural or other rural residential zoned purposes for the duration of such use, provided that such lands are not located within the jurisdiction of the city. In these cases, a 30-foot dense vegetative buffer shall remain around the perimeter of the site to prevent the site from being an eyesore. 
(4)	All activities excepted by O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17. 
(Ord. of 7-6-2010, § 5-105) 
Sec. 16-576. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
50 percent cover means a canopy expected to be achieved over a 30-year period by the planting of large, preferred trees or the retention of existing canopied trees which result in a minimum of 50 percent cover across the county. Fifty percent canopy cover will be approximately 18 large, preferred trees per acre, quantified as 1,600 tree quality points per acre. 
Administrator means the director of the Liberty Consolidated Planning Commission (LCPC) or designee. 
Buffer means any visual and physical separation between two parcels of land. 
Caliper means the diameter or thickness of the main stem of a young tree or sapling as measured at six inches above ground level. This measurement is used for nursery-grown trees having a diameter of four inches or less. 
Canopy trees means large preferred trees which provide canopy over streets and sidewalks and other paved areas. Upon reaching maturity, a canopy tree will achieve a canopy spread of in excess of 40 feet in diameter. Using a radius of 20 feet for calculation purposes, the canopy cover area for one mature tree will be equal to 3.1416 by 20 squared or 1,257 square feet. Total canopy coverage for one acre of land would be equal to 43,560 divided by 1,257 which equals 35 large canopy trees. 
Critical root zone means the minimum area surrounding a tree that is considered essential to support the viability of the tree and is for purposes of this article equal to the diameter at breast height (DBH) in inches converted into the radius of the circular area in feet around a preserved tree. 
Developable acres means the land area that can potentially be developed; i.e., this area does not include environmentally sensitive areas including, but not limited to, wetlands, stream buffers, marshlands, etc. 
Development means the act, process, or state of erecting buildings or structures, or making improvements to a parcel or tract of land. 
Diameter breast height (DBH) means the diameter or width of the main stem of a tree as measured 4.5 feet above the natural grade at its base. Whenever a branch, limb, defect, or abnormal swelling of the trunk occurs at this height, the DBH shall be measured at the nearest point above or below 4.5 feet at which a normal diameter occurs. 
Exceptional tree means any tree designated, as provided for in this article, to be of notable historic interest, aesthetic value, or of unique character because of species, type, age or size. 
Greenspace means any area retained as permeable unpaved ground and dedicated on the site plan to supporting vegetation. 
Greenspace plan means a map and/or supporting documentation which describes for a particular site where vegetation (greenspace) is to be retained or planted in compliance with these regulations. The greenspace plan shall include a tree survey, tree establishment plan, and/or a tree protection plan, and a landscape plan. 
Landscape plan means a map and supporting documentation which describes for a particular site where vegetation is to be retained or provided in compliance with the requirements of this article. The landscape plan shall include any required buffer elements. 
Landscape quality point (LQP) means a unit of measurement which quantifies the relative value of small trees, shrubs, and ground cover which are planted or retained on a given site. 
Native tree means any tree species which occurs naturally and is indigenous within the region. 
Plot plan means a map and supporting documentation which describes for a particular site where the buildings, driveway, utility corridors, and easements are to be located and where greenspace is to be retained or planted in compliance with these regulations. 
Preliminary plan means a plan which shows the proposed design for a commercial project or subdivision as specified in the subdivision regulations. 
Quality points factor means a decimal fraction that is assigned to each tree species in the tree lists and is used as a multiplier in calculating the tree quality points for any tree retained on a site. 
Set-asides means a piece of land dedicated to open space by the developer or owner. Examples of set-asides include parklands, recreation areas, medians of boulevards, etc. 
Sketch plan means a conceptual layout for a subdivision as specified in the subdivision regulations. 
Species diversity means a planting or retention of diverse tree species on a site or within the community to prevent dominance by any single type of tree. The purpose of this diversity is to prevent the destruction of the entire urban forest in the event of disease or pestilence. For any site of one acre or larger, no more than 45 percent of trees and shrubs planted shall be of the same species. 
Tree easement means an easement not less than ten feet in width and not in conflict with any other planning requirements under the zoning and subdivision regulations for public planting and/or maintenance of canopy street trees exclusive of utility, drainage, or other easements. Administrative approval is required for easements greater than ten feet in width. 
Tree establishment plan means a map and supporting documentation which describes for a particular site where existing trees are to be planted in compliance with the requirements of these regulations, the types of trees and their corresponding tree quality points. 
Tree fund means the tree protection escrow fund established to receive funds paid in lieu of required tree quality points or for compensation for damage or removal of trees owned by the governing authority. 
Tree protection plan means a map and surrounding documentation which describes for a particular site where existing trees are to be retained in compliance with the requirements of these regulations, the types of trees, and their corresponding tree quality points. 
Tree protection zone means the area surrounding a preserved or planted tree that is essential to that tree's health and survival, and is protected within the guidelines of these regulations. The minimum tree protection zone required for retained trees is the tree diameter's inches (DBH) converted into feet of radius around the tree. For planted trees, see table. 
Tree quality point (TQP) means a unit of measurement which quantifies the relative value of trees that are planted or retained on a given site. Tree quality points quantitatively express the desirable qualities of the species with regards to size for each tree that is retained on a site. For planted trees, tree quality points are an expression of species desirability and the expected mature size of each tree. 
Tree survey means a map or site plan prepared and sealed by a registered land surveyor within two years of the date of application. The survey shall be at the same scale as the required site development plan and shall include the following information: the location of all trees 16 inches or greater within the limits of disturbance and 25 feet beyond in each direction or to the property line whichever is less. 
Used for shall include the phrases "arranged for," "designed for," "intended for," and "occupied for." 
(Ord. of 7-6-2010, § 5-106) 
Sec. 16-577. - Penalties for violation. 
Violation of the provisions of this article or failure to comply with any of its requirements, including violation of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance shall constitute a violation of this article. Any person who violates this article or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished in accordance with section 1-11 and, in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing contained in this article shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. of 7-6-2010, § 5-117) 
Sec. 16-578. - Variance and appeal procedure. 
(a)	Appeals from decisions of the administrator or requests for variances from the provisions of this article shall be made to the LCPC which shall formulate a recommendation to the city. 
(b)	A variance shall be granted only: 
(1)	Upon a determination that the request is the minimum necessary to afford relief and that the overall intent and purpose of this article will not be adversely impacted; and 
(2)	Upon showing of good and sufficient cause. 
(Ord. of 7-6-2010, § 5-115) 
Sec. 16-579. - Notice of violation; remediation and stop work. 
(a)	Notice of violation. Whenever it is determined that a violation of this article has occurred, the administrator shall immediately issue a written notice to the person in violation, identifying the nature and location of the violation and specifying the remedial action that is necessary to bring the violation into compliance. The person in violation shall immediately commence remedial action and shall have seven calendar days after the receipt of the notice or such longer time as may be specified in the notice to complete the remedial actions required to bring the activity into compliance with this order. 
(b)	Stop work order. The administrator shall have the authority to immediately issue a stop work order in any of the following circumstances: 
(1)	When clearing or other development of land is being implemented without an approved permit. 
(2)	When ongoing noncomplying work is not immediately and permanently stopped upon receipt of a written notice of violation. 
(3)	When tree protection measures have not been implemented or maintained and danger to protected trees exists or appears imminent. 
(4)	When remedial work required by notice of violation is not completed within the time period specified. 
(Ord. of 7-6-2010, § 5-116) 
Sec. 16-580. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this article and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. of 7-6-2010, § 5-118) 
Sec. 16-581. - General provisions. 
(a)	Administration. The director of the Liberty Consolidated Planning Commission (LCPC) or the designee of the city shall administer the provisions of this article. 
(b)	Permit required for clearing. Except as provided in this article, a property owner shall not clear or permit the clearing of property or the removal of any tree without first obtaining a clearing permit as provided for in division 7 of this article. 
(c)	Protected trees. The following trees are protected within the jurisdiction of the governing authority and shall not be removed unless a permit has been approved or the requirement waived: 
(1)	On undeveloped property, any tree greater than two inches DBH. 
(2)	On developed property, any tree equal to or greater than two inches DBH except for single-family residential lots within a common development (subdivision) and exemptions defined in subsection (c)(2)d. 
a.	Any tree retained for the purpose of tree quality points or greenspace requirements. 
b.	Any tree planted for the purpose of tree quality points. 
c.	Any tree in a wetland, except as defined in the exemptions in subsection (c)(2)d of this section. 
d.	Any tree designated as an "exceptional tree." 
(d)	Tree/landscape quality points required. 
(1)	A total of not less than 1,600 tree quality points per developable acre is required for any parcel of land being developed (with the exception of single- family residential lots) and may include existing trees retained and new trees planted. 
(2)	A total of 400 landscape quality points per developable acre is required for commercial, industrial, institutional, or multifamily developments. 
(3)	A total of 1,200 tree quality points per acre is required for any parking area included in a commercial, industrial, institutional, or multifamily development. 
(4)	Any previously developed site that is proposed for redevelopment, building addition or other improvements requiring submittal of a site plan shall comply with the tree quality and landscape quality points requirements for that portion of the site affected by the redevelopment, addition, or improvement. 
(Ord. of 7-6-2010, § 5-107(a)—(d)) 
Sec. 16-582. - Landscape and tree ordinance manual. 
The landscape and tree ordinance manual and implementation guide is hereby adopted by reference. All land-clearing, tree protection, tree establishment, and landscaping shall be done in a manner consistent with the provisions contained in said manual. 
(Ord. of 7-6-2010, § 5-107(6)) 
Sec. 16-583. - Establishment of a tree fund. 
There is hereby created a tree protection escrow fund for the purpose of receiving money paid to the in-lieu-of required tree quality points, or for compensation for damage or removal of trees owned by the governing authority. The fund will be used by the LCPC to plant trees or landscaping on public rights-of-way, easements, or other public property. 
(Ord. of 7-6-2010, § 5-107(7)) 
Sec. 16-584. - Designation of an exceptional tree. 
A tree may be designated as an "exceptional tree" and will thereafter be considered a public landmark and shall not be destroyed or endangered. 
(1)	Procedure for designation as an exceptional tree. A tree may be nominated by written request to the administrator or may be nominated by the administrator. The nomination will be reviewed by the LCPC and a recommendation made to the city. 
(2)	Criteria. The designation of an exceptional tree shall be based upon evaluation of the tree in relation to one or more of the following criteria: 
a.	The tree is demonstrated to have an association with a documented historical event, or is located on a historic site. 
b.	The tree has unusually high aesthetic value. 
c.	The tree is of unique character because of its age, species, variety, location, or because of the size and development of its crown, trunk, or main stem. 
d.	The designation of an exceptional tree shall also meet all of the following criteria: 
1.	The tree is free of disease, pests, and other serious injury; 
2.	The tree has a life expectancy of more than ten years; 
3.	The tree is free from structural defects which would present a hazard to the public. 
(Ord. of 7-6-2010, § 5-107(8)) 
Secs. 16-585—16-601. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TREE PROTECTION REQUIREMENTS AND TREE ESTABLISHMENT 

Sec. 16-602. - Protection of preserved or planted trees. 
Tree protection zones shall be established and maintained on the site for all trees, preserved or planted, for which tree quality points are to be claimed. The provisions of this division apply to such zones and the trees within them. 
(Ord. of 7-6-2010, § 5-108(a)) 
Sec. 16-603. - Tree protection plan. 
A tree protection plan and details shall accompany all applications for the land-clearing and/or land-disturbing activities identifying where and how existing trees are to be protected during clearing and construction of the project. Such plan and details shall be approved by the administrator upon a finding that the plan adequately addresses the criteria set forth in the landscape and tree ordinance manual. 
(Ord. of 7-6-2010, § 5-108(a)(1)) 
Sec. 16-604. - Tree protection zone. 
(a)	The minimum dimension of the tree protection zone shall be the area of the critical root zone. The tree protection zone shall be surrounded at a minimum by four-foot temporary chainlink fencing as illustrated in the specifications and standards in the landscape and tree ordinance manual. 
(b)	For planted trees, the following tree protection standards and requirements shall apply: 
MINIMUM TREE PROTECTION ZONE 

 
(Ord. of 7-6-2010, § 5-108(a)(2), (a)(11)) 
Sec. 16-605. - Contingency planting plan. 
If a determination is made by the administrator that 75 percent of the tree quality points for a site are to be provided by one or more mature trees of greater than 30-inch DBH, a contingency planting plan shall be required. The contingency plan will include locations where trees can be planted for tree quality points (TQPs) credit in the event of the loss of retained trees. 
(Ord. of 7-6-2010, § 5-108(a)(3)) 
Sec. 16-606. - Water infiltration requirement. 
The area within any tree protection zone must remain open and unpaved. The use of perforated pavers or other surface allowing water infiltration may be allowed subject to the approval of the administrator. 
(Ord. of 7-6-2010, § 5-108(a)(4)) 
Sec. 16-607. - Restrictions and prohibitions. 
(a)	No root raking shall be allowed within any tree protection zone at any time during clearing, grading, or construction of the project. 
(b)	No trenching shall be allowed within any tree protection zone at any time during clearing, grading or construction of the project. 
(c)	No vehicle shall be parked, or construction material stored, or substances poured or disposed of or placed within any tree protection zone at any time during clearing, grading or construction of the project. 
(d)	No change in grade within the tree protection zone shall be allowed around existing trees except for a maximum addition of two inches of mulch unless approved by the administrator. 
(e)	To the extent possible, all site work shall be planned and conducted in a manner that will minimize damage to protected trees from environmental changes such as lowered water table, altered site drainage, or any other land disturbance within or immediately adjacent to the critical root zone of the trees. 
(f)	Tree wells or tree walls (islands) shall be constructed as needed to protect preserved trees from grade changes which result in changes of water supply to the tree protection zone. Adequate means for drainage of excess moisture from the tree protection zone shall be provided if tree wells or tree walls are constructed. 
(Ord. of 7-6-2010, § 5-108(a)(5)—(8)) 
Sec. 16-608. - Planting restrictions. 
(a)	No tree shall be planted closer to a building foundation, underground utility line, or storm drain as follows: 
(1)	Five feet for a small trees. 
(2)	Ten feet for a mature medium tree. 
(3)	Ten feet for a large tree; however, the distance from building foundations shall be 15 feet. 
(b)	No large or medium tree species shall be planted within any power or utility easements or under overhead utility distribution lines if the average mature height of the tree is greater than the lowest overhead wire. 
(Ord. of 7-6-2010, § 5-108(b)) 
Sec. 16-609. - Irrigation requirements. 
Except as provided for herein, irrigation shall be provided for tree protection zones in the following manner: 
(1)	All trees and landscaped areas shall be provided with a means for delivery of water in a quantity that is sufficient to establish and maintain the viability of the plants. A permanent water source shall be installed not less than 100 feet from each tree protection zone, but shall not encroach more than 12 inches into any tree protection zone. The minimum permanent water source permissible under these provisions shall be a hose bib capable of delivering a minimum of three gallons/minute. 
(2)	In-ground irrigation systems installed which supply water to all newly planted trees and plant material shall result in a 20-percent reduction of the landscape establishment bond. 
(3)	A water supply is not required for areas of established trees and other vegetation that are retained for greenspace requirements or tree quality points, provided that site grading or development activities will not result in damage to said areas. 
(Ord. of 7-6-2010, § 5-108(c)) 
Sec. 16-610. - Protection of public trees adjacent to land-development activities. 
(a)	A property owner responsible for any land-disturbing activity within proximity to the critical root zone of a tree located on city/county property shall provide for the protection of such tree to the standards described in these regulations. All work on rights-of-way requires a permit. 
(b)	A property owner responsible for a land-disturbing activity that causes damage to a tree which affects the health or growth of such tree, or requires removal of such tree, shall compensate the city for such tree loss or damage as set forth in subsection (c) of this section. 
(c)	The administrator shall establish the tree quality points for the removed or damaged tree. The property owner responsible for the land-disturbing activity which caused the removal or damage to such tree shall compensate the city for such tree loss or damage under the following options, subject to the approval of the administrator: 
(1)	Plant or preserve additional trees on the development site that equal or exceed the value of tree quality points that were assessed for the removed or damaged tree. 
(2)	Plant trees on adjacent rights-of-way to equal or exceed the value of tree quality points that were assessed for the removed or damaged tree. 
(3)	Make payment to the tree fund that equals or exceeds the value of the tree quality points that were assessed for the removed or damaged tree. 
(4)	Meet any equivalent combination of the above as approved. 
(d)	Upon approval by the administrator of the method for compensating the city for the subject tree loss, the owner shall submit a revised tree protection and tree establishment plan which incorporated the approved tree compensation plan to the administrator for approval. 
(Ord. of 7-6-2010, § 5-108(d)) 
Sec. 16-611. - General protection of trees on city rights-of-way. 
(a)	Unless otherwise permitted by an applicable permit or license, no person shall trim, prune, or remove any tree on public property without procuring the written approval of the administrator. 
(b)	No person shall plant any tree or shrub on the right-of-way without written approval or without meeting the requirements for such planting published by the administrator. 
(c)	No person shall cause damage to trees on rights-of-way or other public property. Damage is defined as cutting, carving, attaching any rope, wires, nails, signs or other object to any such tree or allowing any harmful gas, liquid, or solid substance to contact any tree or to set fire or permit any fire to burn which may injure any portion of any tree or causing unnecessary harm to tree roots through construction activities, vehicle parking, or material storage. 
(d)	Any removal or damage to trees on rights-of-way is subject to compensation as provided in 16-610(b). 
(Ord. of 7-6-2010, § 5-108(e)) 
Secs. 16-612—16-640. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - STANDARDS, SPECIFICATIONS, AND CALCULATION OF TREE QUALITY POINTS 

Sec. 16-641. - Planted trees. 
(a)	All large trees, except for conifers, must be at least 2½-inch caliper to qualify for tree quality points when planted on the site. 
(b)	All coniferous trees and all medium trees must be a minimum of two-inch caliper to qualify for tree/landscape quality points when planted on the site. 
(c)	All small trees must be a minimum of one-inch caliper to quality for tree quality points when planted on the site. 
(d)	For palms, two tree quality points will be assigned per foot of stem height up to ten feet, regardless of whether the tree is preserved or planted on the site. 
(e)	All planting of new trees shall be done in accordance with ANSI A-300-1995 or the most recent edition. 
(f)	All trees and plant materials shall conform to the most recent edition of the American Standard for Nursery Stock by the American Association of Nurserymen. 
(g)	A detailed list of qualifying species and their points is provided in the landscape and tree ordinance manual. 
(Ord. of 7-6-2010, § 5-108(f)(1)) 
Sec. 16-642. - Retained trees. 
(a)	All individual preserved trees must be at least four inches DBH, and have a form and structure that will support a viable mature tree to qualify for tree quality points. The tree quality points (TQPs) credit will at a minimum be equal to the points for a planted tree of the same species. 
(b)	Quality points from trees retained on the site are directly related to the tree species quality and tree protection zone that must be provided for the tree. Tree quality points are calculated by the formula as follows: 
(DBH) 2 × (Retention Points Factor) = Tree Quality Points 
(c)	The retention factor for each tree species can be found in the landscape and tree ordinance manual. 
(d)	Trees located on public rights-of-way which have a significant portion of canopy extending over a commercial property can be applied toward TQP as follows: 
TQP value of public trees x percentage of canopy encroachment = the point value 
(e)	Tree quality points and landscape quality points for retained stands of trees. The preservation of mature native stands of trees and understory vegetation may have the value of 1,600 tree quality points/acre and 400 landscape quality points/acre of preserved area, providing compliance with the following: 
(1)	The area proposed for preservation must be approved by the administrator and must have sufficient quantity, size, and quality of mature trees to warrant preservation. 
(2)	All existing vegetation shall be left within the preserved stand with the exception of hazardous trees. Thinning of tree stands will be allowed pursuant to an approved plan created under the supervision of a registered forester or certified arborist. No mechanical clearing of underbrush shall be allowed unless authorized by the administrator. 
(3)	The area shall be protected during the construction period using the same standards and specifications as required for a tree protection zone. 
(4)	The tree retention area shall be considered a set-aside and shall be shown within a permanent recorded tree conservation easement. 
(Ord. of 7-6-2010, § 5-108(f)(2)) 
Sec. 16-643. - Landscape material. 
(a)	Woody ornamental or native shrubs shall be a minimum of three-gallon container size, fully rooted, and appropriately sized to the container. Vines and ground cover material may be full one-gallon size. 
(b)	Small trees used for landscape quality points (LQPs) shall be a minimum of one-inch caliper. 
(c)	Qualified species and LQP values are listed in the landscape and tree ordinance manual. 
(Ord. of 7-6-2010, § 5-108(f)(3)) 
Secs. 16-644—16-674. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - TIMBER HARVESTING AND OTHER REMOVALS 

Sec. 16-675. - Applicability. 
All properties, other than those zoned and used for agricultural activities, which propose timber harvesting or clear cutting shall comply with the provisions in this division unless exempted by O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17. 
(Ord. of 7-6-2010, § 5-109(a)) 
Sec. 16-676. - Permit and plan required. 
(a)	Permit required for timber harvest. A land-clearing permit is required prior to the timber harvest. 
(b)	Plan required for timber harvest. A plan for development of the land and a harvest plan shall be reviewed and approved by the Liberty Consolidated Planning Commission (LCPC) prior to the issuance of a timber harvesting/land-clearing permit. 
(Ord. of 7-6-2010, § 5-109(b)(1), (2)) 
Sec. 16-677. - Reforestation and tree protection standards. 
A minimum of 1,600 tree quality points per developable acre shall remain on the parcel after the timber harvest utilizing one or more of the following methods: 
(1)	Residual stands of trees. Tree quality points may be given to residual stands of trees which are existing on the site and are protected during the harvesting process. 
(2)	Buffer areas. Tree quality points may be given to trees located within buffer areas. 
(3)	Reforestation areas. Where the site is to be used for continual timber growth or silviculture, such land shall be considered a reforestation area. In order to comply with the provisions of this section, a tree establishment plan shall be submitted. This shall consist of the establishment of native tree seedlings using traditional forestry methods and best management practices. A minimum of 600 seedlings per acre shall be planted on the site by the end of the first planting season following the timber harvest. A minimum survival rate of 350 trees per acre will be maintained after the first complete growing season. 
(4)	Tree establishment plan. If an insufficient number of tree quality points are left on the site following the timber harvest, a tree establishment plan shall be submitted to the administrator showing the location of the trees to be planted, their species, size, and tree quality point listing. 
(Ord. of 7-6-2010, § 5-109(b)(3)) 
Sec. 16-678. - Underbrushing procedures. 
The administrator may approve underbrushing and removal of trees or other vegetation up to two inches in diameter upon finding that sufficient tree cover exists such that the removal of such trees will not limit or prevent compliance with other requirements of this article. 
(Ord. of 7-6-2010, § 5-110) 
Secs. 16-679—16-699. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - GREENSPACES 

Sec. 16-700. - Greenspace standards for all proposed development; plan required. 
A greenspace plan shall be submitted for all commercial, industrial, or multifamily development. Such plans shall conform to the standards and requirements of these regulations and the following: 
(1)	A minimum of 20 percent of the total land area of the development shall be devoted to greenspace. 
(2)	Sidewalks, curbing, or any other paved or impermeable surfaces within the greenspace shall not count towards the 20-percent minimum greenspace requirement. 
(3)	For all sites of one acre or larger, no more than 45 percent of trees planted shall be of the same species in order to increase species diversity. 
(4)	Existing groups of trees shall be retained wherever possible. 
(Ord. of 7-6-2010, § 5-111(intro.)) 
Sec. 16-701. - Locations for planting/preserving trees and landscaping. 
Street trees may be preserved within the front yard development setback, provided they can be placed within a tree easement established pursuant to the subdivision regulations, and such tree does not conflict with any existing utility, drainage or other easements. Understory and canopy trees may also be preserved and/or planted in the front yard development setback area. 
(Ord. of 7-6-2010, § 5-111(b)) 
Sec. 16-702. - Parking areas. 
(a)	A minimum of 1,200 tree quality points per acre of the parking area in canopy trees shall be planted and/or preserved within landscaped islands and medians located between parking bays. Landscape quality points may also be planted in these areas. 
(b)	Canopy trees planted in parking islands shall have 400 square feet of unpaved soil for root development. The standard tree island shall be 20 feet by 20 feet; provided, however, that where the islands are an extension of a ten-foot wide landscape median, the islands may be reduced in width to 16 feet. Islands shall not be separated by more than 12 parking spaces, including the landscaped ends of the drive aisles. Islands shall be designated so as to minimize foot traffic across them. 
(c)	The parking island requirement may be altered to minimize conflicts with lighting or to accommodate innovative design, provided that total area of unpaved area and number of trees is maintained. 
(Ord. of 7-6-2010, § 5-111(c)) 
Sec. 16-703. - Buffers. 
Existing and/or planted canopy, understory trees, and planted evergreen shrubs may be incorporated into buffer areas. Such planting shall be credited for quality points provided that other standards and requirements of this article are met. 
(Ord. of 7-6-2010, § 5-111(d)) 
Sec. 16-704. - Landscaping standards. 
(a)	Landscape quality points requirement. The required 400 landscape quality points per acre shall be provided through the planting of small/medium trees, shrubs, vines, and/or ground cover. 
(b)	Locations for landscape quality points. Such plantings may be located in the following areas: 
(1)	Front yard development setback. 
(2)	Parking areas, islands, and medians. 
(3)	Buffers. 
(4)	Areas adjacent to buildings. 
(Ord. of 7-6-2010, § 5-111(e)) 
Sec. 16-705. - Special cases. 
(a)	Insufficient space for trees on site. If the required tree quality points cannot be met on site due to lot size and allowable building setback, trees shall be planted off site or payment made to the tree fund. Off-site planting location or payment must be approved by the administrator. 
(b)	Insufficient space for landscaping on site. If the required landscape quality points cannot be met on site due to lot size and allowable building setback, payment shall be made to the tree fund. 
(c)	Car/boat/trailer sales lots. The requirement of canopy cover in the outdoor display, sales and storage areas may be waived for such uses only if the requirements have been met elsewhere on the site. The required 400 landscape quality points per acre, however, shall be provided in this area to break up large expanses of pavement. 
(1)	Employee and customer parking areas shall be clearly delineated to separate them from outdoor display, sales and storage areas. Such parking areas shall provide 1,200 tree quality points per acre in canopy trees and 400 landscape quality points per acre in landscaping. 
(2)	Porous paving may be used within outdoor display, sales and parking areas to provide root growth area for new and existing trees. 
(d)	Cellular phone towers. Due to the size and location of many cellular tower sites, it is often impracticable to plant the required landscaping on the site; therefore, the administrator may approve any of the following alternatives: 
(1)	Planting large canopy trees within the front yard setback along the roadways if there are no conflicting utility locations. The required tree and landscape quality points may be combined together to provide tree quality points for the site; 
(2)	When utilities or site constraints do not allow planting within the front yard setback, plantings may be approved off-site at other locations within the immediate neighborhood. Trees may be planted either in the street right-of-way where there are not utilities or in street easements on private property, or 
(3)	When there are no viable locations either on site or within the immediate vicinity, a contribution may be made to the tree fund. 
(e)	Stormwater detention areas. Where planting within a stormwater detention area will help it function more efficiently and help make the detention area more visually attractive, such plantings are permitted subject to the following conditions: 
(1)	The centerline of the swale of a storm drainage easement shall remain free of debris and plantings with the exception of grasses or ground cover material which stabilizes the bare soil. This area shall be maintained so that the flow of water is not impeded. Plantings of shrubbery and trees shall be maintained at a distance of a minimum of ten feet or as approved by the administrator from the centerline of the swale so as to keep the area clear for water flow; 
(2)	The area immediately surrounding drainage structures including but not limited to grates, inlets, and weirs shall be kept free from plantings and mulch to keep debris from clogging the structures and impeding the flow of water. All trees and shrubs shall be maintained at a distance of a minimum of ten feet from such structures; 
(3)	All trees in the immediately surrounding area of a stormwater detention area shall be kept a minimum distance of ten feet from the centerline of the basin, or one-third the width of the basin floor, whichever is greater; 
(4)	Shrubbery shall be excluded from the basin floor and banks. Shrubs may be planted at the top of the basin where there is no likelihood of the root balls lifting out of the ground when the basin is filled with water; and 
(5)	Species of vegetation to be planted in or near detention basins and drainageways are to be reviewed and approved by the administrator. 
(Ord. of 7-6-2010, § 5-111(f)) 
Sec. 16-706. - Design requirements for single-family residential subdivisions. 
(a)	Common area requirements. Planted street trees and 1,600 tree quality points (TQPs) in retained and/or planted trees in common areas are required. Canopy street trees shall be planted within the right-of-way or in tree easements if sufficient right-of-way space is not available. 
(1)	Such trees shall be no less than 2½ inches in caliper at time of installation. 
(2)	Trees shall be planted an average of 50 feet apart, along all street frontages within the subdivision. 
(3)	Each planted street tree shall have a value of 90 tree quality points. 
(4)	For new arterial and collector streets that are within the overall development but do not have residential lots abut onto them, a plan must be submitted providing for the planting of canopy trees on both sides of the street spaced at an average of 75 feet apart. 
(5)	The tree species for each street must be approved by the administrator. 
(6)	1,600 tree quality points per developable acreage shall also be planted or retained in all areas outside of the street right-of-way that are not developed as lots (e.g. stormwater detention/retention areas, recreational areas, parks, other set-asides, etc.). 
(7)	Upon approval, the developer may pay to the tree fund an amount equal to the cost of purchase and installation of the required trees, and the trees will be planted by the city or its designee after completion of the subdivision, or the developer may enter into a contract to plant the trees secured by an appropriate bond. 
(b)	Requirements for utilities crossing in the tree easement. Utilities crossing the tree easement shall be located outside of the critical root zone of trees unless otherwise approved by the administrator. Utility locations shall allow for the unobstructed planting of street trees at an average of 50 feet apart (ranging between 40 to 60 feet apart). 
(c)	Existing trees. Existing trees for which tree quality points are sought shall be protected, and may be counted towards tree quality points, within set-aside areas, in common areas, in buffers, or elsewhere as approved by the administrator, provided that they are protected prior to clearing. 
(d)	Trees within set-aside areas. Existing and/or planted trees within set-aside areas as defined by this article may count towards the 1,600 tree quality points/developable acreage requirement if they meet all other requirements of this section. 
(Ord. of 7-6-2010, § 5-111(g)) 
Secs. 16-707—16-725. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - LAND CLEARING 

Sec. 16-726. - Permit application requirements. 
Applications for permits for land-clearing activities shall be submitted by the landowner or an authorized agent on a form provided for this purpose which includes all required information. Such application shall be submitted to the LCPC along with all required attachments. Each land-clearing activity permit application shall include general notes, data items, plans, and other documents as long as clarity is maintained. Completed applications shall be transmitted to the administrator for review and approval. 
(Ord. of 7-6-2010, § 5-112(1)(a)(1)) 
Sec. 16-727. - Project description and plans. 
Project description and plans shall include: 
(1)	Purpose of the requested permit; 
(2)	Plan showing existing and proposed land uses, buildings, parking, and other pertinent elements of development; 
(3)	A boundary survey which shall include the location of all easements, building setback lines, and nearby zoning district boundaries; 
(4)	Anticipated starting and completion dates for each phase of the project; 
(5)	A location map at a scale of one inch equals 1,500 feet or larger, showing the location of the property within the city. 
(Ord. of 7-6-2010, § 5-112(1)(a)( 2)) 
Sec. 16-728. - Phasing of a project. 
If a tract is to be developed in phases, a separate permit shall be required for each phase as appropriate. Requirements for tree quality points (TQPs) and landscape quality points (LQPs) must be met for each phase. 
(Ord. of 7-6-2010, § 5-112(1)(a)(3)) 
Sec. 16-729. - Time limit on approval. 
A permit shall be valid for 12 months. In the event that the permittee has not begun the permitted work within 12 months, the permit shall lapse and a new permit must be obtained before work can begin. Once work has begun under a valid permit, the permittee may continue the permitted work until the work is completed. Any permit, including grandfathered projects, will automatically lapse after 12 months of inactivity, unless the developer has obtained an extension from the administrator. 
(Ord. of 7-6-2010, § 5-112(1)(a)(4)) 
Sec. 16-730. - Denial of a permit. 
If a permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant in writing. 
(Ord. of 7-6-2010, § 5-112(1)(a)(5)) 
Sec. 16-731. - Waivers. 
The administrator may waive the requirement for one or more of the plans listed in section 16-727 upon finding that three or fewer trees are being proposed for removal, no grading is to occur, and such removal will not be contrary to the purpose of these regulations. 
(Ord. of 7-6-2010, § 5-112(1)(a)(6)) 
Sec. 16-732. - Permit procedures. 
(a)	Commercial, industrial, institutional or multifamily development. Permit procedures for land clearing for commercial, industrial, institutional or multifamily development are as follows: 
(1)	A predevelopment site visit shall be scheduled between the owner/agent and the administrator. This meeting may be waived by the administrator at the request of the owner. 
(2)	The owner or developer shall submit a tree survey, the tree protection, tree establishment plans, and the landscape plans together with other required drawings for review by the administrator. 
(3)	All landscape and tree planting plans for sites over one acre shall be prepared by professionals with competency in landscape design. 
(4)	The preparer of the landscape, tree establishment and tree protection plans, and the land-clearing permit applicant shall show evidence of having attended a workshop to review the provisions of these regulations if one is available. 
(5)	The owner/developer shall coordinate the location of utilities with the utility companies and the administrator prior to the issuance of a land-clearing permit. If there is a potential tree and utility conflict, a new tree establishment plan and/or tree protection plan shall be submitted to the administrator, showing the new proposed utility locations or tree locations. 
(6)	A preconstruction meeting shall be scheduled among the owner, agent, contractors, appropriate LCPC staff, and the administrator prior to issuance of land-clearing permits. This meeting shall establish the location of temporary buildings or trailers, temporary utilities, installation of tree protection and erosion control devices, storage of materials, etc. Forty-eight hours notice shall be given to schedule the site visit. 
(7)	Tree protection shall be installed by the owner/agent and inspected by the administrator prior to issuance of a land-clearing permit. 
(b)	New single-family residential subdivision developments. Permit procedures for land clearing for new single-family residential subdivision developments are as follows: 
(1)	A land-clearing permit is required as a prerequisite for clearing rights-of-way, lots, common areas, and drainage and utility easements in a new residential development. In order to obtain a land-clearing permit for lots, rights-of-way and easements, a greenspace plan, including a tree survey for all common areas (e.g., park areas, detention areas, etc.) shall accompany each preliminary plan for review. Such plan shall conform to the standards and requirements of these regulations. 
(2)	A predevelopment site visit shall be scheduled between the owner/agent, and the administrator. This meeting may be waived by the administrator 
(3)	The developer shall submit a tree survey for all common and set-aside areas, including stormwater detention/retention ponds and a tree protection plan. In addition, the developer must show how the required amount of tree quality points is to be met for the common areas of the subdivision or phase of subdivision (i.e. areas not subdivided into lots and not part of the street rights-of-way) for which the land-clearing permit is sought. This may be shown on a separate greenspace plan or on one of the other construction drawings and shall be submitted to the administrator for review. The greenspace plan shall show the total amount of street trees, and how the amount of tree quality points for set-asides, park areas, stormwater detention/retention areas, and other common areas are to be met. 
(4)	Tree protection for set-asides and for trees proposed to be preserved in common areas and for any other tree proposed to be preserved, where clearing is to occur shall be installed by the developer and inspected by the administrator prior to issuance of a land-clearing permit. 
(Ord. of 7-6-2010, § 5-112(2), (3)) 
Secs. 16-733—16-764. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - VISUAL BUFFERS, SCREENING, AND FENCES 

Sec. 16-765. - Applicability. 
Buffers shall be provided as set forth in this division to effectively protect all property from the adverse effects of adjacent land use activity of a more intensive (dissimilar) nature where such activity may result in nuisance, including visual blight, threat to safety, or noise or odor encroachment to an adjacent parcel or one located across a public right-of-way. 
(Ord. of 7-6-2010, § 5-113(a)) 
Sec. 16-766. - Buffer plan required. 
A buffer plan shall be submitted with all applications for building permits, occupancy permits, or site plan approvals for development of a site for which a buffer element is required in this division. The buffer plan shall show in detail the layout of the proposed development, including the arrangement of buildings, parking areas, and permanent open spaces. The plan shall also show the location of proposed buffers, including a detailed description or sketch of such buffer materials to be used, including a provision for a water source within 50 feet of the buffer and landscaping areas. 
(Ord. of 7-6-2010, § 5-113(b)) 
Sec. 16-767. - One-family detached residential buffer requirements. 
Buffers shall be provided as described in this section to protect one-family detached residential property (including one-family developed and undeveloped property zoned for residential use). The buffer types indicated for each circumstance are described in section 16-772. 
(1)	A type "A" buffer shall be required where a one-family detached residential property is adjoined by multifamily residential or by semidetached or end row dwellings or manufactured homes. 
(2)	A type "B" buffer shall be required where a one-family detached residential property is adjoined by institutional or nonretail commercial activity, including religious facilities, hospitals, care homes, public and private schools, day care facilities and kindergartens, banks, professional offices, and other uses of a like nature as determined by the administrator. 
(3)	A type "C" buffer shall be required where one-family detached residential property is adjoined by lodging facilities or convenience or general retail commercial activity not accompanied by outside storage of goods or products or the service/repair of vehicles. Examples of uses within this category include motels, clothing stores, specialty shops, restaurants, foodstores and drugstores, laundromats, furniture stores, department stores, auto parts stores, auto filling stations, and other uses of like nature as determined by the administrator. 
(4)	A type "D" buffer shall be required where a one-family detached residential property is adjoined by uses such as auto repair and paint shops, motorcycle sales and service, auto upholstery shops, sale or rental of autos, trucks, boats or trailers, mini-warehouses, drive-in restaurants, cocktail lounges, nightclubs, package stores and uses of a like nature. 
(Ord. of 7-6-2010, § 5-113(c)(1)(a)) 
Sec. 16-768. - Multifamily residential buffer requirements. 
Buffers shall be provided as described below to protect multifamily residential property (including multifamily developed and undeveloped property zoned for multifamily residential use). The buffer types indicated for each circumstance are described in section 16-772. 
(1)	A type "B" buffer shall be required where multifamily residential property is adjoined by institutional or nonretail commercial activity, including religious facilities, hospital and care homes, and public and private schools, day care facilities, and kindergartens, banks and professional offices, and activities of a like nature as determined by the administrator. 
(2)	A type "C" buffer shall be required where multifamily residential property is adjoined by lodging facilities or convenience/general retail commercial activity not accompanied by outdoor storage of goods, products, or the service or repair of vehicles. Examples of uses within this category include motels, clothing stores, specialty shops, restaurants, foodstores and drugstores, laundromats, furniture stores, department stores, auto parts stores, auto filling stations, and other uses of a like nature. 
(3)	A type "D" buffer shall be required where multifamily residential property is adjoined by uses such as auto repair and paint shops, motorcycle sales and service, auto upholstery shops, sale or rental of autos, trucks, boats or trailers, mini-warehouses, drive-in restaurants, cocktail lounges, nightclubs, package stores and uses of a like nature. 
(Ord. of 7-6-2010, § 5-113(c)(1)(b)) 
Sec. 16-769. - Nonresidential service and storage area buffer requirements. 
A type "E" buffer shall be provided where outdoor storage and salvage yards, outdoor vehicle repair and service areas, wrecker storage compounds, and uses of a similar nature, both principal and accessory, adjoin other properties with a dissimilar land use classification or where such uses abut a public right-of-way. Trees planted with a type "E" buffer shall be staggered to achieve a degree of opacity that prevents clear recognition of the use. All trees and shrubs within the buffer shall be of evergreen variety. Supplemental planting of evergreen vegetation may be required within preserved buffers so that the use is not clearly distinguishable through the buffer. 
(Ord. of 7-6-2010, § 5-113(c)(1)(c)) 
Sec. 16-770. - Manufacturing and industrial buffer requirements. 
A type "F" buffer shall be required where any type of manufacturing or industrial use adjoins other properties with a dissimilar land use classification or where such use abuts a public road right-of-way. Trees planted within a type "F" buffer shall be staggered to achieve a degree of opacity that prevents clear recognition of the use. All trees and shrubs within the buffer shall be of the evergreen variety. Supplemental planting of evergreen vegetation may be required within preserved buffers so that the use is not clearly distinguishable through the buffer. 
(Ord. of 7-6-2010, § 5-113(c)(1)(d)) 
Sec. 16-771. - Off-street parking lot buffer requirements. 
A type "G" buffer shall be required where a parking lot containing four or more parking spaces adjoins other properties or where a parking lot abuts a public or private road right-of-way. 
(Ord. of 7-6-2010, § 5-113(c)(1)(e)) 
Sec. 16-772. - Buffer types; minimum standards. 
The following table contains the minimum standards for the various buffer types. Under each major type are options available to a developer. Some options include more than one element (e.g., according to the table below a type "A" buffer may be a six-foot-high fence with a five-foot planted buffer or a six-foot-high hedge in a ten-foot-wide planted buffer or a 20-foot-wide preserved buffer. 

 
(Ord. of 7-6-2010, § 5-113(c)(1)(f)) 
Sec. 16-773. - Design standards. 
(a)	Fences and walls in buffers. The design of a fence or wall shall be a similar architectural style and materials as the principal building or buildings on the lot. 
(1)	Except where otherwise allowed by these regulations, any fence or wall shall be opaque so as to prevent the passage of light and debris, and shall be constructed of textured or split-faced block, brick, stone, stucco over concrete block, architectural tile, decay-resistant wood, or similar opaque materials. Decay-resistant wood includes wood that is naturally decay resistant (e.g., cedar, cypress, redwood) or wood that has been chemically and/or mechanically treated (e.g., chromate copper arsenate (CCA) to a retention rate such that the manufacturer provides a guarantee against decay for 40 years. 
(2)	Unfinished concrete block shall not be permitted. Chainlink or wire fences shall be permitted within nonresidential zoning districts to buffer similar uses provided that plant material is planted immediately behind or in front of the fence. 
(3)	The height of a fence or wall shall not exceed eight feet. Fences and walls shall be interrupted at intervals not exceeding 25 feet by architectural features such as pilasters or columns or by various species of plants that are at least as tall as the fence or wall or taller. The fence or wall shall be set back not less than five feet from the property line unless otherwise approved by the LCPC. The height of a fence or wall shall be measured from the finished grade at the base of the fence or wall to the top of the fence or wall, but shall not include columns or posts. 
(b)	Hedges. For newly established hedges, plants shall be a minimum of three feet in height. The area between the property line and the hedge shall be grassed and well maintained. 
(c)	Vegetative buffers. In general, the purpose of a vegetative buffer is to achieve a degree of opacity that prevents clear recognition of the use being buffered. There shall be no encroachment of structures or paving within the area designated as a buffer. 
(1)	Trees. Trees shall be planted in conformance with requirements of this article. Standards for the size, planting, protection, and care of trees planted within a required buffer shall conform to the requirements of this division regardless of whether tree quality points are requested for the trees. 
(2)	Shrubs. Shrubs shall be planted in conformance with the requirements of the land- disturbing and tree protection regulations. Standards for the size, planting, protection, and care of shrubs planted within a required buffer shall conform to the requirements of this division or the landscape and tree ordinance manual regardless of whether landscape quality points are requested for the shrubs. 
(3)	Preserved stands of vegetation within buffers. Preserved stands of mature trees within buffers shall also conform to the requirements of this division. The acceptability of mature stands of trees as a buffer shall be determined by the administrator in conformance with the provisions of this division regardless of whether tree or landscape quality points are requested for the stands; provided, however, that selective hand clearing of underbrushing may be permitted if approved. 
(4)	Other fences. In general, a wall or fence shall not exceed six feet in height unless specifically permitted or unless specifically requested by this division. Under no circumstances shall a fence in the front yard be located parallel to the right-of-way that is higher than four feet. 
(Ord. of 7-6-2010, § 5-113(c)(1)(g)) 
Secs. 16-774—16-799. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - REQUIREMENTS FOR CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY, MAINTENANCE, AND PERPETUAL COMPLIANCE 

Sec. 16-800. - Final inspection. 
The administrator shall make a final inspection of trees and landscaping for completeness prior to issuance of the certificate of occupancy. The total required tree quality points and landscape quality points shall match the approved plan. Any changes must be shown on an as-built plan. 
(Ord. of 7-6-2010, § 5-114(1)(a)) 
Sec. 16-801. - Temporary tree and landscape bond. 
(a)	The owner shall post a temporary tree and landscape bond for tree and/or landscape installation which cannot be planted because of continued construction, weather, plant availability, or other approved delay. The bond shall be posted. At the same time, a deadline for the completion of work shall be scheduled with the administrator. 
(b)	The administrator shall make a final inspection of the trees and landscaping at the scheduled completion of work. If work has been completed, the temporary tree and landscape bond shall be refunded. If the landscaping is not complete at the scheduled deadline, the temporary tree and landscape bond shall be withheld based on the amount of work incomplete. 
(Ord. of 7-6-2010, § 5-114(1)(b)) 
Sec. 16-802. - Two-year tree and landscape establishment bond. 
(a)	A two-year tree and landscape establishment bond equal to the value of 50 percent of the tree quality points shall be posted with the LCPC after the administrator gives an approval of the trees and landscaping at the final inspection and prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy. 
(b)	Two years after the date of the bond, the administrator will inspect the site and make a determination of whether the required trees and landscaping are viable, in which case the bond will be released. If deficiencies are found, the owner of the property shall be notified to correct the deficiencies within 90 days. If the deficiencies are not corrected in 90 days, the city shall use the bond to the extent necessary to bring the property into compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 7-6-2010, § 5-114(1)(c)) 
Sec. 16-803. - Continuing obligation for maintenance. 
(a)	All trees and landscaping credited toward tree quality points or landscaping quality points shall be maintained according to industry standards. 
(b)	Any damage or injury occurring to a preserved tree by determination of the administrator sufficient to cause the tree to die within five years or develop into an irreparable hazard tree shall be removed and shall lose tree quality points. Any tree so removed from the site shall be replaced with a tree of equal or greater tree quality points. 
(c)	Damage not considered to be fatal to a preserved tree by the administrator but considered hazardous to the public shall immediately be repaired and shall result in a proportional decrease in tree quality points where applicable. Assessment of damage and repair shall be made by the administrator. 
(d)	The property owner shall be solely responsible for watering and fertilizing trees and landscaping to maintain plants health and vigor. Failure to maintain the required points on the property shall be a violation of this article. 
(Ord. of 7-6-2010, § 5-114(1)(d)) 
Sec. 16-804. - Perpetual compliance. 
All sites are required to remain in compliance with the total tree quality points (TQPs) and landscape quality points (LQPs) required for development and are subject to inspection by the city for this purpose. If deficiencies are found, the owner of the property shall be notified to correct the deficiencies within 90 days. If the deficiencies are not corrected in 90 days, the city will seek administrative or judicial relief as appropriate. 
(Ord. of 7-6-2010, § 5-114(1)(e)) 
Chapter 18 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION 
(RESERVED) 
Chapter 20 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— General municipal authority for health and welfare, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-4; state health care and planning, O.C.G.A. § 31-6-1 et seq.; county boards of health, O.C.G.A. § 31-3-1 et seq.; smoke-free air, O.C.G.A. § 31-12A-1 et seq.; smoking prohibited in local government buildings, O.C.G.A. § 31-12A-2; promulgation of rules, regulations and standards by department of human resources and county boards of health, O.C.G.A. § 26-2-373; power of county board of health to adopt and enforce rules and regulations of local application, O.C.G.A. § 31-3-6. 

Sec. 20-1. - Adoption of county health department rules and regulations. 
The city adopts the rules and regulations of the Liberty County, Georgia, Health Department as fully as if set forth in full in this chapter. A copy of the county health department rules and regulations shall be available in the office of the city clerk. 
Sec. 20-2. - Administration and enforcement. 
The provisions of the county health department rules as adopted herein shall be enforced by the city's code enforcement personnel and may, to the same extent, be enforced by the county health department within the geographical limits of the city. 
Chapter 22 - LAW ENFORCEMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Law enforcement generally, O.C.G.A. § 35-1-1 et seq.; compensation of law enforcement officers on commission basis prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-9; dispatch centers to have trained communications officers on staff, O.C.G.A. § 36-26-19. 

Sec. 22-1. - Memorandum of understanding with county. 
Pursuant to a memorandum of understanding entered into between the city and the county, the county provides certain services for the city, including law enforcement services through the county sheriff's department. 
Chapter 24 - NUISANCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Nuisances generally, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-1 et seq.; jurisdiction of municipal and magistrate courts regarding nuisances, O.C.G.A. § 41-12-5; misdemeanor nuisances, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-6; placement of posters, signs, and advertisements on public or private property, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-58; abatement of nuisances generally, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7 et seq.; dogs as nuisances, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-7; unlawful junkyards as nuisances, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-246. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 24-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Building means any structure or part thereof, not a dwelling as defined in this section. 
Dwelling means any building or structure, or part thereof, used and occupied for human habitation or intended to be so used, and including any outhouses and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith. 
Inspector means the building and health inspector of the city. 
Junk means wornout or discarded material having little or no value, including, but not limited to, household appliances or parts thereof, tools, discarded building material or any other unsightly debris, the accumulation of which has an adverse affect upon a neighborhood's health, safety or general welfare. 
Junk motor vehicle means any automobile, motorcycle or other motor-operated transportation device which: 
(1)	Has been discarded, dismantled, wrecked, scrapped, or ruined. 
(2)	Does not have a valid registration. 
(3)	Is not fully intact due to such missing parts or deflated tires. 
(4)	Is for some other reason in an inoperable, nonrunning condition. 
Junk motor vehicle parts means any discarded automobile parts not currently in use on an operable vehicle with a current tag and vehicle tag registration; including, but not limited to, any motors or component parts, doors, hoods, trunk lids, windshields, tires, wheels, seats, and any and all other similar automobile parts. 
Nuisance means any affirmative act, omission or failure to act, or course of conduct which causes or creates a hazard, disturbance, interruption or condition which materially affects the health, tranquility, welfare or quiet enjoyment of the citizens of the city. Specific nuisances, such as buildings, junk cars, vegetation or similar occurrences, may be defined in other portions of this Code. 
Occupant means any person over eight years of age living, sleeping, cooking or eating in, or having actual possession of, a dwelling. 
Owner means the holder of a fee simple title to real or personal property and every trustee or mortgagee as shown by the public records. 
Parties in interest means all individuals, associations and corporations who have an interest of record in a dwelling or building or who are in possession thereof. 
Public records means deeds, deeds of trust, security deeds and other instruments of record in the county clerk's office and any and all other pertinent records used to determine what persons could have any interest in the real property in question. 
Standard codes means the laws, regulations and minimum standards adopted by the Southern Building Code Congress International, Inc., 1984 National Electrical Code, Fire Prevention Codes and any other codes which promote the safety and welfare to the public with respect to the construction and maintenance of buildings and dwellings within the city as presently published or as hereafter may be from time to time amended, modified or otherwise changed. 
Structural alterations means any change, except for repair or replacement, in the supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders. 
Undeveloped property means any property that has not been improved or maintained by the construction or installation of a building, residence, or any other structural improvements. 
Sec. 24-2. - Abandoned appliances, furniture, vehicles, and other items. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to have in that person's possession or under that person's control upon any premises owned or occupied by that person, which premises are frequented by or accessible to children for playing or other purposes, the items set forth as follows: 
(1)	Any icebox, refrigerator or similar device, abandoned or not being put to the use for which it was intended, which is equipped with any lock or locking device by which the door on such icebox, refrigerator or similar device, when closed, cannot be opened from the inside, or which impedes or makes more difficult the opening of the door from the inside thereof. 
(2)	Any motor vehicle, abandoned or not being put to the use for which it was intended, which is equipped with any lock or locking device by which the windows or doors on the vehicle when closed, cannot be opened from the inside, or which impedes or makes more difficult the opening of the door from the inside thereof. 
(3)	Any household or kitchen appliances that have been abandoned or are not being put to the use for which they were intended, including, but not limited to, clothes washers and dryers, dishwashers, bathtubs, water heaters, toilets, air conditioning or heating units, stoves, ovens, microwave ovens, and other similar such appliances, if said items are physically located or placed outside any structure on the property. 
(4)	Any household furniture customarily intended for indoor use that has been abandoned or is not being put to the use for which it is intended, including, but not limited to, chairs, sofas, couches, loveseats, entertainment centers, desks, tables, or other similar such furniture items, if said items are physically located or placed outside any structure on the property. This subsection (4) shall not include porch or patio furniture, or other furniture customarily placed on the exterior of a residence or other structure. 
(b)	The items set forth in subsections (a)(1)—(4) of this section shall be considered nuisances as a matter of law. 
(c)	The inspector, code enforcement officer, or their agents or designees shall have authority to issue citations or file petitions in the municipal court, if one is established pursuant to authority granted in the city Charter, or to the designated county court of competent jurisdiction for violations of this section. 
State Law reference— Similar provision, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-100. 
Sec. 24-3. - Disposal of fecal matter, dead animals, tainted meat, waste and similar matter. 
It shall be unlawful to place or throw or cause another to place or throw, in or upon any street, or public or private property of another, any dead bird or animal, tainted meat, decayed fruits or vegetables, human or other excrement. Such conditions shall be considered nuisances as a matter of law. Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit the discharge of human excrement into the sewer system of the city, or the placing of the above-named objects in suitable containers at curbside for garbage pickup. 
Sec. 24-4. - Obstruction of natural flow of water. 
Any person who shall, by the erection of a dam or other obstruction, prevent the natural flow of water, causing it to collect in pools upon any lot or in any street or alley, or who shall allow any such dam or obstruction to continue on any property owned or controlled by him, after knowledge of its existence, or who shall do or cause to be done any work the effect of which will be to cause the damming up or collection of water in pools, shall be guilty of the offense of maintaining a nuisance, and such action shall be unlawful. This section shall not prevent persons owning or controlling property from filling up such lots as they may desire, if sufficient draining is provided across such lots for such natural flow. This section shall not prevent such change of the grade of any street as may be for the public interest. 
Sec. 24-5. - Pollution of water. 
It shall be a nuisance per se and shall be unlawful for any person to keep a slaughterhouse, pen, stockyard or other similar activity on any property within the city which drains or could pollute any public water supply or to knowingly dispose of waste, rubbish or other matter directly into an open or flowing body of water. 
Sec. 24-6. - Storage of malodorous commodities. 
It shall be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance to keep uncured hides or other malodorous commodities to the annoyance of any citizen or to keep such within 300 yards of the dwelling or place of business of any citizen of the city. 
Sec. 24-7. - Obnoxious gases or odors. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to burn in any furnace, grate, boiler, fireplace or upon any open land within the limits of the city any substance containing rubber, zinc, lead, sulfuric acid or any other substance which emits poisonous or obnoxious gases, fumes or smoke. Such conduct shall be considered a nuisance as a matter of law. This section shall not be construed so as to prohibit the burning of those substances within an enclosed structure, provided those gases, fumes or smoke are not allowed to escape from the enclosure in which those substances are burned in a state which would pollute the air or is harmful or injurious to the health and welfare of the citizens of the city. 
Sec. 24-8. - Wells, cisterns, pits, and holes to be covered, enclosed or filled. 
(a)	The maintaining upon the premises by the owner or any person occupying such premises of wells, cisterns, pits and other holes in the earth where such are not securely covered or enclosed shall constitute a nuisance, and it shall be the duty of all persons owning or occupying those premises within the city to keep those wells, cisterns, pits and other holes in the earth on such premises securely covered or enclosed, so as to prevent injury therefrom to the person or property of others. 
(b)	Old and unused wells shall be filled by the owners or agents in charge of the property upon which the wells are located. It shall be the duty of the inspector to give notice as provided in this article to any person having such a well to abate it. 
State Law reference— Abatement of hazard from abandoned well or hole, O.C.G.A. § 44-1-14. 
Sec. 24-9. - Junk motor vehicles and motor vehicle parts. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for the owner, occupant or tenant of any lot, tract or premises in the city to suffer, permit or allow any junk motor vehicle or vehicle parts to be parked, abandoned or maintained upon the property. It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to cause or maintain such a junk motor vehicle or vehicle parts to remain upon the real property or upon the property of another. 
(b)	No junk motor vehicle shall be in such a condition as to constitute a health hazard or an unsightly nuisance, notwithstanding the fact that such junk vehicle may be located upon private property. Any such vehicle shall constitute a public nuisance per se, except that it shall not be a nuisance to maintain, in an otherwise lawful manner: 
(1)	Any motor vehicle in an enclosed building. 
(2)	Any motor vehicle on the premises of a business enterprise operated in a lawful manner, when necessary to the operation of such business enterprise. 
(3)	Any motor vehicle on property occupied and used for repair, reconditioning and remodeling of motor vehicles in conformance with the zoning regulations of the city. 
(4)	Any motor vehicle that is properly maintained as an antique vehicle pursuant to any laws or regulations of the state governing such vehicle. 
(c)	Except in circumstances where the public health and safety requires summary abatement before the designated court, the inspector shall give written notice to the owner of the vehicle or the person in possession, charge or control of the real property that, in the opinion of the inspector, the vehicle meets the definitional requirements of a junk motor vehicle and that a nuisance has been created by such responsible party. Upon such lawful notice being given, the procedures contained in this article, and as generally provided in article III of this chapter, shall control the potential abatement of the alleged nuisance. 
State Law reference— Authority to provide by ordinance for removal and disposal of junked vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-4; when police officers may remove vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-206; abandoned motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1 et seq.; removal of improperly parked cars, O.C.G.A. § 44-1-13. 
Sec. 24-10. - Certain loitering constituting a nuisance. 
It shall be unlawful and it is hereby declared to be a nuisance for any person to remain or loiter upon any premises to which the public has access, including, but not limited to, such premises as shopping center parking lots, church parking lots, service station parking lots, private business establishment parking lots, and private individuals' driveways within the city between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. if the person's presence upon the premises is unrelated to the normal activity, use or business for which the premises are made available to the public, and when: 
(1)	The owner of the premises has made a written request and limited dedication of his premises to the city that the provisions of this section be enforced as to his premises; and 
(2)	The owner of the premises has erected signs on his premises giving notice to the public in substantially the following form: 
"No parking or loitering is allowed on these premises between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. by order of the City of Riceboro." 
State Law reference— Adoption of ordinances proscribing loitering or related activities, O.C.G.A. § 16-6-24. 
Sec. 24-11. - Defacing property; graffiti. 
No person shall post or put up any indecent placard, writing or picture or write any indecent or immoral words or make any indecent pictures or drawings, any of which may be morally offensive to modesty and delicacy, on any public or private building, wall, fence, sign, monument, post, sidewalk or pavement, in any of the streets or public places of the city. 
Secs. 24-12—24-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NOISE 

Sec. 24-41. - General prohibitions. 
Subject to provisions of this article, the creating of any unreasonably loud, disturbing and unnecessary noise in the incorporated area of the city is prohibited. Noise of such character, intensity or duration as to be detrimental to the life or health of any individual, or in disturbance of the public peace and welfare is prohibited. 
(Ord. of 6-7-1994, § 1) 
Sec. 24-42. - Specific prohibitions and restrictions. 
The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises in violation of this article, but this enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive: 
(1)	Blowing horns. The sounding of any horn or signal device on any automobile, motorcycle, bus, or other vehicle while not in motion except as a danger signal if another vehicle is approaching, apparently out of control, or if in motion, only as a danger signal after or as brakes are being applied and deceleration of the vehicle is intended; the creation by means of any such signal device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound; and the sounding of such device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time. 
(2)	Radios, phonographs, etc. The playing of any radio, phonograph, or any musical instrument or sound device, including but not limited to loudspeakers or other devices for reproduction or amplification of sound, either independently of or in connection with motion pictures, radio or television, in such a manner or with such volume, particularly during the hours between 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort, or repose of persons in any office or hospital, or in any dwelling, hotel, or other type of residence, or of any person in the vicinity. 
(3)	Yelling, shouting, hooting, etc. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, or singing on the public streets, particularly between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. or at anytime or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort, or repose of any persons in any hospital, dwelling, hotel, or other type of residence, or of any persons in the vicinity. 
(4)	Use of vehicle. The use of any automobile, motorcycle, streetcar, or vehicle so out of repair, so loaded, or in such a manner as to cause loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling, or other noise. 
(5)	Blowing whistles. The blowing of any steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler, except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a warning of fire or danger, or upon request of property city authorities. 
(6)	Exhaust discharge. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, motor vehicle, or boat engine, except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom. 
(7)	Noises near schools, hospitals, churches, etc. The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any hospital or adjacent to any school, institution of learning, church, or court, while in session. 
(8)	Noises to attract attention. The use of any drum, loudspeaker or other instrument or device emitting noise for the purpose of attracting attention to any performance, show, or sale, or display of merchandise, unless a permit for the use of such device shall have been obtained under the regulations hereinafter provided. 
(9)	Loudspeaker or amplifiers on vehicles. The use of mechanical loudspeakers or amplifiers on trucks or other moving or standing vehicles for advertising or other purposes, unless a permit for the use of such device shall have been obtained under the regulations hereinafter provided. 
(Ord. of 6-7-1994, § 2) 
Sec. 24-43. - Exemptions; permits. 
(a)	The reasonable use of amplifiers, loudspeakers, drums, or other instruments or devices emitting noise for the purpose of any public address or for the purpose of attracting attention to any performance, show, sale or display of merchandise shall be permitted providing a permit therefor is secured from the mayor or city clerk. 
(b)	An application for the use desired shall be submitted in writing to the city clerk, which application shall set out the nature of the noise-making activity, the purpose thereof, the places where the activity is to be carried on, and the dates and hours during which the use is to be made. 
(c)	The mayor or city clerk shall act upon each application so submitted, and shall, before granting a permit, place such restrictions upon the use as to the extent, hours and location as to prevent undue annoyance to the public or any resident. 
(d)	The mayor may, in his discretion, authorize the issuance of certain types of permits by the city clerk without the application being referred to the mayor, but in the case of any doubt, the city clerk shall await action by the mayor before issuance of a permit. 
(e)	It shall be unlawful to use any device or to create any undue noise in violation of the terms of any permit issued under this section. 
(Ord. of 6-7-1994, § 3) 
Secs. 24-44—24-74. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES 

Sec. 24-75. - Jurisdiction; summary abatement. 
(a)	Any judge of a municipal court established by the city under the authority of the city Charter and any judge of a county court of competent jurisdiction in which an action is brought pursuant to this chapter shall have the power to order the removal, abatement, demolition, fine or other appropriate judicial remedy of those things which are declared either by this article, state law or federal law to be nuisances, or which are nuisances per se, and from their nature indisputably are so. 
(b)	Summary abatement without notice to the owner thereof shall only occur where the nuisance is of imminent and serious danger to the health, safety or general welfare of the citizens of the city and the owner or occupant cannot be notified. 
Sec. 24-76. - Procedures; notice provisions; actions concerning abatement. 
(a)	Except in urgent circumstances involving nuisances per se, where the public health and safety require an immediate hearing or a summary abatement,, the inspector shall give written notice of any alleged nuisance within the city as follows: 
(1)	By delivery to the owner, occupant and parties in interest personally, or by leaving the notice at the usual place of abode of the owner, occupant or parties in interest with a person of suitable age and discretion. 
(2)	By depositing the notice in the United States Post Office addressed to the owner, occupant or parties in interest at the last known address of the owner, occupant or parties in interest, with postage prepaid thereon. 
(3)	By posting and keeping posted for 24 hours a copy of the notice in a conspicuous place on the premises, or at the general location of the nuisance. 
(b)	Any written notice to the owner, occupant, parties in interest or person in possession, or person in charge or control of any property, area, or other location within the city where a nuisance exists, shall state the opinion of the inspector as to the conditions which exist upon the location that constitute a nuisance. The inspector shall set forth all violations of this article, the standard codes or other applicable matters so as to fully outline the objectionable conditions. 
(c)	The notice shall further state a time, if any and a manner if applicable, in which objectionable conditions may be removed. Further, the inspector may, in the case of an alleged nuisance concerning buildings and dwellings, provide in the notice a statement of the repairs which, in the opinion of the inspector, are necessary to eliminate the objectionable conditions and request that such repairs be made according to the applicable standard building codes. 
(d)	The notice shall further state that unless the repair, removal or other action required is voluntarily made within the time specified, the inspector shall cause summons and a complaint to be issued requiring the party notified to appear in the municipal court, if one has been established by the city pursuant to authority granted in the city Charter, or to appear in the designated county court of competent jurisdiction, to determine whether the alleged violation in fact constitutes a nuisance and should be abated. 
(e)	The summons and complaint shall be personally served upon residents of the state in accordance with the Georgia Civil Practice Act, O.C.G.A. § 9-2-1 et seq. The return of such sheriff or other lawful deputy, or the affidavit of a citizen, that such parties were served either personally or by leaving a copy of the complaint or orders at the parties' usual place of abode with a person of suitable age and discretion shall be conclusive as to service. 
(f)	Nonresidents of the state shall be served by publishing the same once each week for four weeks in a newspaper printed and published in the city. A copy of such complaint and summons shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the property affected by the complaint or summons. A copy of such complaint and summons will also be filed in the proper offices for the filing of lis pendens notices in the county in which the property is located and such filing of the summons and complaint shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices provided by law. Where the address of such nonresident is known, a copy of such complaint or orders shall be mailed to him by registered or certified mail along with a copy of the notice. 
(g)	If either the owner, occupant or any party in interest living within the state is a minor or an incompetent person or person laboring under legal disabilities and the minor or insane person has a guardian or personal representative, the minor or incompetent person shall be served along with the guardian or personal representative as provided in subsection (e) of this section. If such minor or incompetent person or person laboring under legal disabilities has no guardian or personal representative, service shall be perfected as provided in subsection (e) of this section if a resident of the state and subsection (f) of this section if a nonresident of this state. In addition to subsection (e) of this section, the summons and complaint shall also be served upon the judge of the probate court of the county wherein the nuisance exists, who shall stand in the place of and protect the rights of the minor or insane person or appoint a guardian ad litem for such persons. 
Sec. 24-77. - Court appearance; hearing; actions to abate nuisance. 
(a)	If the inspector shall determine that any of the conditions set forth in this article constituting a nuisance exist in any location within the corporate limits of the city and have not been abated after written notice, then notice of appearance before the municipal court of this city shall be given by the inspector, and summons to the owner, occupant or parties in interest shall be given as set forth in the notice provisions of this article. 
(b)	The hearing shall be conducted at a time and in a manner provided for by the judge of the municipal court. The judge shall have the power and authority to make findings concerning whether certain conditions exist and whether they constitute a nuisance or otherwise violate the provisions of this article, this Code or applicable state or federal laws. The judge shall have the authority to abate the nuisance by ordering, in writing, that action he deems appropriate to be taken to abate the nuisance, upon the recommendation of the inspector. He shall further have the right to set such time limitations concerning the abatement or removal of the nuisance as may be proper. 
(c)	In addition to the other penalties or provisions of this section, the judge shall have the authority to consider violations of this article to be offenses punishable as provided in section 1-11. For each day that an order of the municipal court is violated, this shall constitute and be considered a separate offense by which fine and/or imprisonment may be considered by the court in order to enforce its orders of abatement of nuisances. 
(d)	Upon the adjudication by the judge of the municipal court that a nuisance exists, and notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, if the owner or the person in possession of the property has not abated the nuisance after the expiration of five days from the date of the adjudication by the judge of the municipal court, or five days after the date given by the judge for abatement, then the inspector may thereafter cause the nuisance to be abated and the objectionable conditions to be removed from the property. The inspector shall be authorized to charge the cost and expense thereof to the owner of or the person in possession. 
(e)	The cost to the city in abating nuisances, court costs in connection with all hearings conducted under this section, or any other expenses occasioned by the abatement of a nuisance shall be paid out of the general funds of the city and charged to property owners for such nuisance abatement and must be repaid to the general fund. The city manager or his designee shall cause an execution to be issued against the owner or other person for the charges, and shall further have the authority to place a lien upon the property, file a claim with the city or county court having jurisdiction of the matter, or otherwise proceed with any and all lawful manners of collection of any charges adjudicated by the court for abatement of nuisances, fines, costs or related expenses. 
Chapter 26 - OFFENSES[1] 
(RESERVED) 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal home rule, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; crimes generally, O.C.G.A. § 16-1-1 et seq.; maximum penalties that may be imposed by municipalities, O.C.G.A. §§ 36-35-6, 36-32-1, 36-32-5; additional penalties and bond in certain criminal and traffic cases, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-73; authority to impose community service as punishment, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-1; alternative sentences by municipal courts, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-5; powers of municipal court judges in criminal cases, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-3; jurisdiction of municipal court, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-6 et seq. 

Chapter 28 - PARKS AND RECREATION 
(RESERVED) 
Chapter 30 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Solid waste management generally, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.; Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-9-1; hazardous waste management, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-79; local and regional solid waste plans, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-31.1; tire disposal restrictions, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-40.1; yard trimmings and disposal restrictions, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-40.2; authorization for local government units to enforce collection of taxes, fees, or assessments for solid waste management, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-39.3; authority of local governments to adopt and enforce local regulations for the handling and disposal of solid waste, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-30.9; Litter Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-40; transporting garbage or waste across state or county boundaries pursuant to contract, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-16; Resource Recovery Development Authorities Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-63-1 et seq.; littering highways, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-249. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 30-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Ashes means the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke or other combustible materials. 
Building material means any material such as lumber, roofing material, brick, concrete block, plaster, gutters, sand, gravel or other substances used in repairs or alteration of existing buildings, construction of new buildings, or demolition of existing structures. 
Bulk container means a metal container of not less than four cubic yards, not larger than eight cubic yards, watertight, with a lid opening on top and constructed so that it can be emptied mechanically by specially equipped trucks used by the county. The bulk containers, while in service and use, shall be equipped with a lid or cover. 
Commercial solid waste means all types of solid waste generated by stores, offices, restaurants, warehouses and other nonmanufacturing activities, excluding residential and industrial wastes. 
Commercial user means any person having a business operation and a city utilities facility for use, regardless of the manner of the arrangement of the business location thereof within any structure or building. Each separate business, as herein stated, shall be considered a separate user of the city system for which a minimum charge as set forth by section 30-23(c) shall be assessed. 
Composting means the controlled biological decomposition of organic matter into a stable, odor-free humus. 
Customer means, for the purpose of establishing a utility service charge, each dwelling unit, which shall be charged a minimum bill as set forth in this chapter. 
Director means the principal officer responsible for enforcement of this chapter. 
Disposal site means an area, location, tract of land or a facility used or intended to be used for the disposal of solid waste, putrescible waste, hazardous waste or other waste, except it shall not include the land or facility used for the disposal of solid waste or other waste from a single-family dwelling in which the owner, occupant, or lessee of such land or facility resides. 
Dwelling unit means living quarters occupied by a single family such as an apartment, duplex unit, separate rooms set aside in a structure, or a single dwelling unit, or any similar living arrangement. 
Garbage means the byproduct of animal or vegetable food resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food or other matter which is subject to decomposition, decay, putrefaction or the generation of noxious or offensive gases or odors, or which during or after decay may serve as breeding areas or feeding material for flies, insects or animals. 
Hazardous refuse means materials such as poison, acids, caustic matter or solutions, chemicals, infected materials, offal, fecal matter, explosives, sewage sludge, radioactive materials and highly flammable substances. 
Household trash means every waste accumulation of paper, sweepings, dust, rags, bottles, cans or other matter of any kind, other than garbage, which is usually attendant to housekeeping. 
Industrial waste means all waste including solids, semi-solids, sludges and liquids, created by factories, processing plants or other manufacturing enterprises. 
Junked vehicles means and includes any wrecked or inoperable automobile, truck or other vehicle, or a vehicle which does not bear a current license plate or a current inspection sticker. 
Leachate collection system means a system at a landfill for collection of the leachate which may percolate through the waste and into the soils surrounding the landfill. 
Litter means all garbage, refuse, waste material, sand, gravel, slag, brickbats, rubbish, tin cans, trash, debris, dead animals or any other discarded, used or unconsumed substance which is not handled in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
Loading and unloading area means a space or area used by any moving vehicle for the purpose of receiving, shipping and transporting goods, wares, commodities and persons. 
Municipal solid waste means any solid waste derived from households, including garbage, trash and sanitary waste in septic tanks, and includes solid waste from single-family and multifamily residences, hotels and motels, bunkhouses, campgrounds, picnic grounds, and day-use recreation areas. The term "municipal solid waste" includes yard trimmings and commercial solid waste, but does not include solid waste from mining, agricultural or silvicultural operations or industrial processes or operations. 
Municipal solid waste disposal facility means any facility or location where the final deposition of any amount of municipal solid waste occurs, whether or not mixed with or including commercial or industrial solid waste, including but not limited to municipal solid waste landfills. 
Municipal solid waste landfill means a disposal facility where any amount of municipal solid waste, whether or not mixed with or including commercial waste, industrial waste, nonhazardous sludges or small quantity generator hazardous waste, is disposed of by means of placing an approved cover thereon. 
Reclamation means a controlled method of sorting and storing solid waste for future use in accordance with an approved procedure. 
Recycling means the process by which reclaimed resources are transformed into new products in such a manner that the original products may lose their identity. 
Refuse means all putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes, except body wastes, including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned vehicles and appliances and solid market and industrial wastes. 
Refuse receptacle means a Poly Kart or other receptacle as approved by the city. 
Rubbish means nonputrescible solid wastes, excluding ashes, consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, wood, glass, bedding, crockery and similar materials. Tree trimmings not longer than five feet in length and not more than five inches in diameter shall be classified as rubbish. 
Scavenge or scavenging means unauthorized or uncontrolled retrieval of discarded refuse materials. 
Small dead animals means cats, dogs, small household pets and other animals of similar size having a weight of less than 50 pounds. 
Tree and shrubbery trimmings means waste accumulation of tree limbs, parts of trees, bushes, shrubbery cuttings or clippings, or other natural waste. 
Yard trimmings means leaves, brush, grass clippings, shrub and tree prunings, discarded Christmas trees, nursery and greenhouse vegetative residuals, and vegetative matter resulting from landscaping development and maintenance, other than mining, agricultural and silvicultural operations. 
(Ord. of 10-6-1992, §§ 1.1, 3.1; Ord. of 10-2-1996, § 1.1) 
Sec. 30-2. - Penalty for violation. 
Any person violating this chapter may be held liable in damages, and the recovery shall be in a sum of not less than $110.00, nor more than $550.00, for each violation. The city attorney may institute a proceeding in any court having jurisdiction thereof to collect such civil penalty. 
(Ord. of 10-6-1992, § 3.2.5) 
Secs. 30-3—30-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 30-23. - Collections standards. 
(a)	Generally. All refuse accumulated in the city shall be collected, conveyed, and disposed of as expressly authorized in this chapter. No person shall collect, convey over any streets or alleys of the city or dispose of any refuse accumulated in the city, except as otherwise expressly authorized herein or as allowed by pertinent and appropriate actions of the mayor and city council. 
(b)	Fees. Fees, rates and charges for the collection services outlined in this article shall be as provided in the city fee schedule. 
(c)	Night collection. Should the best interest of the public be served by collection of refuse from certain areas in the city at night, the city shall make such collections, or authorize such collections to be made. The occupants of all residences or places of business within the designated area shall be notified of the hours of such collection. All persons so notified shall comply with such order and shall place the containers as designated within such hours. 
(d)	Landlord's responsibility. All garbage charges to a complex of apartments, houses, mobile homes or businesses will be billed to the landlord of the property, and the landlord shall be responsible to the city for payment of assessed charges. 
(Ord. of 10-6-1992, § 3.2) 
Sec. 30-24. - Private collection. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to collect refuse within the city, except from his own residence, business or industrial plant, without first having obtained a proper permit from the state department of natural resources and the city, and without first having obtained a city business license. 
(Ord. of 10-6-1992, § 3.3) 
Sec. 30-25. - Receptacles and containers required. 
Every person in possession, charge or control of any building from which business trash, industrial waste or other waste is accumulated or produced shall be required by this article to provide and keep in a suitable place, readily accessible to the city or county collection crews or other licensed private collector, receptacles and containers suitable for the storage of all such waste materials which will normally accumulate between the established collection dates. The director shall determine the quantity and location of such receptacles and shall determine whether such receptacles and containers are in a serviceable condition. 
(Ord. of 10-6-1992, § 3.4) 
Sec. 30-26. - Receptacles and containers to be safe. 
All receptacles and containers, as required by section 30-25, shall be of solid construction and design and shall be maintained in good, orderly and serviceable condition at all times. Any receptacle or container which does not conform to the requirements of section 30-25 or which has ragged or sharp edges or any other defects likely to hamper or injure the person collecting the contents therefrom, or the public generally, shall be promptly replaced by the user thereof. If such container, after appropriate notice, has not been replaced, the director shall have the right to suspend further collection of such waste material until such time as the container is brought into compliance with this article. 
(Ord. of 10-6-1992, § 3.5) 
Secs. 30-27—30-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 30-56. - Responsible agency. 
The beautification-clean community commission or its director, or any inspector designated by the director, shall: 
(1)	Investigate complaints or violations of any provisions of this article. 
(2)	Determine if there has been a violation and initiate an attempt to obtain compliance with this article by the person in violation thereof. 
(Ord. of 10-6-1992, § 3.2.1) 
Sec. 30-57. - Initiation of complaint. 
The director or his designated inspector shall be authorized to sign a complaint or issue a summons against a violator of this article. 
(Ord. of 10-6-1992, § 3.2.2) 
Sec. 30-58. - Civil remedies. 
In case of any violation of this article, the director, with the approval of the city attorney, in addition to any other remedies, may institute injunction, mandates, or other appropriate proceedings to prevent such violation, or to correct or abate such violation. 
(Ord. of 10-6-1992, § 3.2.3) 
Sec. 30-59. - Suspension of service. 
Upon appropriate notice to the person violating this article, the director may suspend any service or the use of any facility maintained by the city during the period such violation continues to exist. 
(Ord. of 10-6-1992, § 3.2.4) 
Secs. 30-60—30-76. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PRECOLLECTION PRACTICES 

Sec. 30-77. - Preparation required. 
The practices and procedures specified in this division shall be employed by the persons in the city in order to facilitate the collection of solid wastes. 
(Ord. of 10-6-1992, § 3.3.1) 
Sec. 30-78. - Refuse. 
All refuse shall be placed and maintained in containers as specified in this article. All containers shall be maintained at all times with tightfitting lids or covers. 
(Ord. of 10-6-1992, § 3.3.2) 
Sec. 30-79. - Garbage. 
All garbage placed in containers for collection shall first be drained of all liquids, and shall be wrapped, bagged, or enclosed in paper or plastic material. 
(Ord. of 10-6-1992, § 3.3.3) 
Sec. 30-80. - Household trash. 
All household trash shall be drained of all liquids prior to its being placed in refuse receptacles. Household trash may be combined with garbage. 
(Ord. of 10-6-1992, § 3.3.4) 
Sec. 30-81. - Injurious trash items. 
All waste material of an injurious nature, such as broken glass, light bulbs, sharp pieces of metal, fluorescent tubes and television tubes, shall be securely packaged or wrapped for the purpose of preventing injury to the collection crews or other third parties. 
(Ord. of 10-6-1992, § 3.3.5) 
Sec. 30-82. - Hazardous refuse and building materials. 
No hazardous refuse or building materials shall be placed in any receptacle at any time, unless such refuse is to be disposed of by the person packaging such refuse. The city shall not be required to collect any hazardous refuse or building materials. All hazardous refuse shall be secured against the possibility of causing injury to any person and shall not be placed on public property or private property without the written consent of the owner thereof. 
(Ord. of 10-6-1992, § 3.3.6) 
Sec. 30-83. - Yard trash; tree and shrubbery trimmings. 
(a)	Yard trash, leaves, and tree and shrubbery trimmings shall not be collected by the city. 
(b)	Tree and shrubbery branches, limbs and trimmings cut by landscape or tree service contractors or other commercial workmen or resulting from land being cleared shall not be collected by the city, but shall be collected and removed by those who have performed the work or shall be removed by the person for whom the work was performed. 
(c)	It shall be unlawful to place or mix yard trimmings with other collectable wastes. 
(Ord. of 10-6-1992, §§ 3.3.7—3.3.9; Ord. of 10-2-1996, § 1.2) 
Sec. 30-84. - Household furniture and furnishings. 
Upon request, the city shall collect normal household furniture and appliances, including sofas, chairs, beds, refrigerators, washers, dryers, hot water heaters and similar items, but not including furnaces. Persons requesting this service shall be notified by the city as to the date collection will occur. The city shall have the right to set and collect a fee for this service. 
(Ord. of 10-6-1992, § 3.4) 
Sec. 30-85. - Prohibited activities. 
The following activities are hereby declared to be unlawful and in violation of this article: 
(1)	Public streets and private property. No person shall place any accumulations of refuse and trash in any street, median strip, alley or other public place of travel, nor upon any private property, except with the written consent thereof and then only in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(2)	Blockage of drainage. No person shall place any refuse, trash, refuse receptacles, or containers on, over or near any storm drain or drainage ditch, or so close thereto as to cause such material to interfere in any way with such drainage. 
(3)	Unauthorized storage. Any accumulation of refuse or trash items on any lot, property, premises, public streets, alley or other public or private place not permitted by this article, is hereby declared to be a nuisance. Failure of owner or occupant to remove and correct any such accumulation of refuse after appropriate notice from the director shall raise the presumption that such person intended to violate this article. 
(4)	Junk. It shall be unlawful for any person to place or leave outside any building or dwelling, except as specified in this article, any dilapidated furniture, appliance, machinery, equipment, building material, junked motor vehicle or other items which are in a partially rusted, wrecked, junked, dismantled, missing one or more essential or customary parts, or inoperative condition, and which are not completely enclosed within a building or dwelling. Any such items which remain on the property of the occupant for a period of 30 days after notice of violation of this article shall be presumed to be abandoned and subject to being removed from the property by the city without further notice. The city may charge the owner or occupant a fee for the cost of removing such items. This subsection shall not apply to licensed junk dealers or currently licensed establishments engaged in the repair, rebuilding, reconditioning, or salvaging of equipment or furniture. 
(5)	Scavenging. No person, other than the owner thereof or an agent or employee of the director, shall disturb or interfere with any container used for the purpose of storing refuse, pending its collection, remove any contents therefrom, or remove such container from its collection site. 
(6)	Use of streets. It shall be unlawful for any vehicle transporting loose materials on any street, road, right-of-way, etc., to transport same without suitable covers securely fastened to the vehicle. This subsection shall not apply to the transportation of poultry, livestock, silage or other feed grain used in the feeding of poultry or livestock. 
(Ord. of 10-6-1992, § 3.4.1) 
Secs. 30-86—30-113. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - COLLECTION PRACTICES 

Sec. 30-114. - Residential. 
Garbage and household trash accumulated by residences shall be collected at least once each week. Fees for such collection shall be based on the number of receptacles placed for collection. 
(Ord. of 10-6-1992, § 5.1) 
Sec. 30-115. - Commercial establishments. 
Service to commercial establishments will be provided on a schedule which is provided by the director. Such collections shall be limited to a maximum of two refuse receptacles per collection or the standard bulk container. 
(Ord. of 10-6-1992, § 5.2) 
Sec. 30-116. - Industrial waste. 
Industrial waste shall be collected, removed and disposed of by any factory, plant or enterprise creating or causing such waste. 
(Ord. of 10-6-1992, § 5.3) 
Sec. 30-117. - Hazardous refuse. 
No hazardous refuse shall be placed in any receptacle used for collection of refuse by the city or county. 
(Ord. of 10-6-1992, § 5.4) 
Sec. 30-118. - Dead animals. 
Small dead animals will be collected by the city during operating hours of the county landfill, provided the body is appropriately wrapped and is located in an area readily accessible to the collector. Owners of large dead animals shall be responsible for their removal and disposal. 
(Ord. of 10-6-1992, § 5.5) 
Sec. 30-119. - Building materials. 
The city shall not be responsible for the collecting preliminary to, during or subsequent to the construction of a new building, alterations or additions to an existing building of whatever type, or from demolition of existing structures. Such material shall be removed by the owner of the property or the contractor. 
(Ord. of 10-6-1992, § 5.6) 
Secs. 30-120—30-136. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENTS 

Sec. 30-137. - Storage measures followed for refuse, debris reduction. 
All commercial establishments shall store their refuse in containers, as specified in this article, so as to eliminate wind-driven debris and unsightly litter in and about their establishments. Approved methods of containerization shall include refuse receptacles, bulk containers and detachable containers. Any spillage or overflow shall be immediately cleaned up by such establishments. 
(Ord. of 10-6-1992, § 4.1) 
Sec. 30-138. - Loading and unloading areas. 
(a)	All loading and unloading areas shall be provided with refuse receptacles for loose debris, paper, packaging materials and other trash. The owner or occupant of the commercial establishment shall place a sufficient number of containers in such areas to maintain a clean, neat and sanitary condition at all times. The number of such containers to be placed in service for a particular establishment shall be set by the director. 
(b)	The occupant of the premises shall maintain surveillance to ensure that all litter is placed in the proper container and the area is kept clean. If the occupant violates this section, collection service may be suspended by the director until such time as the owner or occupant of the premises brings such premises into full compliance with the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. of 10-6-1992, § 4.2) 
Sec. 30-139. - Parking lots. 
(a)	All parking lots and establishments with parking lots shall provide refuse receptacles within the parking area. The director shall have the authority to determine the number and types of receptacles necessary to provide property containerization. Such receptacles shall be weighted or attached to the ground as necessary to prevent spillage. It shall be the responsibility of the owner or his agent to collect the refuse and trash deposited in such containers and store this material in a location until collected by the city or county. 
(b)	It shall be the obligation of all persons using the parking areas to place any litter in receptacles or containers, and it shall be unlawful for any person to dump, scatter or throw on any parking lot any refuse, garbage or trash of any kind. 
(Ord. of 10-6-1992, § 4.3) 
Sec. 30-140. - Construction and demolition sites. 
(a)	All construction and demolition contractors shall provide on-site refuse receptacles, bulk containers or detachable containers for loose debris, paper, building material waste, scrap building materials and other trash produced by those working at the construction site. The site shall be kept in a litter-free condition. 
(b)	The number of refuse receptacles (not to exceed four) or bulk containers, or detachable containers, shall be determined by the size of the job. Dirt, mud, construction material or other debris upon any public or private property belonging to a person other than the owner of the construction site shall be removed by the contractor upon completion of the construction. 
(Ord. of 10-6-1992, § 4.4) 
Secs. 30-141—30-163. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - SPECIAL REFUSE DISPOSAL 

Sec. 30-164. - Contagious disease refuse. 
The removal of clothing, bedding or other refuse from some or other places where highly infectious diseases have prevailed shall be decontaminated prior to removal under the supervision and direction of the county health department. Such refuse shall not be placed in receptacles or bulk containers for collection until decontaminated. 
(Ord. of 10-6-1992, § 6.1) 
Sec. 30-165. - Hypodermic instruments. 
No person shall dispose of or discard any hypodermic needle or any instrument or device for making hypodermic injections before first breaking, disassembling, destroying or otherwise rendering inoperable and incapable of reuse, such hypodermic syringe, needle, instrument or device, and without safeguarding the disposal thereof, by wrapping or securing same in a suitable manner so as to avoid the possibility of causing injury to the collection personnel. 
(Ord. of 10-6-1992, § 6.2) 
Sec. 30-166. - Cardboard boxes and cartons. 
Prior to depositing refuse for collection in authorized containers or receptacles or in commercial containers, the person disposing of any such boxes or cartons or the person in charge of the premises shall collapse all cardboard boxes and cartons. 
(Ord. of 10-6-1992, § 6.3) 
Secs. 30-167—30-185. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - DISPOSAL SITES 

Sec. 30-186. - Use authorized; regulations. 
All domestic and other acceptable refuse shall be delivered and deposited at authorized public disposal sites in accordance with the directions and orders of the director or his representative in charge of operations; except, however, privately operated sites may be used for the sanitary disposal of industrial wastes or other specified waste upon the approval of the director and upon the issuance of appropriate disposal permits, as required by the regulations of the state department of natural resources or the federal environmental agency. 
(Ord. of 10-6-1992, § 7.1) 
Sec. 30-187. - Designation of sites. 
(a)	Public sites approved for the disposal of refuse shall be identified by appropriate directional signs posted near the roadside and at the location of the county sanitary landfill. 
(b)	Such sites shall be maintained in use until permanently closed, at which time additional authorized sites shall be opened and publicized by posting and through public advertisements. 
(c)	The mayor and city council and the county board of commissioners may restrict certain sites or portions thereof to a specific type of refuse. 
(d)	Commercial collectors, including yard maintenance persons, may use the public designated sites. 
(Ord. of 10-6-1992, § 7.2) 
Sec. 30-188. - Operating schedule. 
Authorized public disposal sites shall be operated on a schedule as established by the county board of commissioners. During the hours designated, acceptable refuse generated in the city shall be received for disposal from any resident of the city. 
(Ord. of 10-6-1992, § 7.3) 
Sec. 30-189. - When use authorized; ownership of waste. 
No person shall enter a disposal site except when an attendant is present and during the hours and days prescribed in section 30-188. All materials delivered and deposited for disposal in a disposal site shall immediately become the property of the city. 
(Ord. of 10-6-1992, § 7.4) 
Sec. 30-190. - Scavenging prohibited. 
No person shall be permitted to scavenge or reclaim any refuse which has been delivered to a public disposal site for disposal. 
(Ord. of 10-6-1992, § 7.5) 
Sec. 30-191. - Classification of refuse for disposal. 
(a)	Domestic refuse. Garbage, business trash, refuse and household trash shall be classed as "domestic refuse" and shall be accepted for disposal. 
(b)	Industrial waste. Industrial and hazardous waste shall be classed as "industrial waste" and shall not be accepted for disposal. 
(c)	Building materials. Building materials may be accepted for disposal upon such terms and conditions as may be determined by the city and county. 
(d)	Recyclables. Materials for recycling shall be separated for storage at each disposal site. 
(Ord. of 10-6-1992, § 7.6) 
Sec. 30-192. - Permit required for private sites. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or permit to be deposited on land under his ownership and control any refuse without first having obtained a disposal area permit as required by any regulation of the state department of natural resources, the federal environmental protection agency and the city. 
(Ord. of 10-6-1992, § 7.7) 
Sec. 30-193. - General maintenance. 
It shall be the duty and responsibility of the owner of any private disposal site to keep the site in an orderly condition and maintained so as not to be a public nuisance or menace to public health. 
(Ord. of 10-6-1992, § 7.8) 
Sec. 30-194. - Right to enter to inspect. 
The director shall have the right to enter a private disposal site at any time during normal business hours for the purpose of inspecting the site to determine whether or not the site is in compliance. 
(Ord. of 10-6-1992, § 7.9) 
Chapter 32 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS, AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES 
(RESERVED) 
Chapter 34 - SUBDIVISIONS 
(RESERVED) 
Chapter 36 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Revenue and taxation generally, O.C.G.A. § 48-1-1 et seq.; ad valorem taxation of property, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-1 et seq.; county tax officials and administration, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-100 et seq.; county taxation, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-220 et seq.; municipal taxation, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-350 et seq.; miscellaneous local administration provisions, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-380; sales and use taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-8-1 et seq.; taxes on tobacco products, O.C.G.A. § 48-11-1 et seq.; levy of occupation taxes by counties and municipalities on certain businesses, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-1 et seq.; imposition of regulatory fees by local governments on certain businesses, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-8 et seq.; authority of counties and municipalities to impose excise tax on lodging and accommodations, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 36-1—36-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - UTILITY TAXES 

Sec. 36-19. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, the term "utility" shall be defined as any company providing a useful service to the public, particularly the service of electric, power, gas, telephone, cable television, etc. 
(Ord. of 10-6-1992, § 2) 
Sec. 36-20. - Applicability; amount and due date of payments. 
(a)	Each utility company operating in the city shall pay a special tax in the amount of four percent of the gross sales to customers served within the corporate limits of the city for the preceding quarter. 
(b)	Each payment shall be due on or before the last day of the second month following the end of each calendar quarter and shall be based on recurring local service record revenues billed during such calendar quarter. 
(c)	Any amount of franchise fees paid by a utility company under a contract entered into with the city that is applicable to any period subsequent to October 6, 1992, shall be credited against the amounts imposed in subsection (a) of this section or by a subsequent ordinance. 
(Ord. of 10-6-1992, § 1) 
Chapter 38 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Motor vehicles and traffic, O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1 et seq.; uniform rules of the road, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq.; off-road vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-7-1 et seq.; equipment and inspection of motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-8-1 et seq.; abandoned motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1 et seq.; use of speed detection devices, O.C.G.A. § 40-14-2 et seq.; cities and counties authorized to enact ordinances for removal of vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-4. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 38-1. - Authority of law enforcement and fire department officials to enforce chapter. 
It shall be the duty of law enforcement officers authorized by the city to enforce all city traffic laws. In addition, officers of the fire department, when at the scene of a fire, may direct or assist law enforcement officers in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate vicinity. 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate traffic by means of police officers preserved, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(1); obedience to persons directing traffic required, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-2. 
Secs. 38-2—38-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TRAFFIC REGULATIONS 

Sec. 38-21. - Adoption of uniform rules of the road. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 40-6-370, the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq., known as the uniform rules of the road, and the definitions contained in O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1, are hereby adopted as and for the traffic regulations of the city with like effect as if recited in this article. 
Sec. 38-22. - Parental responsibility. 
It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of a minor under the age of 16 years to permit, whether knowingly or through ineffective control or supervision, such minor to violate any provision of this Code or state law regarding the operation of vehicles. 
Sec. 38-23. - Sale of vehicles on rights-of-way prohibited. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful to park or leave unattended on or within the right-of-way of any public road in the unincorporated areas of the city any used motor vehicle that is marked for sale or otherwise displayed for sale. A vehicle shall be considered to be displayed for sale when a reasonable person would perceive that the vehicle is for sale without having to inquire whether the vehicle is for sale. 
(b)	The law enforcement officials of the city are authorized and empowered to impound any vehicle found to be in violation of subsection (a) of this section. The owner of such vehicle shall be responsible for all expenses and charges incurred in the towing and storage of the vehicle. 
Secs. 38-24—38-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SPEED REGULATION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Maximum speed limits, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-181; power of local authorities to alter speed limits, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-183. 

Sec. 38-50. - Speed detection device authorized. 
The law enforcement officers of the city are authorized to use speed detection devices as permitted by O.C.G.A. § 40-14-2. 
(Res. of 5-11-1992) 
State Law reference— Georgia Peace Officer Training Act, O.C.G.A. § 35-8-1 et seq.; authority for use or speed detection devices by local law enforcement officers, O.C.G.A. § 40-14-2; requirements that local government obtain state permit, O.C.G.A. § 40-14-2. 
Sec. 38-51. - Speed limits on system highways. 
The following speed zones are hereby established based on an engineering and traffic investigation as prescribed by law: 
SPEED ZONES ON SYSTEM HIGHWAYS 

 
(Ord. No. 071499, 8-25-1999) 
Sec. 38-52. - Reduction of speed when speed hazards exist. 
(a)	No person shall drive a vehicle on a street or highway at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the existing conditions and with due regard for the actual and potential hazards that exist. In every event speed shall be so controlled as may be necessary to avoid colliding with any person, vehicle or other conveyance on or entering the street, road, highway or other avenues of travel, in compliance with legal requirements and the duty of all persons to use due care and caution. 
(b)	Where no speed hazards exist that require lower speed for compliance with subsection (a) of this section, the speed of any vehicle not less than the minimum limits or not in excess of the maximum limits or established as authorized herein, shall be lawful, but no speed in excess of the maximum limits specified in this section, or established as authorized by this section, shall be unlawful unless special hazards exist that might require lower speed for compliance with subsection (a) of this section. 
State Law reference— Alteration of speed limits by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-183. 
Chapter 40 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Public utilities generally, O.C.G.A. § 46-1-1 et seq.; municipal home rule, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; municipal utilities, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-5; Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq.; water resources, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-1 et seq.; public water systems, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-170 et seq.; water supply, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-470; sewage and waste disposal, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-29 et seq.; refusal by city or county to supply water because of indebtedness of prior owner, occupant, or lessee prohibited, and limited liens for unpaid utility charges, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-17. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 40-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under EPA-approved laboratory procedures in five days at 20 degrees, expressed in milligrams per liter. 
Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of buildings and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building wall. 
Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal, also called house connection or service connection. 
Combined sewer means a sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage. 
Completion of work means the concurrence of the following events: 
(1)	The work required by the construction contract shall have been completed; 
(2)	The owner shall provide the city with a certificate verifying that payment has been made for all labor and material employed in connection with the construction of the improvements and that the improvements have been constructed in accordance with the construction contract; and 
(3)	All appropriate governmental authorities have inspected and approved the improvements and the improvements are in operation. 
Construction contract means an agreement between the owner and the general contractor which shall be approved by the engineer and includes the following: 
(1)	The contract; 
(2)	The general conditions; 
(3)	Plans and specifications; 
(4)	All addenda (as defined in the general conditions) issued prior to the execution of the construction contract; 
(5)	All amendments to the construction contract signed by both parties; and 
(6)	All change orders (as defined in the general conditions) signed by both parties. 
Contractor means a person, approved by the city council and consulting engineer, engaged in actual sewer construction or extensions within the jurisdiction of the city. 
Customer means every person who is responsible for contracting (expressly or implicitly) with the city in obtaining, having, or using sewer connections with, or sewer tap to, the city sewer system and in obtaining, having, or using water and other related services furnished by the city for the purpose of disposing of wastewater and sewage through said system. Said terms shall include the occupants of each unit of a multiple-family dwelling unit building as a separate and distinct customer. 
Drawings means detailed drawings prepared by a registered professional engineer showing the proposed sewer improvements as supplemented by detailed specifications. 
Easement means an acquired legal right for the specific use of property owned by others. 
Engineer means the city's consulting engineer on sewer matters or its designated representatives. 
Floatable oil means oil, fat, or grease in a physical state such that it will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment facility. Wastewater shall be considered free of floatable oil if it is properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection system. 
Properly shredded garbage means the wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in the public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension. 
Public sewer means a common sewer controlled by a governmental agency or public utility. 
Sanitary sewer means a sewer that carries liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions together with minor quantities of groundwaters, stormwaters and surface waters that are not intentionally admitted. 
Septic tank means a subsurface impervious tank designed to temporarily retain sewage or similar waterborne wastes together with: 
(1)	A sewer line constructed with solid pipe, with the joints sealed, connecting the impervious tank with a plumbing stub out; and 
(2)	A subsurface system of trenches, piping and other materials constructed to drain the clarified discharge from the tank and distribute it underground to be absorbed or filtered. 
Sewage means the spent water of a community. The equivalent term is wastewater. 
Sewage works (sewerage) means all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage. 
Sewer means a pipe or conduit that carries wastewater. 
Sewer impact fee means the fee charged by the city to individuals for the privilege of connecting to any existing or future system operated by the city. 
Slug means any discharge of water or wastewater which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes or more than five times the average 24-hour concentration of flows during normal operation and shall adversely affect the collection system or performance of the wastewater facilities. 
Storm drain (sometimes termed storm sewer) means a drain or sewer for conveying water, groundwater, subsurface water, or unpolluted water from any source and excluding sewage and industrial wastes other than unpolluted cooling water. 
Superintendent means the superintendent of public works or his authorized deputy, agent or representative. 
Suspended solids means total suspended matter that either floats on the surface of, or is in suspension in, water, wastewater or other liquids, and is removed by laboratory filtration as approved by the environmental protection agency and referred to as nonfilterable residue. 
Unpolluted water means water of quality equal to or better than the effluent criteria in effect, or water that would not cause violation of receiving water quality standards and would not be benefited by discharge to the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided. 
Wastewater means the spent water of a community. From the standpoint of source, it may be a combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water and stormwater that may be present. 
Wastewater facilities means the structures, equipment, and processes required to collect, carry away, and treat domestic and industrial wastes and dispose of the effluent. 
Watercourse means a natural or artificial channel for the passage of water either continuously or intermittently. 
Work means: 
(1)	All of the labor and material necessary to produce the construction required by the plans and specifications and all materials and equipment incorporated or to be incorporated in such construction. 
(2)	All necessary off-site work required by other governmental authorities having jurisdiction of the construction and operation of a sewer system. 
(3)	Connecting and hooking-up of electric and other utilities. 
(Ord. of 9-6-1988, div. 1, § II; Ord. of 7-6-1999, div. 1, § II; Ord. of 10-6-2009, art. 2) 
Sec. 40-2. - Interference with or damage to public utilities. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person intentionally and without authority: 
(1)	To damage or destroy any meter, pipe, conduit, wire, line, post, lamp or other apparatus belonging to the city or a company engaged in the manufacture or sale of electricity, gas, water, telephone, or other public services; 
(2)	To prevent a meter from properly registering the quantity of such service supplied; 
(3)	To use or cause to be used without the consent of such company or the city any service manufactured, sold or distributed by such company or the city; or 
(4)	To interfere, in any way, with the proper action of such company or the city. 
(b)	Where there is no evidence to the contrary, the person performing any of the illegal acts referred to in subsection (a) of this section, or the person who, with knowledge of such violation, received the benefit of such service without proper charge as a result of such improper action, shall be presumed to be responsible for such acts of tampering or diversion. 
(Ord. of 10-6-1992, § 1.2) 
Secs. 40-3—40-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 40-23. - Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this article to set forth requirements for obtaining water service in the city and further to regulate the operation of any private system. This article also provides that the city may establish specific standards and requirements for the construction of all new or replacement water lines and any accessories or extensions thereto. 
(Ord. of 9-6-1988, div. 1, § I) 
Sec. 40-24. - City's access to premises. 
Duly authorized agents of the city shall have access at all hours to the premises of the consumer for the purpose of installing or removing city property, inspecting piping, reading and testing meters, and for any other purpose in connection with the water service in these facilities and enforcing the provisions of this article or any rules promulgated under the authority thereof. 
(Ord. of 9-6-1988, div. 1, § III(E); Ord. of 1-7-2003) 
Secs. 40-25—40-51. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CONNECTIONS 

Sec. 40-52. - Limitations on private supply facilities. 
No person shall operate private facilities for water supply for consumption by humans when existing or new service is available within 200 feet of the facility to be served. The city may waive this requirement for good cause shown and the city's decision in the exercise of its legislative discretion shall be controlling. 
(Ord. of 9-6-1988, div. 1, § III(A); Ord. of 1-7-2003) 
Sec. 40-53. - Water taps; application required. 
Only authorized city employees may tap the water line. Water for the city system shall not be introduced into any premises without a written application having first been made to the city and approved by the mayor. No water line shall be tapped except by authorized employees. 
(Ord. of 9-6-1988, div. 1, § III(B); Ord. of 1-7-2003) 
Sec. 40-54. - Responsibility of property owner for costs of water service lines. 
The owner of the property to be served shall be responsible for the cost, installation and maintenance of the water service line from the facility to be served to a point where the service line ties into the city system, which includes any portions of the service line extending on to the public right-of-way or city easement. 
(Ord. of 9-6-1988, div. 1, § III(D); Ord. of 1-7-2003) 
Sec. 40-55. - City's responsibility and liability. 
(a)	The city shall run a service line from its distribution line to the property line where the distribution line exists or is to be constructed and runs immediately adjacent and parallel to the property to be served. No service charge, other than the connection fee referred to in subsection (b) of this section, shall be made for five-eighths-inch by three-fourths-inch meters. A proportionately greater charge than the connection fee in subsection (b) of this section will be made for meters of larger dimensions. 
(b)	The city may make connections to serve other properties not adjacent to its lines upon payment of reasonable costs for the extensions of its distribution lines as may be required to render such service. 
(c)	The city may install its meters at or near the property line or, at the city's option, on the consumer's property within three feet of the property line. 
(d)	The city reserves the right to refuse service unless the consumer's lines or piping are installed in such a manner as to prevent cross connections or backflows. 
(Ord. of 9-6-1988, div. 4, § III) 
Sec. 40-56. - Unauthorized connections. 
No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any corrections with or opening into, use, or disturb any public water main or appurtenances thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the city. No connection shall be made except at wyes, manholes or connection points approved by the mayor. 
(Ord. of 9-6-1988, div. 1, § III(C); Ord. of 1-7-2003) 
Sec. 40-57. - Right of city to revoke permission to connect to water system. 
The city shall have the right for good cause shown to revoke or annul at any time any permit previously issued for the connection to any water lines, and no party shall have the right to claim damage as a result of such permit being revoked or annulled. The city reserves the right to disconnect and discontinue its service without notice for the following additional reasons: 
(1)	To prevent fraud or abuse. 
(2)	Consumer's willful disregard of the city's rules. 
(3)	Emergency repairs. 
(4)	Insufficiency of water supply due to circumstances beyond the city's control. 
(5)	Legal proceedings. 
(6)	Direction of public authorities. 
(7)	Strike, riot, flood, fire, or unavoidable accidents. 
(Ord. of 9-6-1988, div. 1, § III(F); Ord. of 1-7-2003) 
Sec. 40-58. - Cross connections prohibited. 
No person shall install or operate a cross connection between a private water facility and any system belonging to the city. All private water facilities shall be at all times kept separate and apart from the city systems. The separation of such a system by the placement of valves between facilities will not be allowed. 
(Ord. of 9-6-1988, div. 1, § III(J); Ord. of 1-7-2003) 
Sec. 40-59. - Stopcock or cutoff valve requirements. 
The following requirements shall apply to all water connections: 
(1)	A stopcock and wastecock or cutoff valve must be placed by the property owner on his property between the building and the meter and, if possible, within one or two feet of the meter. The cutoff valve will be under the control of the owner and will be used in case of an emergency, so that any pipe to be repaired can be cut off so as to avoid interference with the city system. 
(2)	The stopcock, box and meter at or near the property lines shall be the property of the city. The city stopcock will be used only by authorized city personnel. 
(3)	Where meters or meter boxes are placed on the premises of a consumer, a suitable place shall be provided by the consumer therefor, unobstructed and accessible at all times to the meter reader. 
(4)	The consumer's piping and apparatus shall be installed and maintained by the consumer at the consumer's expense in a safe and efficient manner and in accordance with the sanitary regulations of the state health department. 
(5)	The pipe from the main water line or meter to the served premises shall be the property of the owner, and all repairs to such lines shall be at the owner's expense. The city shall have an easement to use any portion of the pipe located off of city property and any land adjacent thereto so long as any service is provided to the premises by the city. 
(6)	All water service used in a fire protection system must comply with the following provisions: 
a.	The customer shall provide and maintain separate and independent plumbing facilities including a glob detector check valve or comparable equipment and shall maintain the sprinkler system in good working order. 
b.	A separate water supply shall be installed by the owner or occupant. Customers with a separate water supply for fire protection will be charged a monthly fee in accordance with a schedule of fees which shall include an estimated amount of water usage should the system be employed. 
(Ord. of 9-6-1988, div. 3, § I) 
Sec. 40-60. - Private well connection prohibited. 
In order to be received as a consumer entitled to receive water from the city's water system, all applicants must offer proof that any private wells located on their property are not physically connected to the lines of the city's water system, and all applicants, by becoming consumers of the city, covenant and agree that so long as they continue to be consumers of the city, they will not permit the connection of any private wells on their property to the city's water system. 
(Ord. of 9-6-1988, div. 1, § III(K); Ord. of 1-7-2003) 
Sec. 40-61. - Connection in floodplain prohibited. 
The city will not allow any connection to any facility located in a 100-year floodplain as designated on the relevant flood maps published by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), within any jurisdictional freshwater wetlands, prime farmland, or endangered or threatened species habitat. 
(Ord. of 9-6-1988, div. 1, § III(L); Ord. of 1-7-2003) 
Secs. 40-62—40-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - FIXTURES 

Sec. 40-81. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commercial means any type of building other than residential. 
Construction means the erection of a new building or the alteration of an existing building in connection with its repair or renovation or in connection with making an addition to an existing building and shall include the replacement of a malfunctioning, unserviceable, or obsolete faucet, showerhead, toilet, or urinal in an existing building. 
Residential means any building or unit of a building intended for occupancy as a dwelling but shall not include a hotel or motel. 
(Ord. of 6-9-1992, div. 7, § 1) 
Sec. 40-82. - Restrictions. 
(a)	No construction may be initiated within the city for any residential building of any type which: 
(1)	Employs a gravity tank-type, flushometer-valve, or flushometer-tank toilet that uses more than an average of 1.6 gallons of water per flush; provided, however, this subsection shall not be applicable to one-piece toilets; 
(2)	Employs a shower head that allows a flow of more than an average of 2.5 gallons of water per minute at 60 pounds per square inch of pressure; 
(3)	Employs a urinal that uses more than an average of 1.0 gallons of water per flush; 
(4)	Employs a lavatory faucet or lavatory replacement aerator that allows a flow of more than 2.0 gallons of water per minute; or 
(5)	Employs a kitchen faucet or kitchen replacement aerator that allows a flow of more than 2.5 gallons of water per minute. 
(b)	The requirements of subsection (a) of this section shall apply to any residential construction and to any commercial construction which involves the repair or renovation of or addition to any existing building when such repair or renovation of or addition to such existing building includes replacement of toilets or showers or both. 
(Ord. of 6-9-1992, div. 7, §§ 2, 4) 
Sec. 40-83. - Exemptions. 
(a)	New construction and the repair or renovation of an existing building shall be exempt from the requirements of this division when: 
(1)	The repair or renovation of the existing building does not include the replacement of the plumbing or sewage system servicing toilets, faucets or showerheads within such existing buildings; 
(2)	Such plumbing or sewage system within such existing building, because of its capacity, design, or installation, would not function properly if the toilets, faucets or showerheads required by this article were installed; 
(3)	The system is a well or gravity flow from a spring and is owned privately by an individual for use in such individual's personal residence; or 
(4)	Units to be installed are specifically designed for use by the handicapped, specifically designed to withstand unusual abuse or installation in a penal institution, or toilets for juveniles. 
(b)	The owner (or his agent) of a building undergoing new construction or repair or renovation who is entitled to an exemption under this section shall obtain the exemption by applying at the office of the building inspector for the Liberty Consolidated Planning Commission. 
(Ord. of 6-9-1992, div. 7, § 5) 
Sec. 40-84. - Enforcement; penalty. 
(a)	This division shall be enforced by the office of the building inspector of the Liberty Consolidated Planning Commission (LCPC). Citations for violations may be issued by the chief building inspector of the LCPC. 
(b)	Any person violating this division shall be tried before the county court of competent jurisdiction. Upon conviction, a violation of this division may be punished as published. 
(Ord. of 6-9-1992, div. 7, § 6) 
Secs. 40-85—40-111. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - USE REGULATIONS 

Sec. 40-112. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this division is to set out uniform requirements for users of the water system. 
(Ord. of 9-6-1988, div. 2, § I) 
Sec. 40-113. - Restrictions; violations. 
(a)	The following restrictions shall apply to use of water in the city: 
(1)	No person shall use water supplied by the city water system during periods when a shortage of water exists, as determined by the city, except in accordance with conservation regulations implemented by the city. 
(2)	No person, unless authorized by the city, shall turn on or off a water supply at any meter, or at any other location or point on the city system. 
(3)	Water furnished by the city shall be used for consumption by the consumer, members of his household, and employees only. The consumer shall not sell water to any other person or permit any other person to use said water. 
(4)	Water shall not be used for irrigation, fire protection, nor other purposes except when water is available in sufficient quantity without interfering with the regular domestic consumption in the area served. 
(b)	Violations of this section shall be sufficient cause for refusal or discontinuance of service. 
(Ord. of 9-6-1988, div. 2, § II, div. 4, § IV) 
Sec. 40-114. - Metering. 
(a)	All water usage from the city system will be metered by the city, except fire sprinkler systems. 
(b)	Meters shall be set on the property line and located off the public right-of-way when possible. When this is impracticable, the meter shall be located at such other places as may be approved by the mayor. 
(c)	No person shall run or extend a water line from one lot or tract of land across another lot or boundary line for the purpose of serving more than one residence or other building. 
(d)	No person, except authorized personnel, will be allowed to install, remove or handle meters. 
(e)	The first water meter shall be installed by the city at the property owner's expense. The city will keep the meter in repair which results from normal usage. During such times as the meter is inoperable, the consumer will be charged at the average daily consumption rate as established by the city based on prior bills. 
(f)	If the water meter is repaired or replaced for reasons other than failure due to normal usage, the cost of such repairs will be charged to the customer and be collectable in accordance with this article. 
(Ord. of 9-6-1988, div. 2, § III) 
Sec. 40-115. - Unlawful water use. 
(a)	If water is used without the knowledge of the city, at such time as the city becomes aware of the illegal use of said water, a charge will be made against the owner of the property served for the time the water has been used, or the quantity shown by the meter to have been used, and future water service shall be immediately discontinued and will not be restored until the bill therefor is paid. 
(b)	If the customer does not pay the bill, then the landowner, if different, shall be held responsible for the charges. 
(c)	This section applies to illegal use of water from any fire hydrants. 
(d)	A penalty for such use will be assessed by the city against the illegal user. The amount of the penalty will be determined by the city. If requested by the user so charged, the city will conduct a hearing into the matter. The penalty assessed for violation of this section may include criminal sanctions under state law. 
(Ord. of 9-6-1988, div. 3, § III(C)) 
Sec. 40-116. - Interruption of service in cases of emergency. 
The city may terminate or interrupt service in cases of emergency and for the repair or expansions of the water system. Advanced notice of said interruptions will be given when possible. 
(Ord. of 9-6-1988, div. 1, § III(G); Ord. of 1-7-2003) 
Sec. 40-117. - Disconnection of service by customer. 
When the customer desires to discontinue water service, the following procedure will apply: 
(1)	The customer shall give written notice of such fact to the city. When notified, the city shall remove the customer's meter. A new tap-in fee will be charged to a subsequent user to place the water line back into service. Customers who fail to notify the city shall be charged the minimum monthly fee. 
(2)	Upon discontinuance of water service, the city shall remove the meter and turn off the service line to the premises. 
(Ord. of 9-6-1988, div. 3, § III(A), (B)) 
Secs. 40-118—40-147. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SEWER 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 40-148. - Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this article to set forth requirements for obtaining sewer service in the city. This article also provides that the city may establish specific standards and requirements for the construction of all new or replacement sewer lines and any accessories or extensions thereto. 
(Ord. of 7-6-1999, div. 1, § I) 
Sec. 40-149. - Damage prohibited. 
No person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of the wastewater facilities. Any person violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct. 
(Ord. of 10-6-2009, § 7.1) 
Secs. 40-150—40-166. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 40-167. - Right of entry. 
(a)	Generally. Duly authorized employees or agents bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing pertinent to discharge to the public sewerage system in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 10-6-2009, § 8.1) 
(b)	Private property. Duly authorized employees or agents bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the city holds an easement for the purpose of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the wastewater facilities lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. 
(Ord. of 10-6-2009, § 8.3) 
Sec. 40-168. - Access to premises. 
Duly authorized agents shall have access at all hours to the premises of the consumer for the purpose of installing or removing city property, inspecting piping, reading and testing meters, and for any other purpose in connection with the sewer service in these facilities and enforcing the provisions of this article or any rules promulgated under the authority thereof. 
(Ord. of 7-6-1999, div. 1, § III(E)) 
Sec. 40-169. - Safety standards; indemnification of private property owners. 
While performing necessary work on private property, the authorized employees or agents shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises. The property owner or lessee shall be held harmless for injury to or death of persons and for loss or damage to its property caused by acts or omissions of the city's employees or agents against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the property owner or lessee, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the property owner or lessee to maintain safe conditions as required by this article. 
(Ord. of 10-6-2009, § 8.2) 
Sec. 40-170. - Violations deemed misdemeanors; continuing violations. 
Violations of this article shall be a misdemeanor punishable under state law. Each day of continuing violation shall be considered a separate offense. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned the city by reason of violation. 
(Ord. of 10-6-2009, § 10.1) 
Sec. 40-171. - Order for corrective action; failure to obey; notice. 
(a)	In the event of violation of this article, the health officer or authorized employees may verbally instruct the owner as to the necessary corrective action. If the owner fails to carry out verbal instructions in a timely manner or if a serious violation or hazard to public health exists, the health officer or city may issue to the owner a written order stating the nature of the violation, the corrective action, and the time limit for completing the corrective action. 
(b)	The record of the mailing of said notice or order shall be prima facie evidence thereof, and failure of said owner to receive same shall in no way affect the validity of any proceedings conducted pursuant to this article. 
(c)	Failure to comply with any written order duly issued by the health officer or city pursuant to subsection (a) of this section will constitute a separate misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable as provided by the laws of the state. 
(d)	Compliance with this article is required regardless of whether a written order is issued. 
(Ord. of 10-6-2009, §§ 10.2, 10.3) 
Sec. 40-172. - Violations and nuisances subject to suit for injunction or abatement. 
(a)	The violation of any provisions of this article, as now existing or as may be hereafter amended, may be enjoined by instituting appropriate proceedings in the name of the city for injunction in the courts of competent jurisdiction in the state. 
(b)	Any public nuisance which is injurious to the public health, safety or comfort may be abated by instituting appropriate proceedings in the name of the city for injunction in the court of competent jurisdiction in the state. 
(c)	Such actions may be maintained notwithstanding the fact that such violation also constitutes a crime, and notwithstanding that other adequate remedies at law exist. Such actions may be instituted in the name of the city. 
(Ord. of 10-6-2009, § 10.4) 
Sec. 40-173. - Demand for and scheduling of hearing. 
(a)	Upon receipt of a notice of a violation of this article or an order of the city requiring an act or thing be done or to cease, the owner of any premises then in question may, in writing, demand a hearing before the city council to present the evidence challenging the validity of the city's order. 
(b)	The owner may appear in person, by agent, or by attorney. The demand must be filed with the city clerk and made within five days from the receipt of the order being challenged. 
(c)	Upon receipt of a demand for a hearing, the city will set a date, time, and place for said hearing to be not less than 21 days from the date of filing of said demand. 
(d)	The hearing as provided for herein shall apply to any customer's complaint, dispute, or challenge of the city's rules, regulations, resolutions, ordinances, or policies. 
(Ord. of 10-6-2009, § 10.5) 
Sec. 40-174. - Rules of evidence. 
Evidence before the city of any hearing conducted pursuant to this division shall be admitted in accordance with the rules of evidence of the state superior courts; provided, however, the city may take official notice of any order, rule, regulation, or any other document, record, or entry contained in its official record or minutes for evidentiary purposes. 
(Ord. of 10-6-2009, § 10.6) 
Sec. 40-175. - City council determination final. 
For the purpose of this article, the decisions of the city council will prevail in any instance in which there is a conflict between it and the health officer on any issue of sanitation, or the lack of it, and its effect on human health or well-being. 
(Ord. of 10-6-2009, § 10.7) 
Secs. 40-176—40-203. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CONNECTIONS AND USE 

Sec. 40-204. - Written permits required. 
No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the city. 
(Ord. of 10-6-2009, § 5.1) 
Sec. 40-205. - Application; fees. 
The owner or his agent shall make application for a permit on a special form furnished by the city. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the superintendent. A permit and inspection fee as specified in the fee schedule shall be paid at the time the application is filed. 
(Ord. of 10-6-2009, § 5.2) 
Sec. 40-206. - Connection to sewer service when available; waiver of requirement. 
No person shall hereafter operate private facilities when existing or new service is available within 200 feet of the facility to be served. The city may waive this requirement for good cause shown and the city's decision in the exercise of its legislative discretion shall be controlling. 
(Ord. of 7-6-1999, div. 1, § III(A)) 
Sec. 40-207. - Separate building sewers required; exception. 
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building, except where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer, but the city does not and will not assume any obligation or responsibility for damage caused by or resulting from any single connection aforementioned. 
(Ord. of 10-6-2009, § 5.4) 
Sec. 40-208. - Unauthorized connections. 
No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, or disturb any public sewer main or appurtenances thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the city. No connection shall be made except at a connection point approved by the city. 
(Ord. of 7-6-1999, div. 1, § III(C)) 
Sec. 40-209. - Application. 
No sewer line shall be tapped except by authorized employees. An application will be made to the city prior to connection to the sewer system. 
(Ord. of 7-6-1999, div. 1, § III(B)) 
Sec. 40-210. - Responsibility of property owner for costs. 
(a)	The owner of the property to be served shall be responsible for the cost, installation and maintenance of the sewer service line from the facility to be served to a point where the service line ties into the city system, which includes any portions of the service line extending on to the public right-of-way or city easement. 
(b)	The pipe from the main sewer line to the served premises shall be the property of the owner, and all repairs to such lines shall be at the owner's expense. The city shall have an easement to use any portion of the pipe located off of city property and any land adjacent thereto so long as any service is provided to the premises by the city. 
(c)	The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. 
(Ord. of 7-6-1999, div. 1, § III(D); Ord. of 7-6-1999, div. 2, § I(B); Ord. of 10-6-2009, § 5.3) 
Sec. 40-211. - Compliance with state health department regulations required. 
The consumer's piping and apparatus shall be installed and maintained by the consumer at the consumer's expense in a safe and efficient manner and in accordance with the sanitary regulations of the state health department. 
(Ord. of 7-6-1999, div. 2, § I(A)) 
Sec. 40-212. - Right of city to revoke permission for connection. 
The city shall have the right for good cause shown to revoke or annul at any time any permit previously issued for the connection to any sewer lines, and no party shall have the right to claim damage as a result of such permit being revoked or annulled. The city reserves the right to disconnect and discontinue its service without notice for the following additional reasons: 
(1)	To prevent fraud or abuse. 
(2)	Consumer's willful disregard of the city's rules. 
(3)	Emergency repairs. 
(4)	Circumstances beyond the city's control. 
(5)	Legal proceedings. 
(6)	At the direction of public authorities. 
(7)	Strike, riot, flood, fire, or unavoidable accidents. 
(Ord. of 7-6-1999, div. 1, § III(F)) 
Sec. 40-213. - Connection in floodplain prohibited. 
(a)	The city will not allow any connection to any facility located in a 100-year floodplain as designated on the relevant flood maps published by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), within any jurisdictional freshwater wetlands, prime farmland or endangered or threatened species habitat. 
(b)	The operating provisions for the proposed land application system by the city will restrict encroachment and disturbance into any jurisdictional wetlands found within the confines of the subject land application system as designated on the relevant maps. 
(Ord. of 7-6-1999, div. 6; Ord. of 1-7-2003) 
Sec. 40-214. - Interruption of service in cases of emergency. 
The city may terminate or interrupt service in cases of emergency, and for the repair or expansions of the sewer system. Advanced notice of said interruptions will be given when possible. 
(Ord. of 7-6-1999, div. 1, § III(G)) 
Sec. 40-215. - Grounds for termination of service. 
The city reserves the right to terminate water and wastewater disposal services and disconnect a customer from the system when: 
(1)	Acids or chemicals damaging to sewer lines or the treatment process are released into the public sewer causing rapid deterioration of these structures or interfering with proper conveyance and treatment of wastewater; 
(2)	A government agency informs the city that the effluent from the wastewater treatment plant is no longer of a quality permitted for discharge into a watercourse, and it is found that the customer is discharging wastewater into the public sewer that cannot be sufficiently treated or requires treatment that is not provided by the city as normal domestic treatment; or 
(3)	The customer: 
a.	Discharges industrial waste or wastewater that is in violation of the permit issued by the approving authority; 
b.	Discharges wastewater at an uncontrolled, variable rate in sufficient quantity to cause an imbalance in the wastewater treatment process; 
c.	Fails to pay monthly bills for sanitary sewer service when due; or 
d.	Repeats a discharge of prohibited wastes into public sewers. 
(Ord. of 10-6-2009, § 12.1) 
Secs. 40-216—40-238. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - FIXTURES 

Sec. 40-239. - Toilet required for disposal of human excrement. 
No person shall dispose of human excrement except in a toilet. 
(Ord. of 10-6-2009, § 3.2) 
Sec. 40-240. - Minimum toilet requirements; maintenance. 
(a)	All premises shall be provided by the owner thereof with at least one toilet. All toilets shall be kept clean and in sanitary working condition. 
(b)	The owners of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes situated within the city jurisdiction and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way, in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary sewer, is hereby required at the owner's expense to install suitable toilet facilities herein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this article, within 30 days after the date of official notice to do so, provided that said public sewer is within 200 feet of the property line. 
(c)	Every flush toilet shall be connected to a public sewer where available or to a septic tank. Flush toilets shall be provided at all times with sufficient running water under pressure to flush the toilet clean after use. 
(Ord. of 10-6-2009, §§ 3.1, 3.5, 4.9) 
Sec. 40-241. - Connection of other fixtures and appliances required. 
All sinks, dishwashing machines, lavatories, basins, showerbaths, bathtubs, laundry tubs, washing machines, and similar plumbing fixtures or appliances shall be connected to the public sewer; provided that, where no sewer is available, septic tanks or other private subsurface disposal facilities approved by the health officer may be used. 
(Ord. of 10-6-2009, § 3.6) 
Secs. 40-242—40-260. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - DISCHARGE RESTRICTIONS 

Sec. 40-261. - Compliance with state and federal regulations required. 
The provisions of this article shall not be deemed as alleviating compliance with applicable state and federal regulations. Specific user charge and industrial cost recovery requirements, promulgated pursuant to federal P.L. 92-500 (which amended the federal Clean Water Act, 33 USC 1251 et seq.) shall be considered as a part of this article upon official adoption. All nonresidential users will be required to comply with pretreatment standards as outlined in 40 CFR 403. 
(Ord. of 10-6-2009, § 9.1) 
Sec. 40-262. - Conflict with rules of other jurisdictions. 
In the event a wastewater discharge is made to a publicly owned treatment works (POTW) under the jurisdiction of an approved sewer use ordinance for another governing authority, the more restrictive requirement shall prevail. 
(Ord. of 10-6-2009, § 13.3) 
Sec. 40-263. - Unlawful to discharge to natural outlets and other city areas. 
It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any wastewater or other polluted waters, including septic tank effluent or cesspool overflow to any open drain or well-penetrating, water-bearing formation, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 10-6-2009, § 3.3) 
Sec. 40-264. - Prohibited discharges. 
The following described substances, materials, waters, or waste shall be limited in discharge to municipal systems to concentrations or quantities which will not harm either the sewers, wastewater treatment process or equipment, will not have an adverse effect on the receiving stream, or will not otherwise endanger lives, limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance. The limitations or restrictions on materials or characteristics of waste or wastewater discharged to the sanitary sewer which shall not be violated without approval of the city are as follows: 
(1)	Wastewater having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit (65 degrees Celsius) or wastewater which will elevate the temperature of the influent to the publicly owned treatment works (POTW) to 104 degrees Fahrenheit (40 degrees Celsius) or higher. 
(2)	Wastewater containing more than 25 milligrams per liter of petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oils, or product of mineral oil origin. 
(3)	Wastewater containing more than 100 milligrams per liter of oils, fat, grease or wax, whether emulsified or not, or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 degrees (0 degrees Celsius) and 150 degrees Fahrenheit (65 degrees Celsius). 
(4)	Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. Garbage grinders may be connected to sanitary sewers from homes, hotels, institutions, restaurants, hospitals, catering establishments, or similar places where garbage originates from the preparation of food in kitchens for the purpose of consumption on the premises or when served by caterers. 
(5)	All industrial discharges to the city sewer system must comply with the federal industrial pretreatment standards (40 CFR 403) and those industrial pretreatment standards developed by the state environmental protection division. 
(6)	Any waters or wastes containing taste or odor producing substances exceeding limits which may be established by the city. 
(7)	Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentrations as may exceed limits established in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations. 
(8)	Quantities of flow, concentrations, or both which constitute a "slug." 
(9)	Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the wastewater treatment processes employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters. 
(Ord. of 10-6-2009, § 6.5) 
Sec. 40-265. - Measurements, tests, analyses and sampling. 
All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this article shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association. Sampling methods, location times, durations, and frequencies are to be determined on an individual basis, subject to approval by the city. 
(Ord. of 10-6-2009, § 6.11) 
Sec. 40-266. - Pretreatment of wastes. 
(a)	Required for industrial waste discharge; submittal of plans for approval. Persons discharging industrial wastes into the sewerage system may be required to pretreat such wastes. Plans for all pretreatment facilities shall be approved by the superintendent or the state environmental protection division prior to construction. At the time written plans are submitted for approval, written maintenance plans shall also be submitted and approved by the superintendent. The facilities shall be allowed to operate only as long as they are maintained in accordance with the approved maintenance plans. 
(b)	Pretreatment requirements. Pretreatment requirements shall include the following facilities as a minimum: 
(1)	Neutralization. If plans are submitted for the neutralization of strong acid or alkaline wastes, the plans shall include the necessary instrumentation and controls to ensure compliance with subsection (a) of this section at all times. 
(2)	Equalization. Holding tanks or equalization basins shall be required ahead of the receiving manhole of the city sewerage system when deemed necessary by the superintendent to prevent peak flows that exceed the capacity of the system or that result in operational problems. 
(c)	Operation and maintenance of facilities. All pretreatment facilities shall be operated and maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense. 
(Ord. of 10-6-2009, § 6.12) 
Sec. 40-267. - Waiver of requirements. 
There shall be no provision for the granting of variances for discharge of incompatible wastes. If a user begins to violate any of the provisions of this division, it shall be his responsibility to apply to the superintendent who can issue a temporary permit along with a compliance schedule for planning and construction of necessary treatment or pretreatment works. Each case will be carefully evaluated with respect to its effect on the wastewater treatment system and the environment prior to issuance of a temporary permit compliance schedule. 
(Ord. of 10-6-2009, § 6.13) 
Sec. 40-268. - Dilution to decrease concentration. 
Any dilution of the wastewater by the user for the purpose of decreasing the concentrations of toxic material shall be considered a violation of this division. 
(Ord. of 10-6-2009, § 6.13) 
Sec. 40-269. - Discontinuance of service for failure to comply; notice. 
Failure to comply with the provisions of this division shall be cause for the discontinuance of sewer or water service to the offending person. The procedure shall be as follows: 
(1)	A written notice, signed by the superintendent, shall be delivered personally to the person then responsible for the offending use, outlining the conditions of the wastes which violate the provision of this Code. 
(2)	In the event that the person in charge will not accept the notice, it shall be conveyed by registered mail to the responsible person. 
(3)	The person notified shall have 24 hours from the time of receipt of the notice, either personally delivered or received by registered mail, to correct the offending conditions. 
(4)	If correction is not made or a request for extension is not received by the city within 24 hours, it shall be mandatory that water and/or sewer service shall be discontinued to the offending person without further notice. 
(5)	If a request for an extension of time is received by the city within 24 hours of the notice as stated in subsection (1) of this section and if circumstances are such that in the opinion of the superintendent, the best interest of the city would be served by extending the time for correction of the offending condition, then he may grant an extension of time up to a maximum limit of 30 days. 
(Ord. of 10-6-2009, § 6.14) 
Sec. 40-270. - Responsibilities of the person discharging waste. 
(a)	It shall be the responsibility of the person discharging industrial waste into the city sewerage system to: 
(1)	Build a control structure in the discharge line from his premises, immediately prior to the entrance of the discharge line into the city sewerage system, suitable for the sampling and measuring of wastes. 
(2)	Contact the superintendent prior to operation changes which will materially alter the characteristics of the waste from the last prior sampling. 
(3)	Make timely, periodic payments to the city of surcharges for excessive loading as detailed in the city user charge system. 
(b)	Plans for a control structure must be approved by the city. The requirement for a control structure may be waived if deemed unnecessary by the city. 
(c)	In the event that no special manhole is required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. 
(Ord. of 10-6-2009, § 6.15) 
Secs. 40-271—40-288. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - PRIVATE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS 

Sec. 40-289. - Additional requirements may be imposed by health officer. 
No statement contained in this division shall be constructed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the health officer. 
(Ord. of 10-6-2009, § 4.14) 
Sec. 40-290. - Unlawful to construct or maintain; exceptions. 
Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of wastewater. 
(Ord. of 10-6-2009, § 3.4) 
Sec. 40-291. - When connection required. 
(a)	Where a public sanitary sewer is not available as provided herein, the building sewer shall be connected to a private wastewater disposal system complying with the provisions of the city and the state department of natural resources. 
(b)	Premises with private water systems shall be connected with the public sewerage system. 
(Ord. of 10-6-2009, §§ 4.1, 4.13) 
Sec. 40-292. - Septic tank standards. 
Septic tanks shall be constructed, repaired, altered, enlarged and maintained in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the health officer. Septic tanks shall be maintained in sanitary working order. 
(Ord. of 10-6-2009, § 4.2) 
Sec. 40-293. - Permit required; approval by health officer. 
(a)	No person shall construct, repair, alter, or enlarge any septic tank unless he shall hold a valid permit for such work issued by the health officer. The health officer may withhold the issuance of such a permit pending the inspection and approval by the health officer of the site and location of the proposed work. 
(b)	Before any septic tank or any part thereof may be covered after it has been constructed, repaired, altered, or enlarged, it shall be inspected and approved by the health officer. 
(Ord. of 10-6-2009, § 4.3) 
Sec. 40-294. - Restrictions on installation and use of subsurface disposal facilities. 
(a)	The type, capacities, location and layout of a private wastewater disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the state department of natural resources. 
(b)	No subsurface disposal facilities shall be installed in any place where the health officer deems the use of such facilities to be a menace to human health or well-being. 
(c)	No permit shall be issued for any private wastewater disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is less than 10,000 square feet. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet. 
(Ord. of 10-6-2009, §§ 4.4, 4.8) 
Sec. 40-295. - Restrictions on construction and use of pit privy. 
No pit privy shall be installed in the following locations: 
(1)	Where a public sewer is accessible to the premises involved; 
(2)	In areas where the health officer deems the use of pit privies to constitute a nuisance or menace to the public health; 
(3)	Where a pit privy may pollute any water supply; or 
(4)	Where the use of pit privies is not in keeping with the standard of sanitation in adjacent areas. 
(Ord. of 10-6-2009, § 4.10) 
Sec. 40-296. - Closing and connection to public sewer. 
At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private wastewater disposal system, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer within 30 days after notice. Any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar private wastewater disposal facilities shall then be cleaned of sludge and filled with suitable material. 
(Ord. of 10-6-2009, § 4.6) 
Sec. 40-297. - Maintenance. 
The owners shall operate and maintain the private wastewater disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times and at no expense to the city. 
(Ord. of 10-6-2009, § 4.7) 
Sec. 40-298. - Discharge of septic tanks in sewer system. 
(a)	Restricted. It shall be unlawful to empty, dump, throw or otherwise discharge, into any manhole, catchbasin or other opening, into the city sewer system, or any system connected with discharging into the sewer system, the contents of any septic tank, sludge, sewage, or other similar matter or material, except as provided in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)	Permits. The superintendent of public works or his designee is authorized to grant permits to discharge the contents of septic tanks at locations specified by the superintendent and under his supervision. Such permits may be revoked at any time if, in the opinion of the superintendent, continued dumping of such matter into the sewers will be injurious to the sewer system or treatment processes. 
(c)	Charges. A charge shall be made for the privilege of dumping the contents of septic tanks, as provided in separate rules. A record shall be kept of such dumpings and statements rendered at the first of each month, and the amount of such statements shall be payable within ten days after rendition. Failure to pay the amounts due within such ten-day period shall be cause for revoking the permit. 
(Ord. of 10-6-2009, § 4.11) 
Sec. 40-299. - Faulty system; correction. 
Any septic tank, privy, or any other sewage, industrial waste, or liquid waste disposal system located thereon that does not function in a sanitary manner shall be corrected within 30 days from the receipt of written manner and order that said system be corrected. 
(Ord. of 10-6-2009, § 4.12) 
Secs. 40-300—40-316. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RATES, FEES AND CHARGES 

Sec. 40-317. - Debt service. 
The bond amount for the water and wastewater projects funded by the Georgia Environmental Facilities Authority (GEFA) and other revenue bonds, including all engineering and setup fees, can be shown as a separate line item on the water and wastewater bill or combined in the base charge. 
(Ord. of 8-5-2008) 
Sec. 40-318. - Residential equivalent units. 
(a)	A residential equivalent unit is that portion of a user's facility that has an impact on the water and wastewater system equivalent to a single-family residence. The determination of a facility's residential equivalent units shall be based on estimated water consumption as shown in guidelines below or on square footage. Peak water consumption of 300 gallons per day or a floor space of 3,000 square feet shall be the equivalent of one residential unit. The method which results in the greater number of equivalent residential units shall be applied. 
(b)	The standards in the table in subsection (d) of this section shall be used in the determination of water consumption. If the table does not provide information for a particular application, the estimated water consumption shall be as calculated by the director in accordance with sound engineering practices using information available from the state EPD, USEPA, or standard reference materials commonly used for estimating flows. 
(c)	In the event a facility is made up of more than one smaller component facility, the determination of residential equivalent units shall be calculated as the sum of all components' residential equivalent units. 
(d)	In a case involving a site utilizing its own private water supply and distribution system to multiple locations resulting in the production of domestic-type wastewater only, such as employee restrooms and showers, such that reading and maintenance of meters would create excessive costs and hardship in the judgment of the director, the city may bill on flow estimates, calculated on the basis of an average flow per employee times the average number of employees at such facility, for the recovery of costs of transporting and treating the wastewater. 

 
** Add 300 gallons per machine to amount indicated if laundry or dishwashing machines are installed. 
(Amd. of 4-1-2008; Ord. of 8-5-2008) 
Sec. 40-319. - Tap fees. 
(a)	Water and wastewater tap fees shall be charged on the basis of residential units or residential equivalent units according to the tap fees listed in the city fee schedule. Any fractional units resulting from the calculation of residential equivalent units shall be treated as a whole unit. Tap fees are in addition to the installation fees provided for in this article. 
(b)	All work done by other than city personnel shall be done only under the supervision of licensed master plumbers authorized to perform such work. The director may authorize licensed master plumbers to install connections to water or wastewater facilities upon written application. 
(c)	The director shall require that all installation is performed in accordance with specifications or standards conforming to sound engineering practices. In the event that such installation is not made in accordance with specifications or standards, the director may require the installation to be corrected or removed and reinstalled as necessary. 
(d)	Water meters shall be supplied to authorized licensed master plumbers at cost; all other related accessories for water or sewer connections may be supplied to authorized licensed master plumbers. 
(e)	The director shall require payment of installation fees as listed in the city fee schedule or reimbursement of actual costs for any installations not specifically covered. 
(Ord. of 8-5-2008) 
Sec. 40-320. - Installation fees. 
(a)	Installation fees shall be in addition to tap fees and shall cover only connection to existing mains that are adjacent to location to be served. The actual costs of any extensions necessary shall be charged in addition to tap and installation fees. All fees and charges shall be paid by the customer or customers at whose request the connection is made. 
(b)	Water installation fees are assessed for making taps into the city water mains or water lines and installing water meters or providing water meters for plumbers to install. Fees for installation of meters up to two inches are as set forth in the city fee schedule. Installation fees for meters larger than two inches shall be charged on the basis of reimbursement to the city for all actual costs incurred in making the installation. 
(c)	Sewer installation fees are assessed for making connections to the city sewerage system and installing service lines. These fees are based on tap size and are in the amount provided in the city fee schedule. 
(d)	Installation fees for installations requiring additional facilities including, but not limited to, manholes or flow metering installations, shall be charged on the basis of reimbursement to the city for all actual costs incurred in making the installation. 
(e)	Charges for any installation not covered in standard pricing, and charges for city staff or equipment if used on private facilities, shall be as provided in the city fee schedule. All hourly charges shall include travel time to and from the job location. Work performed outside regular business hours at the request of customers shall be charged at 150 percent of the rates in the schedule. Miscellaneous charges shall include actual charges for equipment rented to perform the work.The staging charge shall be used for construction, but may be waived for other types of work at the discretion of the director. 
(Ord. of 8-5-2008) 
Sec. 40-321. - Overhead sprinkler systems charges. 
The charge for any overhead sprinkler systems installed in any facilities inside or outside the city limits other than single family residences shall be based on the square footage of the facility in the amount set forth in the city fee schedule. . 
(Ord. of 8-5-2008) 
Sec. 40-322. - Deposits. 
(a)	Deposits shall be 2½ times the monthly bill for all services, as estimated by the director using whatever data may be available, subject to the minimum deposit amounts provided in the city fee schedule. . 
(b)	Deposits may be waived or reduced if evidence is produced that the customer has a good record of payment or that the customer would reasonably be expected to pay all bills promptly. 
(c)	In the event a deposit is waived or is less than 2½ times the monthly bill for all services for whatever reason, and that the customer is delinquent in payment of one or more bills, the deposit for that customer's account or accounts may be required to be increased to 2½ times the monthly bill for all services. Such increased deposits may be required to be paid in full before reconnection of service. 
(Ord. of 8-5-2008) 
Sec. 40-323. - Account establishment or transfer fee. 
In addition to the fees and deposits otherwise provided hereinabove, each applicant for service shall pay in advance an account establishment charge in the amount provided in the city fee schedule for either new service or transfer of service from one location to another. 
(Ord. of 8-5-2008) 
Sec. 40-324. - Administration charge. 
An administration charge in the amount provided in the city fee schedule will be charged to each account for meter reading, the preparation of the water and wastewater bill and other administrative duties. 
(Ord. of 8-5-2008) 
Sec. 40-325. - Monthly use charges. 
The rates for monthly water and wastewater use shall be as provided in the city fee schedule. 
Sec. 40-326. - Adjustments in billing. 
The director is authorized to make equitable adjustments in billings for wastewater services only in cases where leaks in pipes and plumbing facilities result in increased billings without fault on the part of the customer. Such adjustments shall be made based on an average of prior billings only after repairs have been made as certified by a licensed plumber, and shall be limited to three months' billings. 
(Ord. of 8-5-2008) 
Sec. 40-327. - Late fee. 
In the event a utility bill has not been paid by the past due date printed on the bill, the account may be subject to an additional late fee in the amount provided in the city fee schedule. Late fees may be incurred whether or not the service is disconnected. 
(Ord. of 8-5-2008) 
Sec. 40-328. - Disconnection, reconnection and related charges. 
(a)	In the event that service has been cut off for nonpayment of any city utility bill or other action resulting in unauthorized use of city services, service shall not be restored until the unpaid bill and service fees provided by this section are satisfied. 
(b)	Before service is restored, the service fees provided in the city fee schedule shall be paid by the user cumulatively for each action taken to prevent unauthorized use of city services. 
(c)	Payment of fees for reconnection or other fees for delinquency in payment or unauthorized use or tampering shall not exempt any user from any civil or criminal action resulting from violations of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 8-5-2008) 
Sec. 40-329. - Charges for unauthorized meter tampering. 
If any action taken by unauthorized persons inside a meter box causes damages to a curb stop or a cover or lock connected to a curb stop, the resident or customer responsible for the premises shall be charged a fee in the amount provided in the city fee schedule for each incident in addition to other fees and charges. 
(Ord. of 8-5-2008) 
Secs. 40-330—40-346. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS 

Sec. 40-347. - Authorized. 
Whenever a water or sewer line is constructed in an established residential area of the city in which such service was not previously available to residents of said area, or in the case of a public health hazard or extreme hardship, the city council may, in exercise of its discretion, by resolution employ the procedure provided in this article for the collection of impact or tap-in fees in order to extend service to an existing house or building in said area. 
(Ord. of 9-6-1988, div. 6, § I; Ord. of 7-6-1999, div. 5, § I) 
Sec. 40-348. - Authority to levy assessment. 
Upon application of the owner of the property lying in the unserved area, or in case of a public health hazard or extreme hardship in any area, the city council may approve the connection of the property to a water or sewer line to the property without the payment in full of all tap-in or impact fees. Instead, the city council shall levy an assessment against the property to be served and the owner thereof for the amount of the impact and tap-in fee which shall constitute a lien upon the property from the date of adoption of the resolution. 
(Ord. of 9-6-1988, div. 6, § I; Ord. of 7-6-1999, div. 5, § I) 
Sec. 40-349. - Clerk to maintain docket. 
The city clerk shall keep a docket of convenient form and size, with property index, in which there shall be registered all such assessments against property for water or sewer, which docket shall be posted immediately upon the passage by the city council of a resolution authorizing the connection of any water or sewer line. 
(Ord. of 9-6-1988, div. 6, § I; Ord. of 7-6-1999, div. 5, § I;) 
Sec. 40-350. - Installment payments; failure to execute agreement or pay. 
(a)	The owner of the property shall be required to pay in cash or by certified check, within 60 days, not less than 25 percent of the amount of such assessment. The remainder, after deduction of such payment, may upon request of the property owner, be divided into not more than three equal annual installments maturing one, two and three years respectively from the date of the initial payment and the execution of an installment agreement; provided, that proper documentation evidencing the extension of time of repayment shall be executed by the owner of the property in a form acceptable to the city. 
(b)	Should the owner of any property against which an assessment has been levied fail either to execute the instrument required or to pay the same in cash within 60 days, an execution shall issue forthwith against the property to which the service has been provided and the owner thereof. 
(Ord. of 9-6-1988, div. 6, § I; Ord. of 7-6-1999, div. 5, § I) 
Sec. 40-351. - Recordation of installment agreement. 
The installment agreement shall be recorded in the office of the clerk of the superior court of the county and shall contain an acknowledgment of the owner that said assessment constitutes a valid and legally enforceable lien against his property. 
(Ord. of 9-6-1988, div. 6, § I; Ord. of 7-6-1999, div. 5, § I) 
Sec. 40-352. - Effect of extension of time for payment. 
No extension of time for the payment of any assessment shall affect the validity of the assessment or the right of the city, or its assigns, to proceed to enforce the same against the property and the owner thereof. 
(Ord. of 9-6-1988, div. 6, § I; Ord. of 7-6-1999, div. 5, § I) 
Sec. 40-353. - Interest. 
The unpaid portion of the assessment shall bear interest from date of the assessment until paid at the rate of 12 percent per annum on the unpaid balance. 
(Ord. of 9-6-1988, div. 6, § I; Ord. of 7-6-1999, div. 5, § I) 
Sec. 40-354. - Default. 
In case of default in any installment, the entire assessment including accrued interest shall become due and payable forthwith. 
(Ord. of 9-6-1988, div. 6, § I; Ord. of 7-6-1999, div. 5, § I) 
Sec. 40-355. - Recordation of executions. 
All executions issued against property and the owner thereof for such assessments shall immediately be recorded on the general execution docket in the aforesaid clerk's office. The execution shall be collected by the city following the same procedure as for other amounts due the city for assessments. . 
(Ord. of 9-6-1988, div. 6, § I; Ord. of 7-6-1999, div. 5, § I) 
Sec. 40-356. - City's right to transfer and assign indebtedness. 
The evidence of the indebtedness shall be negotiable in form, and the city, free and clear of any and all encumbrances of title or claims of title by the owner, shall have the right to transfer and assign the same to third parties. 
(Ord. of 9-6-1988, div. 6, § I; Ord. of 7-6-1999, div. 5, § I) 
Chapter 42 - ZONING[1] 
(RESERVED) 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Downtown development authorities, O.C.G.A. § 36-42-1 et seq.; municipal business improvement districts, O.C.G.A. § 36-43-1 et seq.; redevelopment authority of municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-44-1; city and county development authorities, O.C.G.A. § 36-62-1 et seq.; county and municipal urban development, O.C.G.A. § 36-61-1 et seq.; city and county zoning procedures, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq.; local zoning proposal review procedures, O.C.G.A. § 36-67-1 et seq.; conflicts of interest in zoning actions, O.C.G.A. § 36-67A-1 et seq.; coordinated and comprehensive planning and service delivery by counties and municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-70-1 et seq. 

CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
This is a chronological listing of the ordinances of the city used in this Code. Repealed or superseded laws at the time of the codification and any omitted materials are not reflected in the table. 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Official Code of Georgia. 

 