THE CODE OF THE CITY OF DAHLONEGA, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published in 2018 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 
Adopted March 5, 2018 
____________ 

[_MUNICIPALITY_] OFFICIALS 
____________ 
Sam Norton (Mayor) 
Roman Gaddis (Post 1) 
Helen Hardman (Post 2) 
Mitchell Ridley (Post 3) 
Bruce Hoffman (Post 4) 
JoAnne Taylor (Post 5) 
Ron Larson (Post 6) 
City Council 
____________ 
Bill Schmid 
City Manager 
____________ 
J. Douglas Parks 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Kimberly Smith 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a codification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Dahlonega, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were ordinances adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 

 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Roger D. Merriam, Code Attorney, and Amanda Heath, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Ms. Kimberly Smith, City Clerk, and Mr. J. Douglas Parks, City Attorney, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Dahlonega, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Dahlonega, Georgia. 
© Copyrighted material.  Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Dahlonega, Georgia. 2018. 
ORDINANCE NO. 2018-1 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF DAHLONEGA, GEORGIA; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF DAHLONEGA: 
Section 1. The Code entitled "The Code of the City of Dahlonega, Georgia," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 127, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before December 4, 2017, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00, imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months, or both such fine and imprisonment. A person convicted of a violation of this Code shall be also be subject to alternative sentencing as provided by law. Except as otherwise provided: (i) With respect to violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time, each day that the violation continues is a separate offense; and (ii) With respect to other violations, each act of violation constitutes a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after December 4, 2017, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective March 5, 2018. 
IT IS SO ORDAINED this 5th day of March, 2018. 

Attest: 


SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code and are considered "Omitted." 
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

 
Subpart A - CHARTER[1] 
AN ACT 
To create a new charter for the City of Dahlonega in the County of Lumpkin; to provide for incorporation; to provide for corporate boundaries; to provide for specific and general powers and the construction and exercise thereof; to provide for a governing body, its form and members, their terms, qualifications, compensation and expenses; to provide for vacancy, forfeiture, filling of vacancy, prohibitions, inquiries and investigations; to provide for general power and authority of the city council; to provide for the duties of mayor; to provide for organizational meetings, regular and special meetings, rules of procedure, quorum, voting, enactment of ordinances, codes of technical regulation, and authentication, recording and codification of ordinances; to provide for mayor pro tempore; to provide for the executive branch, its administrative and service departments and boards, commissions and authorities; to provide for a city clerk; to provide for a city manager; to provide for a city attorney; to provide for personnel administration; to provide for an oath for employees and appointed persons; to provide for candidacy of employees and elected officials; to provide for the judicial branch including the municipal court, its convening, jurisdiction and powers; to provide for a judge; to provide for appeal; to provide for rules for the municipal court; to provide for general and special elections; to provide for the applicability of general laws; to provide for rules and regulations for elections; to provide for vacancies, and for grounds and procedure for removal; to provide for financial and fiscal matters including property taxes, tax levy, tax due date and tax bills, collection of delinquent taxes, license fees, occupational and excise taxes, sewer service charges, sanitary and health service charges, special assessment and transfer of executions; to provide for fiscal year and preparation and adoption of operating budget; to provide for bonds; to provide for existing ordinances and regulations; to provide for construction; to provide for penalties; to provide for specific repeal; to provide for severability; to provide for an effective date; to repeal conflicting laws; and for other purposes. 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF GEORGIA: 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the city Charter being 1982 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1091), page 4354. Amendments to the Charter are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original Charter. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

ARTICLE I. - INCORPORATION, POWERS 

Sec. 1.10. - Incorporation. 
This Act shall constitute the whole charter of the City of Dahlonega, in the County of Lumpkin, repealing and replacing the charter provided by an Act of the General Assembly, approved March 27, 1972 (Ga. Laws 1972, p. 2765) and all Acts amendatory thereto. The City of Dahlonega, Georgia, in the County of Lumpkin and the inhabitants thereof shall continue to be a body politic and corporate under the same name and style of the City of Dahlonega, Georgia. Under that name, said city shall continue to be vested with all of the property and rights of property which now belong to the corporation; shall have perpetual succession; may sue and be sued; may contract and be contracted with; may acquire and hold such property, real and personal, as may be devised, bequeathed, sold or in any manner conveyed or dedicated to or otherwise acquired by it, and from time to time may hold or invest, sell or dispose of the same; may have a common seal and alter and renew the same at will; and may exercise in conformity with this Charter all municipal powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities of every name and nature whatsoever. 
Sec. 1.11. - Corporate boundaries. 
The boundaries of the city of Dahlonega shall be those existing on the effective date of the adoption of this Charter with such alterations as may be made from time to time in the manner provided by law. In accordance with procedures established by ordinance of the council, the city clerk shall maintain a map, a written legal description or any combination thereof showing the current boundaries of the city to be retained permanently in the city records and to be designated as the case may be: "Map (or Description) of the Corporate Limits of the City of Dahlonega, Georgia." Alterations in these boundaries shall be indicated by appropriate entries upon or additions to such map or description, and shall be made at the direction of the council. Photographic, typed, or other copies of such map or description certified by the city clerk shall be admitted in evidence in all courts and shall have the same force and effect as the original map or description. 
Sec. 1.12. - Specific powers. 
The corporate powers of the government of the City of Dahlonega to be exercised by the City Council which is the governing authority may include the following: 
(1)  to levy and to provide for the assessment, valuation, revaluation, and collection of taxes on all property subject to taxation; 
(2)  to levy and to provide for the collection of license fees and taxes on privileges, occupations, trades and professions, and to license and regulate such privileges, occupations, trades and professions, and to provide for the manner and method of payment of such licenses and taxes and to revoke such licenses; 
(3)  to levy and collect such other taxes as may be allowed now or in the future by state law; 
(4)  to make appropriations for the support of the government of the city, to authorize the expenditure of money for any purposes authorized by this Charter and for any purpose for which a municipality is authorized by the laws of the State of Georgia, and to provide for the payment of expenses of the city; 
(5)  to appropriate and borrow money for the payment of debts of the city and to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program or venture authorized by this Charter or the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(6)  to acquire, dispose of, and hold in trust or otherwise, any real, personal, or mixed property, in fee simple or lesser interest, inside or outside the property limits of the city; 
(7)  to accept or refuse gifts, donations, bequests or grants from any source for any purpose related to the powers and duties of the city and the general welfare of its citizens, on such terms and conditions as the donor or grantor may impose; 
(8)  to condemn property, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city for present or future use, and for any corporate purpose deemed necessary by the governing authority, under Section 36-202 of the Code of Georgia, 1933 [see now O.C.G.A. § 22-1-4], or under other applicable Public Acts as are or may be enacted; 
(9)  to acquire, lease, construct, operate, maintain, sell and dispose of public utilities, including but not limited to a system of waterworks, sewers and drains, sewage disposal, gas works, electric light plants, transportation facilities, public airports, cable television systems, and any other public utility; to fix the taxes, charges, rates, fares, fees, assessments, regulations and penalties and withdrawal of service for refusal or failure to pay same and the manner in which such remedies shall be enforced; 
(10)  to grant franchises or make contracts for public utilities; to prescribe the rates, fares, regulations and standards and conditions of service applicable to the service to be provided by the franchise grantee or contractor, insofar as not in conflict with such regulations [as are promulgated] by the Public Service Commission; 
(11)  to lay out, open, extend, widen, narrow, establish or change the grade of, abandon, or close, construct, pave, curb, gutter, adorn with shade trees, otherwise improve, maintain, repair, clean, prevent erosion of, and light streets, roads, alleys, and walkways within the corporate limits of the city; 
(12)  to grant franchises and rights-of-way throughout the streets and roads, and over the bridges and viaducts, for the use of public utilities; 
(13)  to provide for the acquisition, construction, building, operation and maintenance of public ways, parks and playgrounds, recreational facilities, cemeteries, markets and market houses, public buildings, libraries, sewers, drains, sewerage treatment, airports, hospitals, and charitable, cultural, educational, recreational, conservation, sport, curative, corrective, detentional, penal and medical institutions, agencies, and facilities; and any other public improvements, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city; and to regulate the use thereof, and for such purposes property may be acquired by condemnation under Section 36-202 of the Code of Georgia, 1933 [see now O.C.G.A. § 22-1-4], or other applicable Public Acts, as are or may be enacted; 
(14)  to require real estate owners to repair and maintain in a safe condition the sidewalks adjoining their lots or lands; and to enact ordinances establishing the terms and conditions under which such repairs and maintenance shall be effected, including the penalties to be imposed for failure to do so; 
(15)  to regulate the erection and construction of buildings and all other structures; to adopt building, housing, plumbing, electrical, gas, and heating and air conditioning codes and to regulate all housing, building, and building trades; to license all building trades, and to license the construction and erection of buildings and all other structures; 
(16)  to provide for the prevention and punishment of drunkenness, riots, and public disturbances; 
(17)  to regulate or prohibit junk dealers, pawn shops, the manufacture, sale, transportation or distribution of intoxicating liquors and the use and sale of firearms; and to regulate the transportation, storage and use of combustible, explosive and inflammable materials, the use of lighting and heating equipment, and any other business or situation which may be dangerous to persons or property; 
(18)  to regulate and control the conduct of peddlers, and itinerant trades, theatrical performances, exhibitions and shows of any kind whatever, by taxation or otherwise; 
(19)  to license, tax, regulate or prohibit professional fortune telling, palmistry, adult bookstores, and massage parlors; 
(20)  to prohibit or regulate and control the erection, removal, and maintenance of signs, billboards, trees, shrubs, fences, buildings and any and all other structures or obstructions upon or adjacent to the right-of-way of streets and roads or within view thereof, within or abutting the corporate limits of the city and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violation of such ordinances; 
(21)  to prescribe standards of health and sanitation and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(22)  to regulate the emission of smoke or other exhaust which pollutes the air, to prevent the pollution of natural streams which flow within the corporate limits of the city, and to protect the water basins and watersheds from which the city's water supply is taken; 
(23)  to fix and establish fire limits and from time to time to extend, enlarge or restrict same; to prescribe fire safety regulations not inconsistent with general law, relating to both fire prevention and detection and to firefighting, and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violation thereof; 
(24)  to provide for the destruction and removal of any building or other structure which may or might become dangerous or detrimental to the public; 
(25)  to provide for the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, refuse and other solid waste; to regulate the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, refuse and other solid waste by others; to provide for the separate collection of glass, tin, aluminum, cardboard, paper, and other recyclable materials and to provide for the sale of such items; to recover and utilize resources contained in solid waste for production of energy and other purposes; 
(26)  to levy, fix, assess, and collect a garbage, refuse, and trash and waste collection and disposal and other sanitary service charge, tax, or fee, for such services as may be necessary in the operation of the city from all individuals, firms, and corporations residing in or doing business therein benefiting from such services; to enforce the payment of such charges, taxes or fees, and to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges; 
(27)  to levy a fee, charge or sewer tax as necessary to assure the acquiring, constructing, equipping, operating, maintaining, and extending of a sewage disposal plant or plants and sewerage systems, and to levy on the users of sewers and sewerage systems a sewer service charge fee or sewer tax for the use of the sewers; and to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges and for enforcing payment of same; 
(28)  to charge, impose and collect a sewer connection fee or fees, and to charge the same from time to time; such fees to be levied on the users connecting with the sewerage system; 
(29)  to define, regulate and prohibit any act, practice, conduct or use of property which is detrimental, or likely to be detrimental, to the health, sanitation, cleanliness, welfare, and safety of the inhabitants of the city and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(30)  to define a nuisance and provide for its abatement whether on public or private property; 
(31)  to provide for the preservation and protection of property and equipment of the city and the administration and use of same by the public, and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof; 
(32)  to establish minimum standards for and to regulate building construction and repair, electrical wiring and equipment, gas installation and equipment, plumbing, and housing, for the health, sanitation, cleanliness, welfare, and safety of inhabitants of the city and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(33)  to provide that persons given jail sentences in the municipal court shall work out such sentence in any public works or on the streets, roads, drains and squares of the city; or to provide for commitment of such persons to any county correctional institution or jail by agreement with the appropriate county officials; 
(34)  to adopt ordinances and regulations for the prevention of loitering, disorderly conduct, public drunkenness and disturbing the peace in the corporate limits of the city and to prohibit the playing of lotteries therein, and to prohibit or regulate by ordinance such other conduct and activities within the city which, while not constituting an offense against the laws of this state, is deemed by the governing authority to be detrimental and offensive to the peace and good order of the city or to the welfare of the citizens thereof; 
(35)  to regulate and license, or prohibit the keeping or running at large of animals and fowl and to provide for the impoundment of same, if in violation of any ordinance or lawful order; also to provide for their disposition by sale, gift, or humane destruction, when not redeemed as provided by ordinance; to provide punishment for violation of ordinances enacted hereunder; 
(36)  to regulate the operation of motor vehicles and exercise control over all traffic, including parking, upon or across the streets, roads, alleys and walkways of the city; 
(37)  to regulate and license vehicles operated for hire in the city; to limit the number of such vehicles; to require the operators thereof to be licensed; to require public liability insurance on such vehicles in the amounts to be prescribed by ordinance; and to regulate and rent parking spaces in public ways for the use of such vehicles; 
(38)  to provide and maintain a system of pensions and retirement for officers and employees of the city; 
(39)  to levy and provide for the collection of special assessments to cover the costs for any public improvements; 
(40)  to enter into contracts and agreements with other governmental entities and with private persons, firms, and corporations providing for services to be furnished and payments to be made therefor; 
(41)  to create, alter or abolish departments, boards, offices, commissions and agencies of the city, and to confer upon such agencies the necessary and appropriate authority for carrying out all the powers conferred upon or delegated to same; 
(42)  to make, ordain and establish such bylaws, ordinances, rules and regulations as shall appear necessary for the security, welfare, convenience and interest of the city and the inhabitants thereof, and for preserving the health, peace, order and good government of the city; 
(43)  to provide penalties for violation of any ordinance adopted pursuant to the authority of this Charter and the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(44)  to exercise the power of arrest through duly appointed policemen and to organize and operate a fire fighting agency; 
(45)  to establish procedures for determining and proclaiming that an emergency situation exists within or without the city, and to make and carry out all reasonable provisions deemed necessary to deal with or meet such an emergency for the protection, safety, health or well-being of the citizens of the city; 
(46)  to provide comprehensive city planning for development by zoning, subdivision regulations and the like as the city council deems necessary and reasonable to insure a safe, healthy, and aesthetically pleasing community; 
(47)  to organize and operate an urban redevelopment program; 
(48)  to organize and operate such public transportation systems as are deemed beneficial; 
(49)  to exercise and enjoy all other powers, functions, rights, privileges and immunities necessary or desirable to promote or protect the safety, health, peace, security, good order, comfort, convenience, or general welfare of the city and its inhabitants, and to exercise all implied powers necessary to carry into execution all powers granted in this Charter as fully enumerated herein; and to exercise all powers now or in the future authorized to be exercised by other municipal governments under other laws of the State of Georgia. No enumeration of particular powers in this Charter shall be held to be exclusive of others, nor restrictive of general words and phrases granting powers; but shall be held to be in addition to such powers unless expressly prohibited to municipalities under the Constitution or applicable laws of the State of Georgia. 
Sec. 1.13. - General powers. 
In addition to all other powers herein granted, the city shall be vested with any and all powers which municipal corporations are, or may hereafter be, authorized or required to exercise under the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia, as fully and completely as though such powers were specifically enumerated herein; and any and all powers which the city was heretofore authorized to exercise upon the effective date of this Charter. 
Sec. 1.14. - Construction. 
The powers of the city shall be construed liberally and in favor of the city. The specific mention or failure to mention particular powers in this Charter shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general power of the city as stated in this Charter. It is the intention hereof to grant to the city full power and right to exercise all governmental authority necessary for the effective operation and conduct of the city and all of its affairs. 
Sec. 1.15. - Exercise of powers. 
All powers, functions, rights, privileges and immunities of the city, its officers, agencies, or employees shall be carried into execution as provided by this Charter. If this Charter makes no provision, such powers, functions, rights, privileges and immunities shall be carried into execution as provided by ordinance of the governing authority and as provided by pertinent laws of the State of Georgia. 
ARTICLE II. - GOVERNING BODY 

Sec. 2.10. - Form of government. 
The government of the City of Dahlonega shall be vested in a City Council to be composed of a mayor and six councilmen, elected in the manner provided by Article V of this Charter. 
Sec. 2.11. - Terms and qualifications of office. 
Except as otherwise provided in Section 5.10 of this charter, the terms of office of the mayor and councilmembers which begin on or after January 1, 2001, shall be for a period of four years and until their respective successors have been elected and qualified. No person shall be eligible to serve as mayor or councilmember unless he or she: (1) has been a resident of the city for a period of one year immediately prior to the date of his or her election; (2) continues to reside within the city during his or her period of service; (3) is registered and qualified to vote in municipal elections of the City of Dahlonega; and (4) meets the qualification standards required for members of the Georgia House of Representatives as are now or may in the future be prescribed by the Georgia Constitution. 
(2000 Ga. Laws (Act No. 510), page 3591, § 1) 
Sec. 2.12. - Vacancy; forfeiture of office; filling of vacancies. 
(a)  The office of mayor or councilman shall become vacant upon the incumbent's death, resignation, forfeiture of office or removal from office in any manner authorized by this Charter or the laws of the State of Georgia. 
(b)  The mayor or any councilman shall forfeit his or her office if he or she: (1) lacks at any time during the term of office any qualifications of the office as prescribed by this Charter or the laws of the State of Georgia; (2) willfully and knowingly violates any express prohibition of this Charter; (3) is convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude; or (4) is absent from four consecutive regular meetings of the council, except if granted leave of absence by the council which leave shall be entered upon the minutes. 
(c)  A vacancy in the office of mayor or councilman shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term, if any, as provided for in Article V of this Charter. 
Sec. 2.13. - Compensation and expenses. 
The mayor and councilmen shall receive as compensation for their services an amount prescribed by ordinance passed by the council in conformity with the laws of the State of Georgia. The mayor and councilmen shall be entitled to receive their actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties of office. 
Sec. 2.14. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  Except as authorized by law, no member of the council shall hold any other elective municipal office or municipal employment in the City of Dahlonega during the term for which he or she is elected. 
(b)  Any city councilman, officer or employee who has a financial interest, direct or indirect or by reason of ownership of stock in any corporation, in any contract with the city or in the sale of any land, material, supplies or services to the city or to a contractor supplying the city, shall make known that interest by announcement at a council meeting or in writing to the city clerk and shall refrain from voting upon or otherwise participating in this capacity as a city officer or employee in the making of such sale or in the making or performance of such contract. Any city councilman, officer or employee who willfully conceals such financial interest or willfully violates the requirements of this subsection shall, upon conviction, after administrative hearing before the council, be found guilty of malpractice or malfeasance in office or position and shall forfeit his or her office or position. Violation of this Section with the knowledge express or implied of the person or corporation involved in such contract or sale shall render the contract or sale voidable by the council. 
Sec. 2.15. - Inquiries and investigations. 
The council may make inquiries and investigations into affairs of the city and the conduct of any department, office or agency thereof and for this purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony and require the production of evidence. Any person who fails or refuses to obey a lawful order issued in the exercise of these powers by the council shall be punished as provided by ordinance. 
Sec. 2.16. - General power and authority of the council. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided by law or by this Charter, the council shall be vested with all the powers of government of the City of Dahlonega provided in Article I. 
(b)  In addition to all other powers conferred on it by law, the council shall have the authority to adopt and provide for the execution of such ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations, not inconsistent with this Charter, the Constitution and the laws of the State of Georgia, which it shall deem necessary, expedient or helpful for the peace, good order, protection of life and property, health and welfare, sanitation, comfort, convenience, prosperity or well-being of the inhabitants of the City of Dahlonega and may enforce such ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations by imposing penalties for violation thereof. 
(c)  The council may by ordinance create, change, alter, abolish, or consolidate offices, agencies and departments of the city and may assign additional functions to any of the offices, agencies and departments expressly provided for by this Charter. 
Sec. 2.17. - Duties of mayor. 
The mayor shall be the chief executive officer of the City of Dahlonega. He shall possess all of the executive and administrative powers granted to the city under the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia, and all the executive and administrative powers contained in this Charter. The mayor shall: 
(a)  preside at all meetings of the council; 
(b)  vote as a member of the council only at such times as are necessary to break a tie or deadlock of the council; 
(c)  be the official head of the city for the service of process and for ceremonial purposes; 
(d)  have power to administer oaths and to take affidavits; 
(e)  sign all written contracts entered into by the council on behalf of the city and all other contracts and instruments executed by the city which by law are required to be in writing; 
(f)  see that all laws and ordinances of the city are faithfully executed; 
(g)  perform other duties as may be required by law, this Charter or ordinance or as otherwise directed by the City Council. 
Sec. 2.18. - Submission of ordinance to the mayor; veto power. 
(1)  Every ordinance adopted by the council shall be presented promptly by the clerk to the mayor. 
(2)  The mayor, within five calendar days after passage of an ordinance by the council, shall return it to the clerk with or without his approval, or with his disapproval. If the ordinance has been approved by the mayor, it shall become law upon its return to the clerk; if the ordinance is neither approved nor disapproved, it shall become law at twelve o'clock noon on the tenth calendar day after its adoption; if the ordinance is disapproved, the mayor shall submit to the council through the clerk a written statement of his reasons for his veto. The clerk shall record upon the ordinance the date of its delivery to and receipt from the mayor. 
(3)  Ordinances vetoed by the mayor shall be presented by the clerk to the council at its next meeting and should the council then or at any meeting within 30 days of the mayor's veto adopt the ordinance by an affirmative vote of four councilmen, it shall become law. Such action shall be taken by a recorded vote of the council and entered upon the minutes of the council. 
Sec. 2.19. - Organization meeting. 
The council shall meet for organization on the date and at the time of the first regular meeting in January following each regular election. The meeting shall be called to order by the city clerk and the oath of office shall be administered to all newly elected officials of the city as follows: 
"I solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support the Constitution of the United States and of the State of Georgia; that I will in all respects observe the provisions of the charter and ordinances of the City of Dahlonega, and I will faithfully discharge the duties of (mayor or councilman, as the case may be). So help me God." 
Said oath with the officer's jurat attached shall be written or printed, and when executed, filed with the city clerk. 
Sec. 2.20. - Mayor pro tempore. 
At the organization meeting described in Section 2.19, the council shall elect one of its members mayor pro tempore for that year who shall discharge the duties and exercise the powers and authority of mayor in the absence, disability or disqualification of the mayor and during a vacancy in the office of mayor; provided that his or her rights and duties as councilman shall remain unimpaired. 
Sec. 2.21. - Regular and special meetings. 
(a)  The council shall hold regular meetings at such times and places as prescribed by ordinance. The council may recess any regular meeting and continue such meetings on any weekday or hour it may fix, and may transact any business at such continued meeting as may be transacted at any regular meeting. 
(b)  Special meetings of the council may be held on call of the mayor or by the mayor pro tempore and two councilmen. Notice of such special meetings shall be served on all other members personally or by telephone personally, or shall be left at their residence at least 12 hours in advance of the meeting. Such notice shall not be required if the mayor and all councilmen are present when the special meeting is called. Attendance at a special meeting by the mayor and all councilmen shall constitute a waiver of notice of the special meeting if all of said persons are present at the time the meeting is convened. Only the business stated in the call may be transacted at the special meeting, except by unanimous consent of all members present. With such consent, any business which may be transacted in a regular meeting may be conducted at the special meeting. 
Sec. 2.22. - Rules of procedure. 
The council shall adopt its rules of procedure and order of business consistent with the provisions of this Charter and shall provide for the keeping of a journal of its proceedings, which shall be a public record. 
Sec. 2.23. - Quorum; voting. 
The mayor or vice-mayor and four councilmen shall constitute a quorum and shall be authorized to transact business of the council. Voting on the adoption of ordinances shall be taken by a recorded vote of the council and shall be entered upon the minutes. Any member of the council shall have the right to request a roll call vote. The affirmative vote of a majority of the council present shall be required for the adoption of any ordinance, resolution or motion except as otherwise provided in this Charter. 
Sec. 2.24. - Enactment of ordinances. 
(a)  Except as herein provided, every official action of the council which is to become law shall be by ordinance. Each proposed ordinance shall be introduced in writing and in the form required for final adoption. No ordinance shall contain a subject which is not expressed in its title. The enacting clause shall be: "Be it ordained by the city council of Dahlonega…." Any ordinance which repeals or amends an existing ordinance shall set forth the ordinance sections or subsections to be repealed or amended. 
(b)  An ordinance may be introduced by any member of the council and read at a regular or special meeting of the council. Ordinances shall be considered and adopted or rejected by the council in accordance with the rules which it shall establish. Every ordinance which becomes law shall be signed by the mayor. 
Sec. 2.25. - Codes of technical regulation. 
(a)  The council may adopt any standard code of technical regulations by reference thereto in an adopting ordinance. The procedure and requirements governing such adopting ordinance shall be as prescribed for ordinances generally except that a copy of each adopted code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance, shall be authenticated and recorded by the clerk pursuant to Section 2.26. 
(b)  Copies of any adopted code of technical regulations shall be made available by the clerk for distribution or for purchase at a reasonable price. 
Sec. 2.26. - Authentication, recording and codification of ordinances. 
(a)  The city clerk shall authenticate by his or her signature and record in full in a properly indexed book kept for that purpose all ordinances adopted by the council. 
(b)  The council may provide for the preparation of a general codification of all ordinances of the city having the force and effect of law. The general codification may be adopted by the council by ordinance, and, if so adopted, shall be known as "The Code of the City of Dahlonega, Georgia." All ordinances enacted subsequent to the adoption of the code shall be incorporated therein. 
ARTICLE III. - EXECUTIVE BRANCH 

Sec. 3.10. - Administrative and service departments. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided herein, the council, by ordinance, may establish, abolish, merge, or consolidate offices, positions of employment, departments and agencies of the city, as they shall deem necessary for the proper administration of the affairs and government of the city; shall prescribe the functions and duties of existing departments, offices, and agencies or of any departments, offices and agencies hereinafter created or established; may provide that the same person shall fill any number of offices and positions of employment; and may transfer or change the function or duties of offices, positions of employment, departments and agencies of the city. 
(b)  The operations and responsibilities of each department now or hereafter established in the city shall be distributed among such divisions or bureaus as may be provided by ordinance of the council. Each department shall consist of such officers, employees, and positions as may be provided by this Charter or by ordinance, and shall be subject to the general supervision and guidance of the council. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided by this Charter, the directors of departments and other appointed officers of the city shall serve at the pleasure of the appointing authority. Vacancies occurring in an appointive office shall be filled in the same manner as prescribed by this Charter for an original appointment. 
(d)  Except as otherwise provided by law, the directors of departments and other appointed officers of the city shall be appointed solely on the basis of their respective administrative and professional qualifications. 
(e)  All appointive officers and directors of departments shall receive such compensation as prescribed by ordinance of the city council. 
Sec. 3.11. - Boards, commissions and authorities. 
(a)  All members of boards, commissions and authorities of the city shall be appointed by the council for such terms of office and such manner of appointment as provided by ordinance, except where other appointing authority, term of office or manner of appointment is prescribed by this Charter or by applicable State law. 
(b)  Any vacancy in office of any member of a board, commission, or authority of the city shall be filled for the unexpired term in the manner prescribed herein for original appointment, except as otherwise provided by this Charter or any applicable State law. 
(c)  No member of any board, commission or authority shall assume office until he shall have executed and filed with the clerk of the city the oath prescribed in Section 3.16. 
(d)  Any member of any board, commission or authority may be removed from office for cause by a two-thirds vote of the members of the council; 
(e)  Members of boards, commissions and authorities may receive such compensation and expenses in the performance of their official duties as prescribed by ordinance. 
(f)  The qualifications required of members of boards, commissions, and authorities shall be as prescribed by ordinance. The mayor and members of the council shall be eligible to be appointed to and serve on such boards, commissions and authorities when the council, in its discretion, determines it appropriate. 
(g)  Except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by applicable State law, each board, commission or authority of the city government shall elect one of its members as chairman and one member as vice-chairman for terms of one year and may elect as its secretary one of its own members or may appoint as secretary an employee of the city. Each board, commission, or authority of the city government may establish such bylaws, rules and regulations, not inconsistent with this Charter, ordinances of the city, or applicable State law, as it deems appropriate and necessary for the conduct of its affairs, copies of which shall be filed with the clerk of the city. 
Sec. 3.12. - Personnel administration. 
The council may, in its discretion, adopt ordinances, rules and regulations consistent with this Charter dealing with: (1) the method of employment selection and probationary periods of employment; (2) adoption and administration of a position classification and pay plan including methods of promotion and application of service ratings thereto, and transfer of employees within the classification plan; (3) hours of work, vacation, sick leave, and other leaves of absence, overtime pay, and the order and manner in which layoff shall be effected; and (4) such other personnel policies and procedures as may be necessary to provide for adequate and systematic handling of the personnel affairs of the city. 
Sec. 3.13. - City clerk. 
The council may appoint a city clerk, who shall also serve as the city treasurer, with such compensation as shall be determined by the council. The city clerk shall keep the minutes of the proceedings of the city council, maintain in a safe place all records and documents pertaining to the affairs of the city and perform such other duties as may be required by law or as the council may direct. 
Sec. 3.14. - City manager; appointment; qualifications; compensation. 
The city council may appoint a city manager for an indefinite term and fix his or her compensation. The manager shall be appointed solely on the basis of his or her executive and administrative qualifications. He or she need not be a resident of the city or state at the time of his or her appointment, but shall reside within Lumpkin County while in office. The city manager shall serve at the pleasure of the council. The city manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the government of the City of Dahlonega and shall have such powers and duties as are vested in him or her by ordinance or as otherwise provided by the council. 
Sec. 3.15. - City attorney. 
The council may appoint a city attorney and provide for the payment of such attorney for services rendered to the city. The city attorney shall be responsible for representing and defending the city in all litigation in which the city is a party; shall attend the meetings of the council as directed; shall advise the council, mayor and other officers and employees of the city concerning legal aspects of the city's affairs; and shall perform such other duties as may be requested by the council. 
Sec. 3.16. - Oath of officers. 
Before a person takes any office in the city government, he or she shall take before an officer of the State, authorized to administer oaths, the following such oath or affirmation: 
"I solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support the Constitution of the United States and of the State of Georgia; that I will in all respects, observe the provisions of the charter and ordinances of the City of Dahlonega, and I will faithfully discharge the duties of ___________. So help me God." 
Said oaths, with the officer's jurat attached, shall be written or printed, and when executed, filed with the city clerk. 
Sec. 3.17. - Candidacy of employees and elected officials. 
No officer or employee of the city, other than the mayor and councilmen, shall continue in the employment of the city after becoming a candidate for nomination or election to any city office. No councilman or mayor may run for any city office except the one presently held without first resigning from such office. 
ARTICLE IV. - JUDICIAL BRANCH 

Sec. 4.10. - Creation; name. 
There shall be a court to be known as the Municipal Court of the City of Dahlonega. 
(Ord. No. 2003-6, § 4.10, 11-3-2003) 
Sec. 4.11. - Chief judge; associate judge. 
(a)  The municipal court shall be presided over by a chief judge and such part-time, full-time, or stand-by judges as shall be provided by ordinance. 
(b)  No person shall be qualified or eligible to serve as a judge on the municipal court unless that person shall have attained the age of 21 years, shall be a member of the State Bar of Georgia and shall possess all qualifications required by law. All judges shall be appointed by the city council and shall serve until a successor is appointed and qualified. 
(c)  Compensation of the judges shall be fixed by ordinance. 
(d)  Judges serve at will and may be removed from office at any time by the city council unless otherwise provided by ordinance. 
(e)  Before assuming office, each judge shall take an oath, given by the mayor, that the judge will honestly and faithfully discharge the duties of the office to the best of that person's ability and without fear, favor or partiality. The oath shall be entered upon the minutes of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2003-6, § 4.11, 11-3-2003) 
Sec. 4.12. - Convening. 
The municipal court shalt be convened at regular intervals as provided by ordinance, or in the discretion of the Solicitor. 
(Ord. No. 2003-6, § 4.12, 11-3-2003) 
Sec. 4.13. - Jurisdiction; powers. 
(a)  The municipal court shall try and punish violations of this charter, all city ordinances, and such other violations as provided by law; and exercise all powers granted to Municipal Courts by state law. 
(b)  The municipal court shall have authority to punish those in its presence for contempt, provided that such punishment shall not exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00) or ten (10) days in jail. 
(c)  The municipal court may fix punishment for offenses within its jurisdiction not exceeding a fine of One Thousand ($1,000.00) Dollars or imprisonment for Six Months (180 days) or both such fine and imprisonment, or may fix punishment by fine, imprisonment or alternative sentencing as now or hereafter provided by law in excess of the stated fines and imprisonment if otherwise provided by law. 
(d)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish a schedule of fees to defray the cost of operation, and shall be entitled to reimbursement of the cost of meals, transportation, and caretaking of prisoners bound over to superior courts for violations of state law. "Cost of Operation" may include fine surcharges for specific software packages essential to the orderly functioning of the Municipal Court over and in addition to the fine surcharges otherwise authorized or required by law, including but not limited to those surcharges already in effect as part of the fine and fee structure of the Municipal Court. 
(e)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish bail and recognizances to ensure the presence of those charged with violations before said court, and shall have discretionary authority to accept cash or personal or real property as surety for the appearance of persons charged with violations. Whenever any person shall give bail for that person's appearance and shall fail to appear at the time fixed for trial, the bond shall be forfeited by the judge presiding at such time, and an execution issued thereon by serving the defendant and the defendant's sureties with a rule nisi, at least two (2) days before a hearing on the rule. 
(f)  The municipal court shall have the same authority as superior courts to compel the production of evidence in the possession of any party; to enforce obedience to its orders, judgments and sentences; and to administer such oaths as are necessary. 
(g)  The municipal court may compel the presence of all parties necessary to a proper disposal of each case by the issuance of summonses, subpoenas, and warrants which may be served as executed by any officer as authorized by this charter or by law. 
(h)  Each judge of the municipal court shall be authorized to issue warrants for the arrest of persons charged with offenses against any ordinance of the city, and each judge of the municipal court shall have the same authority as a magistrate of the state to issue warrants for offenses against state laws committed within the city. 
(Ord. No. 2003-6, § 4.13, 11-3-2003) 
Sec. 4.14. - Certiorari. 
The right of certiorari from the decision and judgment of the municipal court shall exist in all criminal cases and ordinance violation cases, and such certiorari shall be obtained under the sanction of a judge of the Superior Court of Lumpkin County under the laws of the State of Georgia regulating the granting and issuance of writs of certiorari. 
(Ord. No. 2003-6, § 4.14, 11-3-2003) 
Sec. 4.15. - Rules for court. 
With the approval of the city council, the judge shall have full power and authority to make reasonable rules and regulations necessary and proper to secure the efficient and successful administration of the municipal court; provided, however, that the city council may adopt in part or in toto the rules and regulations applicable to municipal courts. The rules and regulations made or adopted shall be filed with the city clerk, shall be available for public inspection, and, upon request, a copy shall be furnished to all defendants in municipal court proceedings at least 48 hours prior to said proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 2003-6, § 4.15, 11-3-2003) 
Sec. 4.16. - Indigent defense. 
With the approval of the city council, the Judge shall have full power and authority to establish a system of indigent defense. The Judge may also provide for payment for indigent defense through fine surcharges as may be allowed by law. 
(Ord. No. 2003-6, § 4.16, 11-3-2003) 
ARTICLE V. - ELECTIONS 

Sec. 5.10. - Regular election. 
(a)  The mayor and councilmembers of the City of Dahlonega who are serving as such on the effective date of this Act and any person selected to fill a vacancy in any such office shall continue to serve as such members until the regular expiration of their respective terms of office and upon the election and qualification of their respective successors. On and after the effective date of this Act, the city council shall consist of six members, all of whom shall be elected at large as provided in this section, and the mayor who is elected at large as provided in this section. 
(b)  For purposes of electing members of the city council, the City of Dahlonega shall consist of one election district with numbered posts 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6. Each person seeking election as a councilmember shall designate the post for which such person seeks election. 
(c)  In order to be elected as a member of the city council from a council district, a person must receive a plurality of votes cast for that office in the entire city. At the time of qualifying for election as a member of the city council, each candidate for such office shall specify the post for which that person is a candidate. A person elected or appointed as a member of the city council must continue to reside in the city during that person's term of office or that office shall become vacant. 
(d)  The mayor may reside anywhere within the City of Dahlonega and, if elected, must receive a plurality of votes cast for that office in the entire city. The mayor must continue to reside within the city during that person's term of office or that office shall become vacant. 
(e)  (1)  Larry Crowel, the member of the council elected at the November, 2001, general election, shall be designated to be serving from and representing Post 1. 
(2)  Guy Laboa, the member of the council elected at the November, 2001, general election, shall be designated to be serving from and representing Post 2. 
(3)  Dudley Owens, the member of the council elected at the November, 2001, general election, shall be designated to be serving from and representing Post 3. 
(4)  Michael Clemons, the member of the council elected at the November, 2003, general election, shall be designated to be serving from and representing Post 4. 
(5)  Bill Northquest, the member of the council elected at the November, 2003, general election, shall be designated to be serving from and representing Post 5. 
(6)  Terry Peters, the member of the council elected at the November, 2003, general election, shall be designated to be serving from and representing Post 6. 
(7)  The mayor and the members of the council representing Post 1, Post 2, and Post 3 shall be elected at the municipal general election on the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November, 2005, and quadrennially thereafter, and shall take office on the first day of January immediately following their election for terms of four years and until their successors are elected and qualified. 
(8)  The members of the council representing Post 4, Post 5, [and] Post 6 shall be elected at the municipal general election on the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November, 2007, and quadrennially thereafter and shall take office on the first day of January immediately following their election for terms of four years and until their successors are elected and qualified. 
(2000 Ga. Laws (Act No 510), page 3591, § 2; 2005 Ga. Laws (Act No. 211), page 3735, § 1) 
Sec. 5.11. - Applicability of general laws. 
The procedures and requirements for election of all elected officials of the City of Dahlonega as to primary, special, and general elections shall be in conformity with the provisions of O.C.G.A. title 21, ch. 2, known as the Georgia Election Code, as now or hereafter amended. All candidates in general or special elections shall be elected by a plurality of the votes cast to fill such public office. 
(2000 Ga. Laws (Act No 510), page 3591, § 3) 
Sec. 5.12. - Special elections; vacancies. 
In the event that a vacancy occurs in one or more elected offices of the city for any cause whatsoever, the remaining elected officials shall constitute a quorum for the purpose of implementing the terms of this section, and those remaining elected officials shall appoint a qualified person to fill such vacancy or vacancies for the remainder of the unexpired term or terms. No person appointed to fill such a vacancy shall be eligible to run in the next succeeding election for the post held by such appointed person. If a tie vote occurs in regard to filling such vacancy or vacancies, the mayor, or in the event the mayor recuses himself or herself or is otherwise incapable of making the selection, or if the position of mayor is vacant, the mayor pro tempore shall appoint a qualified person to fill the vacancy or vacancies. At no time shall there be more than three members so appointed holding office and, if a vacancy occurs within the three members so appointed on the city council, a special election shall be held by the city at the next available time in compliance with applicable laws, at which election a qualified person shall be elected to serve the remainder of the unexpired term of such vacant office, provide that no such election shall be held if a regular annual election will occur within six months of the date of vacancy. 
(1990 Ga. Laws (Act No. 97), page 4534, § 1; 2000 Ga. Laws (Act No. 510), page 3591, § 4; 2010 Ga. Laws (Act No. 354), page 3522, § 1; Act of 5-11-2010 ) 
Sec. 5.13. - Rules and regulations for elections. 
Except as otherwise provided by the charter, the city council shall, by ordinance, prescribe such rules and regulations it deems appropriate to fulfill any options and duties under O.C.G.A. title 21, ch. 2, known as the "Georgia Election Code," as now or hereafter amended. 
(2000 Ga. Laws (Act No. 510), page 3591, § 5) 
Sec. 5.14. - Grounds for removal. 
The mayor or any councilman shall be subject to removal from office for any one or more of the following causes: 
(a)  incompetence, misfeasance or malfeasance in office; 
(b)  conviction of a crime involving moral turpitude; 
(c)  failure at any time to possess any of the qualifications of office as provided by this Charter or by law; 
(d)  willful violation of any express prohibition of this Charter; 
(e)  abandonment of office or neglect to perform the duties thereof; or 
(f)  failure for any other cause to perform the duties of office as required by this Charter or by law. 
Sec. 5.15. - Procedure for removal. 
Removal of an elected officer from office may be accomplished by one of the following methods: 
(a)  By action of two-thirds vote of the entire membership of the council. In the event an elected officer is sought to be removed by the action of the council, such officer shall be entitled to a written notice specifying the grounds for removal and to a public hearing which shall be held not less than ten (10) days from the service of such written notice. Any elected officer sought to be removed from office as herein provided shall have the right of appeal from the decision of the council to the Superior Court of Lumpkin County. Such appeal shall be governed by the same rules as govern appeals to the superior court from the probate court. 
(b)  By information filed in the Superior Court of Lumpkin County as provided by law. 
Sec. 5.16. - Supplemental procedures for removal hearings. 
Subpart 1.  Consideration of dismissal hearing; finding of probable cause; notice of charge. 
(a)  When information comes to the Mayor and Council, pursuant to its investigatory powers under the City Charter or by other means, that an elected official may have engaged in conduct that would be grounds for removal under Section 5.14 of the City Charter or under such other laws as exist or may hereafter be enacted, the Mayor and Council shall make an initial determination as to whether probable cause for removal exists. The Mayor and Council may make such a determination based on live testimony taken by it in open session, through acceptance of a report conducted under its auspices by persons designated to make such an investigation on its behalf, or by other reliable means. To the extent information comes to the Mayor and Council suggesting grounds for removal exist, the Mayor and Council retain investigative powers under Section 2.15 of the Charter and may utilize such powers in any manner it deems appropriate to reach a decision as to whether probable cause exists. The City Attorney or his designee shall serve as a legal advisor to the Mayor and Council in making its determination. 
(b)  The Mayor and Council shall conduct a vote on the probable cause determination. Such determination may be made by adoption of a resolution finding probable cause to exist. 
(c)  Once probable cause has been found to exist, a written notice shall be prepared detailing the grounds for removal. In addition to detailing grounds for removal, the notice shall provide the time, place and date for hearing of the charges and reference the procedures adopted by this Ordinance. A copy of the notice shall be served on the officer against whom removal is sought no less than 10 days before any scheduled hearing. The notice may be served by hand delivery or by certified mail. The Mayor and Council shall convene a hearing as provided for in Subpart 3 hereof or may appoint a Hearing Board as provided for in Subpart 2 to conduct the hearing. 
Subpart 2.  Hearing Board. 
(a)  The Mayor and Council, in lieu of conducting a hearing directly, may appoint a Hearing Board to hear evidence and make a recommended finding as to whether the official shall be removed from office. The Hearing Board shall be composed of three impartial persons, each of whom shall (i) be either an attorney licensed to practice law in Georgia or a city manager, (ii) possess no less than 10 years' experience in local government, and (iii) not be involved in any current official capacity with the City of Dahlonega. 
(b)  Members of the Hearing Board shall be compensated at a per diem set by the City Council or its administrative staff. 
(c)  In the event a Hearing Board is constituted, any action taken by a majority of the Hearing Board shall be considered final action of the Hearing Board and shall constitute its recommended finding. 
Subpart 3.  Hearing on charges. 
(a)  Hearing on the charges shall be convened at such time, day and place as described in the notice of the hearing. The Hearing Board, if such a board is conducting the hearing, shall designate one of its members as a Chairperson to preside over the hearing. The hearing of evidence shall be open to the public. 
(b)  At the public hearing, the official charged shall be entitled: 
(1)  to be represented by privately retained counsel of his or her choice; 
(2)  to present his or her case or defense by oral or documentary evidence, to be given under oath or by affirmation; 
(3)  to submit rebuttal evidence; and 
(4)  to conduct such cross-examination as may be required for a full and true disclosure of the facts. 
(c)  Any relevant oral or documentary evidence may be received, but the Hearing Body as a matter of policy shall provide for the exclusion of irrelevant, immaterial or unduly repetitious evidence. The Hearing Body shall not be bound by the strict rules of evidence prevailing in the courts of law or equity. 
(d)  The Hearing Body and the Official charged shall exchange witness lists (including brief summaries of anticipated testimony), documentary evidence, audio or video evidence, and exhibits no later than five work days prior to the hearing. 
(e)  A full record of the hearing shall be prepared and maintained by the City, which record shall be open to the public and available for inspection. Any person may request a copy of the record upon payment of the full cost thereof. 
(f)  The City Attorney or his designee may serve as legal advisor to the Hearing Body and may be designated in lieu of the chair of the hearing Board or the Mayor to preside over the hearing. 
(g)  Upon conclusion of the hearing, the Hearing Body shall deliberate upon the evidence presented. Deliberations shall be closed to the public. The Hearing Body shall make findings of fact based on the evidence presented. 
(i)  Where the Hearing Body, if the Hearing Body is composed of members of the City Council, determines, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the official has engaged in conduct constituting grounds for removal under Section 5.14 of the City Charter, the decision shall be for removal. Where the Hearing Body, if the Hearing Body is composed of members of the City Council, determines, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the official has not engaged in any such conduct, the action shall be dismissed. A decision for removal shall require a two-thirds vote of the entire membership of the City Council in accordance with Section 5.15 of the Charter. 
(ii)  Where the Hearing Body, if the Hearing Body is composed of a Hearing Board as set forth in Subpart 2 hereof, determines by a preponderance of the evidence that the official has engaged in conduct constituting grounds for removal under Section 5.14 of the City Charter, the Hearing Body shall recommend to the City Council that the decision be for removal. Where the Hearing Body, if the Hearing Body is composed of a Hearing Board as set forth in Subpart 2 hereof, determines by a preponderance of the evidence that the official has not engaged in any such conduct, the Hearing Body shall recommend to the City Council that the action shall be dismissed. A decision for removal shall require [a] two-thirds vote of the entire membership of the City Council in accordance with Section 5.15 of the Charter. 
(h)  The Hearing Body shall prepare a written decision, including findings of fact, conclusions and its final determination/recommendation with regard to removal. A copy of the written decision shall be provided to the official upon its completion by either hand delivery or certified mail. The City Council's written decision shall be a final action of the City. 
Subpart 4.  Appeals. An official disputing the action of the Hearing Body shall have 30 days to appeal the decision to the Superior Court of Lumpkin County as provided in Section 5.15 of the City Charter. Where the Hearing Body is composed of a Hearing Board as set forth in Subpart 2 hereof, the 30 days shall not begin to run until after the City Council has issued a final determination based on the hearing Board's recommendation. 
Subpart 5.  Definitions. For the purpose of this Chapter the following terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
(1)  "Hearing Body" shall mean either the Mayor and Council or a Hearing Board designated pursuant to Subpart 2 by the Mayor and Council and designated to act in the Mayor and Council's stead as provided herein. 
(2)  "Official" shall mean the elected official for whom removal is sought prior to the expiration of that official's term of office. 
(3)  "Work days" shall be defined as excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and City-recognized holidays. 
Subpart 6.  Intent. It is the intent of this Ordinance to serve as a general process for removal of all officials subject to that action. 
Subpart 7.  Interpretation. Should any words, phrases, sentences or paragraphs of this Ordinance be declared invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such ruling shall not affect the remaining words, phrases, sentences or paragraphs of this Ordinance, but the offending provisions shall be severed from the remainder to the extent allowable by law. 
Subpart 8.  Effective date. This Ordinance shall be effective upon its adoption at two consecutive regular meetings of the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 2011-1, 4-11-2011; 2011 Ga. Laws, page 4344) 
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCIAL AND FISCAL MATTERS 

Sec. 6.10. - Property taxes. 
All property subject to taxation for State or county purposes, assessed as of January 1 in each year, shall be subject to the property tax levied by the City of Dahlonega. The council by ordinance shall elect to use the county assessment for the year in which the city taxes are to be levied and shall request the county to furnish appropriate information for such purpose. 
Sec. 6.11. - Tax levy. 
The council may assess, levy and collect an ad valorem tax on all real and personal property within the corporate limits of the city that is subject to such taxation by the State and county. This tax is for the purpose of raising revenues to defray the costs of operating the city government; providing governmental services; for the repayment of principal and interest on general obligations; and for any other public purpose as determined by the council in its discretion. 
Sec. 6.12. - Millage rates; due dates; tax bills. 
The council by ordinance shall establish a millage rate for the city property tax; a due date; and in what length of time those taxes must be paid. The council by ordinance may provide for the payment of these taxes by installation or in one lump sum, as well as to authorize the voluntary payment of taxes prior to the time when due. 
Sec. 6.13. - Sewer service charges. 
The council by ordinance shall have the right, power and authority to assess and collect fees, charges, and tolls for sewer services rendered both within and without the corporate limits of the City of Dahlonega, to provide for the cost and expense of providing for the collection and disposal of sewage through the sewerage facilities of the city. If unpaid, said sewer service charge shall be collected as provided in Section 6.20. 
Sec. 6.14. - Sanitary and health service charge. 
The council shall have authority by ordinance to provide for, to enforce, to levy and to collect the cost of sanitary and health services necessary in the operation of the city from all individuals, firms and corporations, residing in or doing business in the city benefiting from such service. Such authority shall include the power to assess, levy and collect annual or monthly sanitary taxes or fees in such amount or amounts, and based upon and in accordance with such classification of property and sanitary service or service provided, as may be fixed by ordinance. If unpaid, such taxes or fees shall be collected as provided in Section 6.20. 
Sec. 6.15. - Special assessments. 
The council shall have power and authority to assess all or part of the cost of constructing, reconstructing, widening, or improving any public way, street, sidewalk, curbing, gutters, sewers, or other utility mains and appurtenances, against the abutting property owners, under such terms and conditions as may be prescribed by ordinance. If unpaid, such special assessments shall be collected as provided in Section 6.20. 
Sec. 6.16. - Occupation and business taxes. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to levy such occupation or business taxes as are not denied by general State law. Such taxes may be levied on both individuals and corporations who transact business in this city or who practice or offer to practice any profession or calling therein. The city council may classify businesses, occupations, professions or callings for the purpose of such taxation in any way which may be lawful and compel the payment of such taxes as provided in Section 6.20. 
Sec. 6.17. - Licenses, permits, fees. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to require any individuals or corporations who transact business in this city or who practice or offer to practice any profession or calling therein to obtain a license or permit for such activity from the city and pay a reasonable fee for such license or permit where such activities are not now regulated by general State law in such a way as to preclude city regulation. Such fees may reflect the total cost to the city of regulating the activity and, if unpaid, shall be collected as provided in Section 6.20. The city council by ordinance may establish reasonable requirements for obtaining or keeping such licenses as the public health, safety, and welfare necessitates. 
Sec. 6.18. - Franchises. 
The city council shall have the power to grant franchises for the use of this city's streets and alleys, for the purposes of railroads, street railways, telephone companies, electric companies, cable television, gas companies, transportation companies and other similar organizations. The city council shall determine the duration, provisions, terms, whether the same shall be exclusive or nonexclusive, and the consideration for such franchises; provided, however, no franchise shall be granted for a period of in excess of 35 year(s) and no franchise shall be granted unless the city receives just and adequate compensation therefor. The city council shall provide for the registration of all franchises with the city clerk in a registration book to be kept by him or her. The city council may provide by ordinance for the registration within a reasonable time of all franchises previously granted. 
Sec. 6.19. - Construction; other taxes and fines. 
The City of Dahlonega shall be empowered to levy any other tax or fee allowed now or hereafter by State law and the specific mention of any right, power or authority in this Article shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general powers of the city to govern its local affairs. 
Sec. 6.20. - Collection of delinquent taxes and fees. 
The city council by ordinance may provide generally for the collection of delinquent taxes, fees, or other revenue due the city under this Charter by whatever reasonable means as are not precluded by general State law. This shall include providing for the dates when the taxes or fees are due; late penalties or interest; issuance and execution of fi. fa's; creation and priority of liens; making delinquent taxes and fees personal debts of the persons required to pay the taxes or fees imposed; revoking city licenses for failure to pay any city taxes or fees; allowing exceptions for hardship; and providing for the assignment or transfer of tax executions. 
Sec. 6.21. - General obligation bonds. 
The council shall have the power to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program or venture authorized under this Charter or the general laws of the State. Such bonding authority shall be exercised in accordance with the laws governing bond issuances by municipalities in effect at the time said issue is undertaken. 
Sec. 6.22. - Revenue bonds. 
Revenue bonds may be issued by the council as State law now or hereafter provides. 
Sec. 6.23. - Fiscal year; preparation and adoption of operating budget. 
The council shall set a fiscal year and prepare and adopt a budget in conformance with the requirements of general State law applicable to municipal corporations. 
ARTICLE VII. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 7.10. - Official bonds. 
The officers and employees of the City of Dahlonega, both elective and appointive, shall execute such official bonds in such amounts and upon such terms and conditions as the city council may from time to time require. 
Sec. 7.11. - Existing ordinances and regulations. 
Existing ordinances and regulations of the City of Dahlonega not inconsistent with the provisions of this Charter shall continue in effect until they have been repealed, modified, or amended by the council. Existing rules and regulations of departments or agencies of the City of Dahlonega not inconsistent with the provisions of this Charter shall continue in effect until they have been repealed, modified, or amended. 
Sec. 7.12. - Construction. 
(a)  The captions to the several sections of this Charter are informative only and are not to be considered as a part thereof. 
(b)  The word "shall" is intended to be mandatory and the word "may" is not. 
(c)  The singular shall include the plural and the masculine the feminine and vice versa. 
Sec. 7.13. - Penalties. 
The violation of any provision of this Charter, for which penalty is not specifically provided for herein, is hereby declared to be a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment not to exceed 60 days, or both such fine and imprisonment. 
Sec. 7.14. - Specific repealer. 
An Act incorporating the City of Dahlonega in the County of Lumpkin, approved March 27, 1972 (Ga. Laws 1972, p. 2765), is hereby repealed in its entirety and all amendatory acts thereto are likewise repealed in their entirety. 
Sec. 7.15. - Severability. 
If any article, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, or part thereof of this Charter shall be held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect or impair other parts of this Charter, unless it clearly appears that such other parts are wholly and necessarily dependent upon the part or parts held to be invalid or unconstitutional, it being the legislative intent in enacting this Charter that each article, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence or part thereof be enacted separately and independent of each other. 
Sec. 7.16. - Effective date. 
This Charter shall become effective upon its approval by the Governor or upon its becoming law without his approval. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
STATE ACTS 
The charter is derived from 1982 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1091), page 4354. This table shows the location of amendments made to the charter by the General Assembly. 

 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
ORDINANCES 
This table shows the location of ordinance amendments to the charter by the General Assembly. 

 
Subpart B - RELATED LAWS 
ARTICLE I. - COMMUNITY IMPROVEMENT DISTRICTS[1] 
AN ACT 
To provide for the creation of one or more community improvement districts in the City of Dahlonega; to provide for a short title; to provide for the purposes of the said districts; to provide for definitions; to provide for boards to administer said districts; to provide for taxes, fees, and assessments; to provide for the boundaries of said districts; to provide procedures for the determination of the specifications for projects to be undertaken by the district and the manner of levying taxes, fees, and assessments with respect thereto; to provide standards concerning conflicts of interest; to provide for debt of the said districts; to provide for cooperation with local governments; to provide for the powers of said districts; to provide for the form of bonds and definition of terms "cost of project" or "cost of any project" as used in bond resolutions; to provide for authorized contents of agreements and instruments of the boards generally, use of proceeds of sale of bonds and notes and subsequent issues of bonds and notes; to provide for construction; to provide that Chapter 5 of Title 10 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Securities Act of 1973," shall not apply to the offer, sale, or issuance of the districts' notes or other obligations; to provide that no notice, proceeding, publication, or referendum shall be required; to provide the procedures connected with all of the foregoing; to provide for severability; to provide for an effective date; to repeal conflicting laws; and for other purposes. 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF GEORGIA: 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is 1991 Ga. Laws (Act No. 242), page 4649. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

Sec. 1. - Short title. 
This Act shall be referred to as the "City of Dahlonega Community Improvement Districts Act." 
Sec. 2. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this Act shall be to provide for the creation of one or more community improvement districts within the City of Dahlonega, and such districts shall be created for the provision of such of the following governmental services and facilities as may be provided for in the resolution activating each district created in this Act, or any supplemental resolution amending same: 
(1)  Street and road construction and maintenance, including curbs, sidewalks, street lights, and devices to control the flow of traffic on streets and roads; 
(2)  Parks and recreational areas and facilities; 
(3)  Storm-water and sewage collection and disposal systems; 
(4)  Development, storage, treatment, purification, and distribution of water; 
(5)  Public transportation; 
(6)  Terminal and dock facilities and parking facilities; and 
(7)  Such other services and facilities as may be provided for by general law. 
Sec. 3. - Definitions. 
As used in this Act, the term: 
(1)  "Agricultural" means the growing of crops for sale or raising of animals for sale or use, including the growing of field crops, fruit or nut trees, the raising of livestock or poultry, and the operation of dairies, horse-boarding facilities, and riding stables. 
(2)  "Board" means the governing body created for the governance of each community improvement district authorized in this Act. 
(3)  "Bonds" or "general obligation bonds" means any bonds of a district which are authorized to be issued under the Constitution and laws of Georgia, including refunding bonds but not including notes or other obligations of a district. 
(4)  "Cost of the project" or "cost of any project" means and includes: 
(A)  All costs of acquisition (by purchase or otherwise), construction, assembly, installation, modification, renovation, or rehabilitation incurred in connection with any project or any part of any project; 
(B)  All costs of real property, fixtures, or personal property used in or in connection with or necessary for any project or for any facilities related thereto, including, but not limited to, the cost of all land, estates for years, easements, rights, improvements, water rights, connections for utility services, fees, franchises, permits, approvals, licenses, and certificates; the cost of securing any such franchises, permits, approvals, licenses, or certificates; and the cost of preparation of any application therefor and the cost of all fixtures, machinery, equipment (including all transportation equipment and rolling stock), furniture, and other property used in or in connection with or necessary for any project; 
(C)  All interest and other financing charges and loan fees and all interest on bonds, notes, or other obligations of a district which accrue or are paid prior to and during the period of construction of a project and during such additional period as the board may reasonably determine to be necessary to place such project in operation; 
(D)  All costs of engineering, surveying, and architectural and legal services and all expenses incurred by engineers, surveyors, architects, and attorneys in connection with any project; 
(E)  All expenses for inspection of any project; 
(F)  All fees of fiscal agents, paying agents, and trustees for bondholders under any trust agreement, indenture of trust, or similar instrument or agreement; all expenses incurred by any such fiscal agents, paying agents, and trustees; and all other costs and expenses incurred relative to the issuances of any bonds, notes, or other obligations for any project; 
(G)  All expenses of or incidental to determining the feasibility or practicability of any project; 
(H)  All costs of plans and specifications for any project; 
(I)  All costs of title insurance and examinations of title with respect to any project; 
(J)  Repayment of any loans made for the advance payment of any part of any of the foregoing costs, including interest thereon and any other expenses of such loans; 
(K)  Administrative expenses of the board and such other expenses as may be necessary or incidental to any project or the financing thereof or the placing of any project in operation; and 
(L)  The establishment of a fund or funds for the creation of a debt service reserve, a renewal and replacement reserve, or such other funds or reserves as the board may approve with respect to the financing and operation of any project and as may be authorized by any bond resolution, trust agreement, indenture of trust, or similar instrument or agreement pursuant to the provisions of which the issuance of any bonds, notes, or other obligations of the district may be authorized. 
Any cost, obligation, or expense incurred for any of the foregoing purposes shall be a part of the cost of the project and may be paid or reimbursed as such out of proceeds of bonds, notes, or other obligations issued by the district. 
(5)  "District" means the geographical area designated as such by the resolution of the governing body consenting to the creation of the community improvement district or as thereafter modified by any subsequent resolution of the governing body within which the district is or is to be located, or a body corporate and politic being a community improvement district created and activated pursuant hereto, as the context requires or permits. 
(6)  "Equitably apportioned among the properties subject to such taxes, fees, and assessments according to the need for governmental services and facilities created by the degree of density of development of each such property," with reference to taxes, fees, and assessments levied by the board, means that the burden of the taxes, fees, and assessments shall be apportioned among the properties subject thereto based upon: 
(A)  The values established in the most recent ad valorem tax reassessment of such properties certified by the chairman of the Lumpkin County Board of Tax Assessors; or 
(B)  If so specified, such other method specified in the project specifications. 
(7)  "Forestry" means the planting and growing of trees for sale in a program which includes reforestation of harvested trees, regular underbrush and undesirable growth clearing, fertilizing, pruning, thinning, cruising, and marking which indicate an active tree-farming operation; it does not include the casual growing of trees on land otherwise idle or held for investment, even though some harvesting of trees may occur thereon. 
(8)  "Project" means the acquisition, construction, installation, modification, renovation, or rehabilitation of land, interests in land, buildings, structures, facilities, or other improvements, located or to be located within the district, and the acquisition, installation, modification, renovation, rehabilitation, or furnishing of fixtures, machinery, equipment, furniture, or other property of any nature whatsoever used on, in, or in connection with any such land, interest in land, building, structure, facility, or other improvement, all for the essential public purposes set forth in Section 2 of this Act, which project is a project described in the project specifications for the district. 
(9)  "Project specifications" means a description of the project or projects to be undertaken by the district. The project specifications must include the rates for taxes, fees, and assessments that the district may levy. The project specifications may also include as a matter of election any or all of the following: 
(A)  The maximum amounts that may be raised for any annual period by taxes, fees, and assessments; 
(B)  The maximum period of time during which such taxes, fees, and assessments may be levied; 
(C)  A method for the equitable apportionment of such taxes, fees, and assessments. 
(10)  "Property owner" or "owner of real property" means any entity or person shown as a taxpayer for one or more parcels of real estate on the most recent ad valorem tax records of Lumpkin County within the district as certified by the Lumpkin County tax commissioner. Multiple owners of one parcel shall constitute one property owner and shall designate in writing one of their number to represent the whole. 
(11)  "Property used nonresidentially" means property used for neighborhood shopping, shopping center, general commercial, tourist services, office or institutional, office services, light industry, heavy industry, central business district, or other commercial or business use which does not include residential. 
(12)  "Taxpayer" means any entity or person paying ad valorem taxes on real property, whether on one or more parcels of property within the district. Multiple owners of one parcel shall constitute one taxpayer and shall designate in writing one of their number to represent the whole. 
Sec. 4. - Creation; project specifications; conflicts of interest. 
(a)  Pursuant to Section VII of Article IX of the Constitution of the State of Georgia, as amended in 1984 (said amendment being set out at Ga. L. 1984, p. 1703, et seq.), there is created one or more community improvement districts to be located in the City of Dahlonega, Georgia, wholly within the incorporated area thereof, each of which shall be activated upon compliance with the conditions hereinafter provided, and which shall be governed by a board as hereinafter constituted. The conditions for such activation shall be: 
(1)  The delivery of a petition by any taxpayer, containing the project specifications for the proposed district, to the Dahlonega City Council; 
(2)  The adoption of a resolution consenting to the creation of each community improvement district (which resolution shall state that the district is created under this Act and to the project specifications by the Dahlonega City Council; 
(3)  Written consent to the creation of the community improvement district by and the project specifications by: 
(A)  A majority of the owners of real property within the community improvement district which will be subject to taxes, fees, and assessments levied by the administrative body of the community improvement district; and 
(B)  The owners of real property within the community improvement district which constitutes at least 75 percent by value of all real property within the community improvement district which will be subject to taxes, fees, and assessments levied by the administrative body of the community improvement district; and for this purpose value shall be determined by the most recent approved Lumpkin County ad valorem tax digest; 
(4)  If the proposed community improvement district is to lie in an area wholly or partially coexistent with one or more community improvement districts, then the governing board of the newly created district and the governing board of the preexisting district or districts shall have entered into a cooperative agreement whereby the collection of taxes and the provision of services in the overlapping areas of such districts shall be specified. 
No district or board created hereunder shall transact any business or exercise any powers hereunder until the foregoing conditions are met. A copy of such resolutions shall be filed with the Secretary of State, who shall maintain a record of all districts activated hereunder, and with the Department of Community Affairs. 
(b)  The project specifications may be amended, changed, or expanded from time to time, but not so as to reduce taxes, fees, and assessments pledged to holders of bonds or other indebtedness of the district without such holders' written consent, by the adoption, certification, and filing of consents as described in paragraph (3) of subsection (a) of this section. 
Sec. 5. - Administration and appointment of board members. 
Each district created pursuant to this Act shall be administered by a nine-member board. One member of the board shall be appointed by the Board of Commissioners of Lumpkin County, one member of the board shall be the acting mayor of the City of Dahlonega, and seven members of the board shall be appointed by the Dahlonega City Council; provided, however, that so long as the directors of the Downtown Development Authority of the City of Dahlonega, created pursuant to the provisions of the Downtown Development Authorities Law (Ga. L. 1981, p. 1744), as amended, shall be appointed by the Dahlonega City Council, the members of the board of each community improvement district created by this Act to be appointed by the Dahlonega City Council shall be the same as and shall serve terms coextensive with the board of directors, as now or hereafter constituted, of the Downtown Development Authority of the City of Dahlonega. 
Sec. 6. - Taxes, fees, and assessments. 
(a)  The board may levy taxes, fees, and assessments within the district only on real property used nonresidentially, specifically excluding property exempt from ad valorem taxation under the Constitution or laws of the State of Georgia and all property used for residential, agricultural, or forestry purposes and specifically excluding tangible personal property and intangible property. Any tax, fee, or assessment so levied shall not exceed 1 percent of the aggregate assessed value of all such real property; provided, further, that no tax, fee, or assessment so levied shall exceed any lesser limitation designated in the project specifications and that no tax, fee, or assessment shall be levied beyond any time limitation designated as provided in the project specifications. The taxes, fees, and assessments levied by the board shall be equitably apportioned among the properties subject to such taxes, fees, and assessments according to the need for governmental services and facilities created by the degree of density of development of each such property. The proceeds of taxes, fees, and assessments levied by the board shall be used only for the purpose of providing the projects which are specially required by the degree of development within the applicable district and not for the purpose of providing those governmental services and facilities provided to the municipality as a whole. Any tax, fee, or assessment so levied shall be collected by the City of Dahlonega. Delinquent taxes shall bear the same interest and penalties as the City of Dahlonega ad valorem taxes, and may be enforced and collected in the same manner. The proceeds of taxes, fees, and assessments so levied, less a collection fee if approved by the board, to be retained by the City of Dahlonega in an amount no more than 5 percent of the taxes so collected shall be transmitted by the City of Dahlonega to the board and shall be expended by the board only for the purposes authorized in this Act. 
(b)  The board shall levy the above-provided taxes between January 1 and June 1 each calendar year and notify in writing the City of Dahlonega by June 15 each year so it may include the levy on its regular ad valorem tax bills. 
(c)  If, but for this provision, a parcel of real property is removed from a district or otherwise would become nontaxable, it shall continue to bear its tax millage then extant upon such event, for bonded indebtedness of the district then outstanding, until said bonded indebtedness then outstanding is paid or refunded. 
Sec. 7. - Boundaries of the districts. 
(a)  The boundaries of each district shall be as designated by the City of Dahlonega and shall lie wholly within the incorporated area of the City of Dahlonega, as set forth in the resolutions required in Section 4 of this Act, or as may thereafter be added as hereinafter provided. 
(b)  The boundaries of a district may be increased after the initial creation of a district pursuant to the following: 
(1)  Written consent of: 
(A)  A majority of the owners of real property within the area sought to be annexed into the community improvement district which will be subject to taxes, fees, and assessments levied by the administrative body of the community improvement district; and 
(B)  The owners of the real property within the area sought to be annexed into the community improvement district which constitutes at least 75 percent by value of all real property within the area sought to be annexed into the community improvement district which will be subject to taxes, fees, and assessments levied by the administrative body of the community improvement district; and for this purpose value shall be determined by the most recent approved Lumpkin County ad valorem tax digest; 
(2)  The adoption of a resolution consenting to the annexation by the board of the district; and 
(3)  The adoption of a resolution consenting to the annexation by the City Council of the City of Dahlonega. 
Sec. 8. - Debt. 
Each district may incur debt without regard to the requirements of Section V of Article IX of the Constitution of the State of Georgia, or any other provision of law prohibiting or restricting the borrowing of money or the creation of debt by political subdivisions of the State of Georgia, which debt shall be backed by the full faith, credit, and taxing power of the district but shall not be an obligation of the State of Georgia, the City of Dahlonega, or any other unit of government of the State of Georgia other than the district. 
Sec. 9. - Cooperation with local governments. 
The services and facilities provided pursuant to this Act shall be provided for in a cooperation agreement executed jointly by the board and the City Council of the City of Dahlonega. If the parties to the cooperation agreement so agree, the cooperation agreement may provide that such private persons as are designated by the district perform the actual construction or improvement of the services and facilities provided by the district. The provisions of this section shall in no way limit the authority of the City of Dahlonega to provide services or facilities within the district; and the City of Dahlonega shall retain full and complete authority and control over any of its facilities located within its respective areas of any district. Said control shall include but not be limited to the modification of, access to, and degree and type of services provided through or by facilities of the City of Dahlonega. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to limit or preempt the application of any governmental laws, ordinances, resolutions, or regulations to the district or the services or facilities provided therein. 
Sec. 10. - Powers. 
(a)  Each district and its board created pursuant to this Act shall have all the powers necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purposes and provisions hereof, including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the power: 
(1)  To bring and defend actions; 
(2)  To adopt and amend a corporate seal; 
(3)  To make and execute contracts, agreements, and other instruments necessary or convenient to exercise the powers of the board or to further the public purposes for which the district is created, including, but not limited to, contracts for construction of projects, leases of projects, contracts for sale of projects, agreements for loans to finance projects, and contracts with respect to the use of projects; 
(4)  To acquire by purchase, lease, or otherwise and to hold, lease, and dispose of real and personal property of every kind and character, or any interest therein, in furtherance of the public purposes of the district; 
(5)  To finance (by loan, grant, lease, or otherwise), construct, erect, assemble, purchase, acquire, own, repair, remodel, renovate, rehabilitate, modify, maintain, extend, improve, install, sell, equip, expand, add to, operate, or manage projects and to pay the cost of any project from the proceeds of bonds, notes, or other obligations of the district or any other funds of the district, or from any contributions or loans by persons, corporations, partnerships (whether limited or general), or other entities all of which the board is authorized to receive, accept, and use; 
(6)  To borrow money to further or carry out its public purposes and to execute bonds, notes, other obligations, leases, trust indentures, trust agreements, agreements for the sale of its bonds, notes, or other obligations, loan agreements, security agreements, assignments, and such other agreements or instruments as may be necessary or desirable, in the judgment of the board, to evidence and to provide security for such borrowing; 
(7)  To issue bonds, notes, or other obligations of the district and use the proceeds thereof for the purpose of paying all or any part of the cost of any project and otherwise to further or carry out the public purposes of the district and to pay all costs of the board incidental to, or necessary and appropriate to, furthering or carrying out such purposes; 
(8)  To make application directly or indirectly to any federal, state, county, or municipal government or agency or to any other source, whether public or private, for loans, grants, guarantees, or other financial assistance in furtherance of the district's public purposes and to accept and use the same upon such terms and conditions as are prescribed by such federal, state, county, or municipal government or agency or other source; 
(9)  To enter into agreements with the federal government or any agency thereof to use the facilities or services of the federal government or any agency thereof in order to further or carry out the public purposes of the district; 
(10)  To contract for any period, not exceeding 50 years, or such longer period as may be authorized by law, with the State of Georgia, state institutions, or any municipal corporation, county, or political subdivision of this state for the use by the district of any facilities or services of the state or any such state institution, municipal corporation, county, or political subdivision of this state, or for the use by any state institution or any municipal corporation, county, or political subdivision of the state of any facilities or services of the district, provided that such contracts shall deal with such activities and transactions as the district and any such political subdivision with which the district contracts are authorized by law to undertake; 
(11)  The district shall have the power and is authorized, whenever bonds of the district have been validated as provided in this Act, to issue, from time to time, its notes in anticipation of the issuance of such bonds as validated and to renew, from time to time, any such notes by the issuance of new notes, whether the notes to be renewed have or have not matured. The district may issue notes only to provide funds which would otherwise be provided by the issuance of the bonds as validated. The notes may be authorized, sold, executed, and delivered in the same manner as bonds. As with its bonds, the district may sell such notes at public or private sale. Any resolution or resolutions authorizing notes of the district or any issue thereof may contain any provisions which the district is authorized to include in any resolution or resolutions authorizing bonds of the authority or any issue thereof; and the district may include in any notes any terms, covenants, or conditions which it is authorized to include in any bonds. Validation of such bonds shall be a condition precedent to the issuance of the notes, but it shall not be required that such notes be judicially validated. Bond anticipation notes shall not be issued in an amount exceeding the par value of the bonds in anticipation of which they are to be issued; 
(12)  To grant, mortgage, convey, assign, or pledge its property, revenues or taxes, fees or assessments to be received as security for its bonds, notes, or other indebtedness and obligations; 
(13)  To receive and administer gifts, grants, and devises of money and property of any kind and to administer trusts; 
(14)  To use any real property, personal property, or fixtures or any interest therein; or to rent or lease such property to or from others or make contracts with respect to the use thereof; or to sell, lease, exchange, transfer, assign, pledge, or otherwise dispose of or grant options for any such property in any manner as it deems to be to the best advantage of the district and the public purposes thereof; 
(15)  To appoint, select, and employ engineers, surveyors, architects, urban or city planners, fiscal agents, attorneys, and others and to fix their compensation and pay their expenses; 
(16)  To encourage and promote the improvement and development of the district and to make, contract for, or otherwise cause to be made long-range plans or proposals for the district in cooperation with the City of Dahlonega; 
(17)  To invest its funds, whether derived from the issuance of its bonds or otherwise, in such manner as it may deem prudent and appropriate, without further restriction; 
(18)  To adopt bylaws governing the conduct of business by the board, the election and duties of officers of the board, and other matters which the board determines to deal with its bylaws; 
(19)  To exercise any power granted by the laws of this state to public or private corporations which is not in conflict with the public purposes of the district; and 
(20)  To do all things necessary or convenient to carry out the powers conferred in this Act. 
(b)  The powers enumerated in each paragraph of this section are cumulative of and in addition to those powers enumerated herein and elsewhere in this Act; and no such power limits or restricts any other power of the board. 
Sec. 11. - Bonds; generally. 
(a)  Notes or other obligations issued by a district other than general obligation bonds shall be paid solely from the property pledged to pay such notes or other obligations. General obligation bonds issued by any district shall constitute a general obligation of the district to the repayment of which the full faith and credit and taxing power of the district shall be pledged (subject to the power of the district to tax only in accordance with any limitations established by the project specifications). 
(b)  All bonds, notes, and other obligations of any district shall be authorized by a resolution of its board adopted by a majority vote of the board members at a regular or special meeting. 
(c)  Bonds, notes, or other obligations shall bear such date or dates, shall mature at such time or times (not more than 40 years from their respective dates), shall bear interest at such rate or rates (which may be fixed or may fluctuate or otherwise change from time to time), shall be subject to redemption on such terms, and shall contain such other terms, provisions, covenants, assignments, and conditions as the resolution authorizing the issuance of such bonds, notes, or other obligations may permit or provide. The terms, provisions, covenants, assignments, and conditions contained in or provided or permitted by any resolution of the board authorizing the issuance of such bonds, notes, or other obligations shall bind the board members of the district then in office and their successors. 
(d)  The board shall have power from time to time and whenever it deems it expedient to refund any bonds by the issuance of new bonds, whether or not the bonds to be refunded have matured, and may issue bonds partly to refund bonds then outstanding and partly for any other purpose permitted in this Act. The refunding bonds may be exchanged for the bonds to be refunded, with such cash adjustments as may be agreed upon, or may be sold and the proceeds applied to the purchase or redemption of the bonds to be refunded. 
(e)  There shall be no limitation upon the interest rates of any maximum interest rate or rates on any bonds, notes, or other obligations of the district; and the usury laws of this state shall not apply to bonds, notes, or other obligations of these districts. 
(f)  Bonds issued by a district may be in such form, either coupon or fully registered, or both coupon and fully registered, and may be subject to such exchangeability and transferability provisions as the bond resolution authorizing the issuance of such bonds or any indenture or trust agreement may provide. 
(g)  Bonds issued by a district shall be validated under and in accordance with Code Section 36-82-3 of the O.C.G.A., the "Revenue Bond Law," [O.C.G.A. § 36-82-3] or in accordance with such other successor provision governing bond validation generally as may be provided by law. Bonds shall bear a certificate of validation. The signature of the clerk of the Superior Court of Lumpkin County shall be made on the certificate of validation of such bonds by facsimile or by manual execution, stating the date on which such bonds were validated; and such entry shall be original evidence of the fact of judgment and shall be received as original evidence in any court in this state. 
(h)  In lieu of specifying the rate or rates of interest which such bonds are to bear, and the principal amount and maturities of such bonds, the notice to the district attorney or the Attorney General, the notice to the public of the time, place, and date of the validation hearing, and the petition and complaint for validation may state that the bonds, when issued, will bear interest at a rate not exceeding a maximum per annum rate of interest (which may be fixed or may fluctuate or otherwise change from time to time) and that the principal amount will not exceed and the final maturity date will not be later than as specified in such notices and petition and complaint or may state that, in the event the bonds are to bear different rates of interest for different maturity dates, none of such rates will exceed the maximum rate (which may be fixed or may fluctuate or otherwise change from time to time) so specified; provided, however, that nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting or restricting the right of a board to sell such bonds at a discount, even if in doing so the effective interest cost resulting therefrom would exceed the maximum per annum interest rate specified in such notices and in the petition and complaint. 
(i)  The terms "cost of the project" and "cost of any project" shall have the meaning prescribed in this Act whenever those terms are referred to in bond resolutions of a board, in bonds, notes, or other obligations of the district, or in notices or proceedings to validate such bonds, notes, or other obligations of a district. 
Sec. 12. - Authorized contents of agreements and instruments of the board generally; use of proceeds of sale of bonds and notes; subsequent issues of bonds and notes. 
(a)  Subject to the limitations and procedures provided by this section and by the immediately preceding section, the agreements or instruments executed by a board may contain such provisions not inconsistent with law as shall be determined by such board. 
(b)  The proceeds derived from the sale of all bonds, notes, and other obligations issued by a district shall be held and used for the ultimate purpose of paying, directly or indirectly as permitted in this Act, all or part of the cost of any project or for the purpose of refunding any bonds, notes, or other obligations issued in accordance with this Act. 
(c)  Issuance by a board of one or more series of bonds, notes, or other obligations for one or more purposes shall not preclude it from issuing other bonds, notes, or other obligations in connection with the same project or with any other projects; but the proceeding wherein any subsequent bonds, notes, or other obligations are issued shall recognize and protect any prior loan agreement, security agreement, or other agreement or instrument made for any prior issue of bonds, notes, or other obligations, unless in the resolution authorizing such prior issue the right is expressly reserved to the board to issue subsequent bonds, notes, or other obligations on a parity with such prior issue. 
Sec. 13. - Construction; applicability of Chapter 5 of Title 10 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Securities Act of 1973"; notice, proceeding, publication, referendum. 
This Act shall be liberally construed to effect the purposes hereof. The offer, sale, or issuance of bonds, notes, or other obligations by a district shall not be subject to regulation under Chapter 5 of Title 10 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 10-5-1 et seq.], the "Georgia Securities Act of 1973." No notice, proceeding, or publication except those required by this Act shall be necessary to the performance of any act authorized hereby, nor shall any such act be subject to referendum. 
Sec. 14. - Severability. 
In the event any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this Act shall be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall in no manner affect the other sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, or phrases of this Act, which shall remain of full force and effect as if the section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase so declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional were not originally a part hereof. The General Assembly declares that it would have passed the remaining parts of this Act if it had known that such part or parts hereof would be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional. 
Sec. 15. - Termination. 
So long as a district has no debt outstanding, the board of a district may terminate and dissolve the district as of a certain date, and on such date all property, rights, and obligations of the district shall devolve to the City of Dahlonega. 
Sec. 16. - Effective date. 
This Act shall become effective upon its approval by the Governor or upon its becoming law without such approval. 
Sec. 17. - Repealer. 
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are repealed. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER AND SEWERAGE AUTHORITY[2] 
AN ACT 
To create the City of Dahlonega Water and Sewerage Authority; to provide for a short title and definitions; to confer powers and impose duties on the Authority; to provide for the membership and the appointment of members of the Authority and their terms of office, qualifications, duties, powers, and expenses; to provide for vacancies, organization, meetings, and quorum; to provide for revenue bonds and their form, denominations, signatures thereon, negotiability, sale, and use of proceeds from such sales; to provide for interim documents and for lost or mutilated documents; to provide conditions for issuance; to prohibit the pledge of credit for the payment of bonds; to provide for intergovernmental contracts; to provide for trust indentures and sinking fund; to provide for payment of bond proceeds; to provide for bondholder remedies and protection; to provide for refunding bonds; to provide for bond validation; to provide for venue and jurisdiction; to provide for trust funds; to provide for Authority purpose; to provide for charges; to provide for rules and regulations; to provide for tort immunity; to provide for tax exemptions; to provide for supplemental powers; to provide for effect on other governments; to provide for liberal construction; to provide for an effective date; to repeal conflicting laws; and for other purposes. 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF GEORGIA: 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is 2001 Ga. Laws (Act No. 100), page 3871. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

Sec. 1. - Short title. 
This Act shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Dahlonega Water and Sewerage Authority Act." 
Sec. 2. - City of Dahlonega Water and Sewerage Authority. 
(a)  There is created a public body corporate and politic to be known as the "City of Dahlonega Water and Sewerage Authority," which shall be deemed to be a political subdivision of the state and a public corporation, and by that name, style, and title said body may contract and be contracted with, sue and be sued, implead and be impleaded, and complain and defend in all courts of law and equity. The Authority shall have perpetual existence. 
(b)  The Authority shall consist of three members who shall be appointed by the City Council of Dahlonega, Georgia. No more than one of such members may be a member of the City Council of Dahlonega, Georgia. With respect to the initial appointment by the City Council of Dahlonega, Georgia, one member shall be appointed for a term of three years, one member shall be appointed for a term of two years, and one member shall be appointed for a term of one year. Thereafter, all appointments shall be made for terms of three years. Immediately after such appointments, the members of the Authority shall enter upon their duties. Members of the Authority shall serve the terms specified and until their successors are appointed and qualified. Any vacancy on the Authority shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment of the member whose office has become vacant and the person so appointed shall serve for the remainder of the unexpired term. To be eligible for appointment as a member of the Authority a person shall be at least 21 years of age and a resident of the City of Dahlonega, Georgia, for at least two years prior to the date of his or her appointment. No person shall be eligible for appointment to or to serve on the Authority who has been convicted of a felony or who is an employee of a utility system not operated by the Authority or the City of Dahlonega. Any member of the Authority may be selected and appointed to succeed himself or herself. 
(c)  The appointing City Council of Dahlonega, Georgia, may provide by resolution for compensation for the services of the members of the Authority in such amounts as they may deem appropriate and may provide that such members be reimbursed for their actual expenses necessarily incurred in the performance of their duties. 
(d)  The members of the Authority shall elect one of their number as chairperson and another as vice chairperson. The members of the Authority shall also elect a secretary, who need not be a member of the Authority, and may also elect a treasurer, who need not be a member of the Authority. The secretary may also serve as treasurer. If the secretary or treasurer is not a member of the Authority, such officer shall have no voting rights. Each of such officers shall serve for a period of one year and until their successors are duly elected and qualified. 
(e)  Two members of the Authority shall constitute a quorum. No vacancy on the Authority shall impair the right of the quorum to exercise all of the rights and perform all of the duties of the Authority. 
Sec. 3. - Definitions. 
As used in this Act, the term: 
(1)  "Authority" means the City of Dahlonega Water and Sewerage Authority created by this Act. 
(2)  "Cost of the project" means and embraces the cost of construction; the cost of all lands, properties, rights, easements, and franchises acquired; the cost of all machinery and equipment; financing charges; interest prior to and during construction and for six months after completion of construction; the cost of engineering, architectural, fiscal agents and legal expenses, plans and specifications, and other expenses necessary or incidental to determining the feasibility or practicability of the project; administrative expenses and such other expenses as may be necessary or incident to the financing herein authorized; working capital; and all other costs necessary to acquire, construct, add to, extend, improve, equip, operate, and maintain the project. 
(3)  "Project" means: 
(A)  Systems, plants, works, instrumentalities, and properties used or useful in connection with the obtaining of a water supply and the conservation, treatment, distribution, disposal, and sale of water for public and private uses and used or useful in connection with the collection, treatment, and disposal of sewage, waste water, and storm water, together with all parts of any such system, plant, work, instrumentality, and property and appurtenances thereto, including lands, easements, rights in land, water rights, contract rights, franchises, approaches, dams, reservoirs, recreational facilities adjacent to such reservoirs, generating stations, sewage disposal plants, intercepting sewers, trunk connecting and other sewer and water mains, filtration works, and pumping stations and equipment; and 
(B)  Any undertaking permitted by the Revenue Bond Law. 
(4)  "Revenue Bond Law" means Article 3 of Chapter 82 of Title 36 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 36-82-60 et seq.], or any other similar law hereinafter enacted. 
(5)  "Revenue bonds" means revenue bonds authorized to be issued pursuant to this Act. 
(6)  "Self-liquidating" means any project from which the revenues and earnings to be derived by the Authority, including but not limited to any contractual payments with governmental or private entities, and all properties used, leased, and sold in connection therewith, together with any grants, will be sufficient to pay the costs of operating, maintaining, and repairing the project and to pay the principal and interest on the revenue bonds or other obligations which may be issued for the purpose of paying the costs of the project. 
(7)  "State" means the State of Georgia. 
Sec. 4. - Powers. 
The Authority shall have the power: 
(1)  To have a seal and alter the same at its pleasure; 
(2)  To acquire by purchase, lease, gift, condemnation, or otherwise, and to hold, operate, maintain, lease, and dispose of real and personal property of every kind and character for its corporate purposes; 
(3)  To acquire in its own name by purchase, on such terms and conditions and in such manner as it may deem proper, or by condemnation in accordance with the provisions of any and all existing laws applicable to the condemnation of property for public use, real property or rights or easements therein or franchises necessary or convenient for its corporate purposes, and to use the same so long as its corporate existence shall continue, and to lease or make contracts with respect to the use of or dispose of the same in any manner it deems to the best advantage of the Authority, the Authority being under no obligation to accept and pay for any property condemned under this Act, except from the funds provided under the authority of this Act, and in any proceedings to condemn, such orders may be made by the court having jurisdiction of the suit, action, or proceedings as may be just to the Authority and to the owners of the property to be condemned, and no property shall be acquired under the provisions of this Act upon which any lien or encumbrance exists, unless at the time such property is so acquired a sufficient sum of money is to be deposited in trust to pay and redeem the fair value of such lien or encumbrance; 
(4)  To combine its water facilities, storm water, and sewerage facilities into one system and to operate and maintain its facilities as such; 
(5)  To appoint, select, and employ officers, agents, and employees, including engineering, architectural, and construction experts, fiscal agents, and attorneys, and to fix their respective compensations; 
(6)  To execute contracts, leases, agreements, and instruments necessary or convenient in connection with the acquisition, construction, addition, extension, improvement, equipping, operation, or maintenance of a project. Any and all persons, firms, and corporations and the state, and any institution, department, or other agency thereof, and any municipality, school district, or other political subdivision or authority of the state are hereby authorized to enter into contracts, leases, agreements, or instruments with the Authority upon such terms and for such purposes as they deem advisable and as they are authorized by law; 
(7)  To acquire, construct, add to, extend, improve, equip, operate, and maintain projects; 
(8)  To pay the cost of the project with the proceeds of revenue bonds or other obligations issued by the Authority, from any grant or contribution from the United States of America or any agency or instrumentality thereof, from the state or any agency or instrumentality or other political subdivision thereof, or from any other source whatsoever; 
(9)  To accept loans or grants or loans and grants of money or materials or property of any kind from the United States of America or any agency or instrumentality thereof upon such terms and conditions as the United States of America or such agency or instrumentality may require; 
(10)  To accept loans or grants or loans and grants of money or materials or property of any kind from the state or any agency or instrumentality or political subdivision thereof, upon such terms and conditions as the state or such agency or instrumentality or political subdivision may require; 
(11)  To borrow money for any of its corporate purposes and to issue revenue bonds, and to provide for the payment of the same and for the rights of the holders thereof; 
(12)  To exercise any power usually possessed by private corporations performing similar functions, including the power to incur short-term debt and to approve, execute, and deliver appropriate evidence of any such indebtedness, provided that such power is not in conflict with the Constitution and laws of the state; and 
(13)  To do all things necessary or convenient to carry out the powers expressly given in this Act. 
Sec. 5. - Revenue bonds. 
The Authority, or any authority or body which has or which may in the future succeed to the powers, duties, and liabilities vested in the Authority created hereby, shall have power and is hereby authorized to provide by resolution for the issuance of revenue bonds of the Authority for the purpose of paying all or any part of the cost of the project and for the purpose of refunding revenue bonds or other obligations previously issued. The principal of and interest on such revenue bonds shall be payable solely from the special fund hereby provided for such payment. The revenue bonds of each issue shall be dated, shall bear interest at such rate or rates per annum, payable at such time or times, shall mature at such time or times not exceeding 40 years from their date or dates, shall be payable in such medium of payment as to both principal and interest as may be determined by the Authority and may be redeemable before maturity, at the option of the Authority, at such price or prices and under such terms and conditions as may be fixed by the Authority in the resolution for the issuance of such revenue bonds. 
Sec. 6. - Same; form; denomination; registration; place of payment. 
The Authority shall determine the form of the revenue bonds and shall fix the denomination or denominations of the revenue bonds. The revenue bonds may be issued in coupon or registered form, or both, as the Authority may determine, and provision may be made for registration and exchangeability privileges. The Authority shall fix the place or places of payment of principal and interest thereon, which may be at any bank or trust company within or outside the state. 
Sec. 7. - Same; signatures; seal. 
All such revenue bonds shall bear the manual or facsimile signature of the chairperson or vice chairperson of the Authority and the attesting manual or facsimile signature of the secretary, assistant secretary, or secretary-treasurer of the Authority, and the official seal of the Authority shall be impressed or imprinted thereon. Any coupons attached thereto shall bear the manual or facsimile signatures of the chairperson or vice chairperson and the secretary, assistant secretary, or secretary-treasurer of the Authority. Any revenue bonds or coupons attached thereto may bear the manual or facsimile signature of such persons as at the actual time of the execution of such revenue bonds or coupons shall be duly authorized or hold the proper office, although at the date of issuance of such revenue bonds such person may not have been so authorized or shall not have held such office. In case any officer whose signature shall appear on any revenue bond or any coupon shall cease to be such officer before the delivery of such revenue bond, such signature shall nevertheless be valid and sufficient for all purposes, the same as if that person had remained in office until such delivery. 
Sec. 8. - Same; negotiability; exemption from taxation. 
All revenue bonds shall have and are hereby declared to have all the qualities and incidents of negotiable instruments under the laws of the state unless the same are issued in fully registered form. All revenue bonds, or other obligations of the Authority to pay moneys, their transfer, and the income therefrom shall be exempt from all taxation within the state. 
Sec. 9. - Same; sale; price; proceeds. 
The Authority may sell revenue bonds in such manner and for such price as it may determine to be in the best interest of the Authority. The proceeds derived from the sale of revenue bonds shall be used solely for any purpose provided in the resolutions and proceedings authorizing the issuance of such revenue bonds. 
Sec. 10. - Same; interim receipts and certificates or temporary bonds. 
Prior to the preparation of any definitive revenue bonds, the Authority may, under like restrictions, issue interim receipts, interim certificates, or temporary revenue bonds, with or without coupons, exchangeable for definitive revenue bonds upon the issuance of the latter. 
Sec. 11. - Same; replacement of lost or mutilated bonds. 
The Authority may provide for the replacement of any revenue bonds or coupons which shall become mutilated or be destroyed or lost. 
Sec. 12. - Same; conditions precedent to issuance. 
The Authority shall adopt a resolution authorizing the issuance of the revenue bonds. In the resolution, the Authority shall determine that the project financed with the proceeds of the revenue bonds is self-liquidating. Revenue bonds may be issued without any other proceedings or the happening of any other conditions or things other than those proceedings, conditions, and things which are specified or required by this Act. Any resolution providing for the issuance of revenue bonds under the provisions of this Act shall become effective immediately upon its passage and need not be published or posted, and any such resolution may be passed at any regular or special or adjourned meeting of the Authority by a majority of its members. 
Sec. 13. - Credit not pledged. 
Revenue bonds shall not be deemed to constitute a debt of the City of Dahlonega, Georgia, nor a pledge of the faith and credit of said city, but such revenue bonds shall be payable solely from the fund provided for in this Act. The issuance of such revenue bonds shall not directly, indirectly, or contingently obligate said city to levy or to pledge any form of taxation whatsoever for payment of such revenue bonds or to make any appropriation for their payment, and all such revenue bonds shall contain recitals on their face covering substantially the provisions of this section. Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, this Act shall not affect the ability of the Authority and said city to enter into an intergovernmental contract pursuant to which said city agrees to pay amounts sufficient to pay operating charges and other costs of the Authority or any project including, without limitation, the principal of and interest on revenue bonds in consideration for services or facilities of the Authority. 
Sec. 14. - Trust indenture as security. 
In the discretion of the Authority, any issuance of revenue bonds may be secured by a trust indenture by and between the Authority and a corporate trustee, which may be any trust company or bank having the powers of a trust company within or outside the state. Either the resolution providing for the issuance of the revenue bonds or such trust indenture may contain such provisions for protecting and enforcing the rights and remedies of the bondholders as may be reasonable and proper and not in violation of law, including covenants setting forth the duties of the Authority in relation to the acquisition and construction of the project, the maintenance, operation, repair, and insuring of the project, and the custody, safeguarding, and application of all moneys. 
Sec. 15. - To whom proceeds of bonds shall be paid. 
In the resolution providing for the issuance of revenue bonds or in the trust indenture, the Authority shall provide for the payment of the proceeds of the sale of the revenue bonds to any officer or person who, or any agency, bank, or trust company which shall act as trustee of such funds and shall hold and apply the same to the purposes thereof, subject to such regulations as this Act and such resolution or trust indenture may provide. 
Sec. 16. - Sinking fund. 
The moneys received pursuant to an intergovernmental contract and the revenues, fees, tolls, fines, charges, and earnings derived from any particular project or projects, regardless of whether or not such revenues, fees, tolls, fines, charges, and earnings were produced by a particular project for which revenue bonds have been issued, unless otherwise pledged and allocated, may be pledged and allocated by the Authority to the payment of the principal and interest on revenue bonds of the Authority as the resolution authorizing the issuance of the revenue bonds or in the trust indenture may provide, and such funds so pledged from whatever source received shall be set aside at regular intervals as may be provided in the resolution or trust indenture into a sinking fund, which said sinking fund shall be pledged to and charged with the payment of: 
(1)  The interest upon such revenue bonds as such interest shall fall due; 
(2)  The principal or purchase price of such revenue bonds as the same shall fall due; 
(3)  Any premium upon such revenue bonds as the same shall fall due; 
(4)  The purchase of such revenue bonds in the open market; and 
(5)  The necessary charges of the paying agent for paying principal and interest. 
The use and disposition of such sinking fund shall be subject to such regulations as may be provided in the resolution authorizing the issuance of the revenue bonds or in the trust indenture, but, except as may otherwise be provided in such resolution or trust indenture, such sinking fund shall be maintained as a trust account for the benefit of all revenue bonds without distinction or priority of one over another. 
Sec. 17. - Remedies of bondholders. 
Any holder of revenue bonds or any of the coupons appertaining thereto and the trustee under the trust indenture, if any, except to the extent the rights herein given may be restricted by resolution passed before the issuance of the revenue bonds or by the trust indenture, may, either at law or in equity, by suit, action, mandamus, or other proceedings, protect and enforce any and all rights under the laws of the state, including specifically but without limitation, the Revenue Bond Law, or granted hereunder or under such resolution or trust indenture, and may enforce and compel performance of all duties required by this Act or by such resolution or trust indenture to be performed by the Authority or any officer thereof, including the fixing, charging, and collecting of revenues, fees, tolls, fines, and other charges for the use of the facilities and services furnished. 
Sec. 18. - Validation. 
Revenue bonds and the security therefor shall be confirmed and validated in accordance with the procedure of the Revenue Bond Law. The petition for validation shall also make party defendant to such action the state, and any institution, department, or other agency thereof, and any city, municipality, school district, or other political subdivision or authority of the state which has contracted with the Authority for services or facilities relating to the project for which revenue bonds are to be issued and sought to be validated, and such defendant shall be required to show cause, if any exists, why such contract or contracts shall not be adjudicated as a part of the basis for the security for the payment of any such revenue bonds. The revenue bonds, when validated, and the judgment of validation shall be final and conclusive with respect to such revenue bonds and the security for the payment thereof and interest thereon and against the Authority and all other defendants. 
Sec. 19. - Refunding bonds. 
The Authority is authorized to provide by resolution for the issuance of bonds of the Authority for the purpose of funding or refunding any revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act and then outstanding, together with accrued interest thereon and premium, if any. The issuance of such funding or refunding bonds, the maturities and all other details thereof, the rights of the holders thereof, and the duties of the Authority in respect to the same shall be governed by the provisions of this Act insofar as the same may be applicable. 
Sec. 20. - Venue and jurisdiction. 
Any action to protect or enforce any rights under the provisions of this Act or any suit or action against such Authority shall be brought in the Superior Court of Lumpkin County, Georgia, and any action pertaining to validation of any revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act shall likewise be brought in said court which shall have exclusive, original jurisdiction of such actions. 
Sec. 21. - Interest of bondholders protected. 
While any of the revenue bonds issued by the Authority remain outstanding, the powers, duties, or existence of said Authority or its officers, employees, or agents shall not be diminished or impaired in any manner that will affect adversely the interests and rights of the holders of such revenue bonds, and no other entity, department, agency, or authority will be created which will compete with the Authority to such an extent as to affect adversely the interest and rights of the holders of such revenue bonds, nor will the state itself so compete with the Authority. The provisions of this Act shall be for the benefit of the Authority and the holders of any such revenue bonds, and upon the issuance of such revenue bonds under the provisions hereof, shall constitute a contract with the holders of such revenue bonds. 
Sec. 22. - Moneys received considered trust funds. 
All moneys received pursuant to the authority of this Act, whether as proceeds from the sale of revenue bonds, as grants or other contributions, or as revenue, income, fees, and earnings, shall be deemed to be trust funds to be held and applied solely as provided in this Act. 
Sec. 23. - Purpose of the authority. 
Without limiting the generality of any provision of this Act, the general purpose of the Authority is declared to be that of acquiring an adequate source or sources of water supply, treatment of such water, and thereafter the maintenance and distribution of the same to the various entities and citizens in the City of Dahlonega, Georgia, and environs, including but not limited to other authorities located therein, and further for the general purpose of gathering and treatment of sewerage and waste, both individual and industrial. Such general purpose shall not restrict the Authority from selling and delivering water directly to consumers in those areas where there do not now exist water distribution systems or furnishing sewer facilities to such customers and areas where no municipality deems it desirable or feasible to furnish water in such locality. The Authority shall also have the authority, where it deems it feasible, to sell its products and services to customers, governmental agencies, or governmental instrumentalities of adjoining states, provided that the laws of the adjoining states do not prohibit or tax said activity. 
Sec. 24. - Rates, charges, and revenues; use. 
The Authority is hereby authorized to prescribe and fix rates and to revise same from time to time and to collect revenues, tolls, fees, fines, and charges for the services, facilities, and commodities furnished, and in anticipation of the collection of the revenues, to issue revenue bonds as provided in this Act to finance, in whole or in part, the cost of the project, and to pledge to the punctual payment of said revenue bonds and interest thereon, all or any part of the revenues. 
Sec. 25. - Rules, regulations, service policies, and procedures for operation of projects. 
It shall be the duty of the Authority to prescribe rules, regulations, service policies, and procedures for the operation of any project constructed or acquired under the provisions of this Act, including the basis upon which water service and facilities, sewerage service and facilities, or both, shall be furnished. The Authority may adopt bylaws in connection with the operation of any project or projects. 
Sec. 26. - Tort immunity. 
To the extent permitted by law, the Authority shall have the same immunity and exemption from liability for torts and negligence as the City of Dahlonega, Georgia; and the officers, agents, and employees of the Authority when in the performance of the work of the Authority shall have the same immunity and exemption from liability for torts and negligence as the officers, agents, and employees of the City of Dahlonega, Georgia, when in the performance of their public duties or work of the city. 
Sec. 27. - Tax-exempt status of authority. 
The properties of the Authority, both real and personal, are declared to be public properties used for the benefit and welfare of the people of the state and not for purposes of private or corporate benefit and income, and such properties and the Authority shall be exempt from all taxes and special assessments of any city, county, or the state or any political subdivision thereof. 
Sec. 28. - Effect on other governments. 
This Act shall not and does not in any way take from the City of Dahlonega, Georgia, or any other county or municipality the authority to own, operate, and maintain a water system, a sewerage system, or a combined water and sewerage system, or to issue revenue bonds as provided by the Revenue Bond Law. 
Sec. 29. - Liberal construction of act. 
This Act, being for the welfare of various political subdivisions of the state and its inhabitants, shall be liberally construed to effect the purposes of this Act. 
Sec. 30. - Effective date. 
This Act shall become effective upon its approval by the Governor or upon its becoming law without such approval. 
Sec. 31. - General repealer. 
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are repealed. 
ARTICLE III. - AD VALOREM TAX EXEMPTION FOR SENIOR CITIZENS[3] 
AN ACT 
To provide a homestead exemption from City of Dahlonega ad valorem taxes for municipal purposes in the amount of $60,000.00 of the assessed value of the homestead for residents of that city who are 65 years of age or older or who are disabled; to provide for definitions; to specify the terms and conditions of the exemption and the procedures relating thereto; to provide for applicability; to provide for a referendum, effective dates, and automatic repeal; to repeal conflicting laws; and for other purposes. 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF GEORGIA: 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is 2008 Ga. Laws (Act No. 65), page 4113. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

Sec. 1. - Definitions. 
(a)  As used in this Act, the term: 
(1)  "Ad valorem taxes for municipal purposes" means all ad valorem taxes for municipal purposes levied by, for, or on behalf of the City of Dahlonega, including, but not limited to, any ad valorem taxes to pay interest on and to retire municipal bonded indebtedness. 
(2)  "Homestead" means homestead as defined and qualified in Code Section 48-5-40 of the O.C.G.A., as amended [O.C.G.A. § 48-5-40], with the additional qualification that it shall include not more than five contiguous acres of homestead property. 
(3)  "Senior citizen" means a person who is 65 years of age or older on or before January 1 of the year in which application for the exemption under subsection (b) of this section is made. 
(b)  Each resident of the City of Dahlonega who is a senior citizen or who is disabled is granted an exemption on that person's homestead from City of Dahlonega ad valorem taxes for municipal purposes in the amount of $60,000.00 of the assessed value of that homestead. The value of that property in excess of such exempted amount shall remain subject to taxation. 
(c)  (1)  In order to qualify for the exemption provided for in subsection (b) of this section as being disabled, the person claiming such exemption shall be required to obtain a certificate from not more than three physicians licensed to practice medicine under Chapter 34 of Title 43 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. title 34, ch. 43], as amended, certifying that in the opinion of such physician or physicians, such person is mentally or physically incapacitated to the extent that such person is unable to be gainfully employed and that such incapacity is likely to be permanent. Such certificate or certificates shall constitute part of and be submitted with the application provided for in paragraph (2) of this subsection. A person can also qualify for the exemption provided for in subsection (b) of this section as being disabled, by presenting evidence that such person has been found to be disabled by the Social Security Administration or 100 percent disabled by the Veterans Administration. 
(2)  A person shall not receive the homestead exemption granted by subsection (b) of this section unless such person or person's agent files an application with the governing authority of the City of Dahlonega, or the designee thereof, giving the person's age and such additional information relative to receiving such exemption as will enable the governing authority of the City of Dahlonega, or the designee thereof, to make a determination regarding the initial and continuing eligibility of such person for such exemption. The governing authority of the City of Dahlonega, or the designee thereof, shall provide application forms for this purpose. 
(d)  The exemption shall be claimed and returned as provided in Code Section 48-5-50.1 of the O.C.G.A., [O.C.G.A. § 48-5-50.1]as amended. The exemption shall be automatically renewed from year to year as long as the person granted the homestead exemption under subsection (b) of this section occupies the residence as a homestead. After a person has filed the proper application as provided in subsection (c) of this section, it shall not be necessary to make application thereafter for any year, and the exemption shall continue to be allowed to such person. It shall be the duty of any person granted the homestead exemption under subsection (b) of this section to notify the governing authority of the City of Dahlonega, or the designee thereof, in the event that person for any reason becomes ineligible for that exemption. 
(e)  The exemption granted by subsection (b) of this section shall not apply to or affect any state ad valorem taxes, county ad valorem taxes for county purposes, or county or independent school district ad valorem taxes for educational purposes. The homestead exemption granted by subsection (b) of this section shall be in addition to and not in lieu of any other homestead exemption applicable to City of Dahlonega ad valorem taxes for municipal purposes. 
(f)  The exemption granted by subsection (b) of this section shall apply to all taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 2009. 
Sec. 2. - Voting. 
Unless prohibited by the federal Voting Rights Act of 1965, as amended, the municipal election superintendent of the City of Dahlonega shall call and conduct an election as provided in this section for the purpose of submitting this Act to the electors of the City of Dahlonega for approval or rejection. The municipal election superintendent shall conduct that election on the date of the November, 2008, general election and shall issue the call and conduct that election as provided by general law. The municipal election superintendent shall cause the date and purpose of the election to be published once a week for two weeks immediately preceding the date thereof in the official organ of Lumpkin County. The ballot shall have written or printed thereon the words: 
"( ) YES 
( ) NO 
Shall the Act be approved which provides a homestead exemption from City of Dahlonega ad valorem taxes for municipal purposes in the amount of $60,000.00 of the assessed value of the homestead for residents of that city who are 65 years of age or older or who are disabled?" 
All persons desiring to vote for approval of the Act shall vote "Yes," and all persons desiring to vote for rejection of the Act shall vote "No." If more than one-half of the votes cast on such question are for approval of the Act, Section 1 of this Act shall become of full force and effect on January 1, 2009. If the Act is not so approved or if the election is not conducted as provided in this section, Section 1 of this Act shall not become effective, and this Act shall be automatically repealed on the first day of January immediately following that election date. The expense of such election shall be borne by the City of Dahlonega. It shall be the municipal election superintendent's duty to certify the result thereof to the Secretary of State. 
Sec. 3. - Effective date. 
Except as otherwise provided in Section 2 of this Act, this Act shall become effective upon its approval by the Governor or upon its becoming law without such approval. 
Sec. 4. - Repealer. 
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are repealed. 
ARTICLE IV. - HOTEL/MOTEL TAX[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-06, adopted July 2, 2018 , amended Art. IV in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. VI, pertained to the same subject matter, consisted of § 1—4, and derived from the 2017 Georgia Laws, pg. 3546. 

Sec. 1. - Statutory authority. 
This Ordinance is adopted pursuant to authority conferred by Article 13 of Title 48 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
( Ord. No. 2018-06, § 1, 7-2-2018 ) 
Sec. 2. - Definitions. 
As used in this Ordinance, the term: 
(1)  City means City of Dahlonega, Georgia. 
(2)  Council means City Council of the City. 
(3)  Destination Marketing Organization shall have the meaning set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50.2. 
(4)  District means the territorial limits of the City of Dahlonega. 
(5)  Innkeeper means any person who is subject to taxation under this Ordinance for the furnishing for value to the public any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations. 
(6)  Private sector nonprofit organization shall have the meaning set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50.2. 
(7)  Promoting tourism, conventions, and trade shows means planning, conducting, or participating in programs of information and publicity designed to attract or advertise tourism, conventions, or trade shows. 
(8)  Tourism product development means the expenditure of funds for the creation or expansion of physical attractions which are available and open to the public and which improve destination appeal to visitors, support visitors' experience, and are used by visitors. Such expenditures may include capital costs and operating expenses. Tourism product development may include: 
(1)  Lodging for the public for no longer than 30 consecutive days to the same customer; 
(2)  Overnight or short-term sites for recreational vehicles, trailers, campers, or tents; 
(3)  Meeting, convention, exhibit, and public assembly facilities; 
(4)  Sports stadiums, arenas, and complexes; 
(5)  Golf courses associated with a resort development that are open to the general public on a contract or fee basis; 
(6)  Racing facilities, including dragstrips, motorcycle racetracks, and auto or stock car racetracks or speedways; 
(7)  Amusement centers, amusement parks, theme parks, or amusement piers; 
(8)  Hunting preserves, trapping preserves, or fishing preserves or lakes; 
(9)  Visitor information and welcome centers; 
(10)  Wayfinding signage; 
(11)  Permanent, nonmigrating carnivals or fairs; 
(12)  Airplanes, helicopters, buses, vans, or boats for excursions or sightseeing; 
(13)  Boat rentals, boat party fishing services, rowboat or canoe rentals, horse shows, natural wonder attractions, picnic grounds, river-rafting services, scenic railroads for amusement, aerial tramways, rodeos, water slides, or wave pools; 
(14)  Museums, planetariums, art galleries, botanical gardens, aquariums, or zoological gardens; 
(15)  Parks, trails, and other recreational facilities; or 
(16)  Performing arts facilities. 
Other terms defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50.2 except as modified herein shall have the meanings provided in said Code section. 
( Ord. No. 2018-06, § 2, 7-2-2018 ) 
Sec. 3. - Resolution and Local Act. 
This Ordinance incorporates the following: 
(a)  The Resolution of the Council made on the 5th day of December 2016 titled Resolution No. 2016-15 (the "Resolution") specifying the subsequent rate of tax, identifying projects for tourism product development purposes, and specifying the allocation of proceeds of the tax, and 
(b)  House Bill 172, Act No. 63, of the Georgia General Assembly enacted during the 2017 Session of the General Assembly and approved by the Governor of the State of Georgia on May 01, 2017, in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(b)(5) ("House Bill 172"). 
( Ord. No. 2018-06, § 3, 7-2-2018 ) 
Sec. 4. - Contract with authorized entity; budget plans. 
In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(e)(2), prior to each fiscal year of the City in which the tax is levied, the Council shall: 
(a)  Contract with an authorized entity other than a Destination Marketing Organization for the expenditure of certain expected proceeds of the tax levied by this Ordinance for promoting tourism, conventions, and trade shows; 
(b)  Adopt a budget plan specifying how the expected proceeds of the tax levied by this Ordinance are to be expended; and 
(c)  Prior to the adoption of such budget plan of the City, obtain from such authorized entity a budget plan for expenditures to be made by such entity for promoting tourism, conventions, and trade shows which shall be made a part of the budget plan of the City. 
( Ord. No. 2018-06, § 4, 7-2-2018 ) 
Sec. 5. - Levy of Tax; Rate. 
Within the District as defined herein, the Council levies and does hereby continue the levy of an excise tax at the rate of eight percent (8%) of the charge for the furnishing for value to the public of any room or rooms, lodgings, or accommodations furnished by any person or legal entity licensed by, or required to pay business or occupation taxes to, the City for operating within the District a hotel, motel, inn, lodge, tourist camp, tourist cabin, campground, or any other place in which rooms, lodgings, or accommodations are regularly or periodically furnished for value. Such lodgings shall include "bed and breakfast" houses and other short-term rentals of single-family homes, apartments, and condominiums when the intended occupancy shall be for thirty (30) days or less. 
( Ord. No. 2018-06, § 5, 7-2-2018 ) 
Sec. 6. - Expenditure. 
Pursuant to and in accordance with the Resolution and House Bill 172 (AS PASSED BY HOUSE AND SENATE), the proceeds of the tax levied by this Ordinance shall be allocated as follows: 
(a)  The amount of the proceeds of the tax equal to the amount which would be collected at the rate of 3 percent (3%), the expenditure of which is not governed by the remaining portions of this Section 6, shall be expended for such authorized purposes as are determined by the Council. 
(b)  In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(b)(6), the City shall expend an amount equal to the amount by which the total taxes levied by this Ordinance which would be collected at the rate of 5 percent (5%) which exceeds the taxes which would be collected at the rate of 3 percent (3%) for the purposes of promoting tourism, conventions, and trade shows in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(a)(3). 
(c)  In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(b)(5) and § 48-13-51(e)(2): 
(1)  An amount equal to not less than fifty percent (50%) of the total amount of taxes collected that exceed the amount of taxes that would be collected at the rate of five percent (5%) shall be expended for promoting tourism, conventions, and trade shows: (A) by the destination marketing organization designated by the City, or (B) through a contract or contracts with an entity other than a destination marketing organization with which the City may continue to expend proceeds of the tax for promoting tourism, conventions, and trade shows pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(e)(2); and in the case of such clause (B), prior to each fiscal year in which the tax is imposed, the City shall adopt a budget plan specifying how the proceeds of such tax are to be expended and shall obtain from such entity with which the City proposes to contract to meet the expenditure requirements of such clause (B) a budget plan for expenditures to be made by such entity for promoting tourism, conventions, and trade shows with the budget plan of such entity to be made a part of the City budget plan; and 
(2)  The remaining amount of the taxes collected that exceed the amount of taxes that would be collected at the rate of five percent (5%) which are not otherwise expended under paragraph (1) of this subsection (c) shall be expended for tourism product development. The projects for tourism product development purposes for tax levied by this Ordinance shall be the planning, conducting, or participating in programs of information and publicity designed to attract or advertise tourism, conventions, or trade shows in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50.2(4) and the creation or expansion of physical attractions which are available and open to the public which improve the destination appeal to visitors, support visitors' experience, and which are used by visitors, the expenditures for which may include capital costs and operating expenses, in accordance with and including tourism product development purposes specified in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50.2(6). 
( Ord. No. 2018-06, § 6, 7-2-2018 ) 
Sec. 7. - Returns; remittance. 
Each Innkeeper, on or before the twentieth (20th) day of each month, shall transmit a return and remit taxes due showing the gross charges taxable under this Ordinance during the preceding calendar month. The returns required by this Section 6.7 shall be made upon such forms prescribed, prepared, and furnished by the City. The forms prescribed, prepared, and furnished by the City for making returns and remitting taxes due under this Ordinance shall provide for the disclosure of all information deemed necessary by the City for a determination of the taxes due under this Ordinance. The Innkeeper shall use only the forms prescribed, prepared, and furnished by the City. The Innkeeper shall complete the prescribed form(s) to disclose all information for which the form provides disclosure. An incomplete return form shall not be considered a return. An Innkeeper making an incomplete return form shall be subject to penalties as herein provided for the failure to make a return. The form(s) prescribed, prepared, and furnished by the City shall include the following declaration to be signed by the Innkeeper: 
"Under penalty of perjury, I declare that I have examined this document and supporting documentation and to the best of my knowledge, information, and belief, they are true, correct, and complete." 
Together with each of its monthly returns, each Innkeeper shall also submit to the City a copy of its monthly return for the corresponding period required by the State of Georgia for reporting sales and use taxes (currently Georgia Department of Revenue Form ST-3). In the event there is no tax to be collected under this Ordinance by an Innkeeper for a month, such Innkeeper shall nevertheless file a return showing zero (0) as the tax collected for such month. 
( Ord. No. 2018-06, § 7, 7-2-2018 ) 
Sec. 8. - Extensions; failure to make return and pay required tax. 
(a)  In accordance with O.C.G.A. §48-13-53.3(a), 
(1)  The City may, for good cause, extend the time for making any returns required under this Ordinance for not more than 30 days. 
(2)  No extension granted pursuant to paragraph (1) of this subsection (a) shall be valid unless granted in writing upon written application, and then the extension shall only be valid for a period, as appropriate, of not more than 12 consecutive months or four consecutive calendar quarters. 
(3)  Upon the grant of any extension authorized by this subsection (a), the Innkeeper shall remit to the City on or before the date the tax would otherwise become due without the grant of the extension an amount which equals not less than 100 percent of the Innkeeper's payment for the corresponding period of the preceding tax year. 
(4)  No interest or penalty shall be charged by reason of the granting of an extension pursuant to this subsection (a) during the first ten (10) days of each extension period. Thereafter, interest shall be collected upon the unpaid balance of the Innkeeper's liability at the rate of one (1%) percent per month as specified in Code Section 48-2-40 and for purposes thereof any period of less than one (1) month shall be considered one (1) month. 
(b)  In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-13-53.3(b), in the event any Innkeeper fails to make a return and pay the tax as provided by this Ordinance or makes a grossly Incorrect return or a return that is false or fraudulent, the City shall make an estimate for the taxable period of taxable charges of the Innkeeper. Based upon its estimate, the City shall assess and collect the taxes, interest, and penalties, as accrued, on the basis of the assessments. 
( Ord. No. 2018-06, § 8, 7-2-2018 ) 
Sec. 9. - Allowance to collector. 
As authorized by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-52, each person collecting the tax authorized by this Ordinance shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting, and paying the amount due If the amount due is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be three percent (3%) of the amount due, but only if the amount due was not delinquent at the time of payment. 
( Ord. No. 2018-06, § 9, 7-2-2018 ) 
Sec. 10. - Registration of innkeeper; certification of registration. 
Every Innkeeper in the District shall immediately register its business with the City for purposes of the tax and other provisions of this Ordinance. Such Innkeeper must so register such business no later than thirty (30) days after the date this Ordinance becomes effective or, if later, after the date the Innkeeper's such business begins, but such grace period for registration of such business after the effective date of the tax or after the date such business begins shall not relieve any person from the obligation of collection or payment of such tax on and after the date of imposition thereof. 
(a)  The required registration hereunder shall set forth the name under which the Innkeeper transacts business or intends to transact business; the street address location(s) of the place or places of business, the mailing address of the business, the principal contact person at such business, and such other information as the City may request. 
(b)  The registration shall be signed by the owner (if a natural person), by an officer (if a corporation), a manager or member (if a limited liability company), a partner (if a partnership), or authorized representative of any other entity. 
(c)  A separate registration shall be required for each place of business of an Innkeeper. 
Upon the registration of an Innkeeper and its business as hereinabove provided, the City shall issue to such Innkeeper a certificate evidencing such registration. Each certificate shall state the name and location of the business or person to which it relates. The Innkeeper shall maintain such registration at the business for examination by the City. 
( Ord. No. 2018-06, § 10, 7-2-2018 ) 
Sec. 11. - Records and books. 
(a)  In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-13-53.4, each Innkeeper required to make a return and pay any tax under this Ordinance shall keep and preserve: 
(1)  suitable records of the charges taxable under this Ordinance; and 
(2)  other books of account which are necessary to determine the amount of tax due. 
(b)  All books, invoices, and other records required by this Section 6.11 to be kept shall be open to examination at all reasonable hours by the City. 
( Ord. No. 2018-06, § 11, 7-2-2018 ) 
Sec. 12. - Exempt from tax. 
In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(h), the tax authorized by this Ordinance shall not apply to: 
(a)  Charges made for any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations provided to any persons who certify that they are staying in such room, lodging, or accommodation as a result of the destruction of their home or residence by fire or other casualty; 
(b)  The use of meeting rooms and other such facilities or any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations provided without charge; 
(c)  Any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations furnished for a period of one or more days for use by Georgia state or local governmental officials or employees when traveling on official business. Notwithstanding the availability of any other means of identifying the person as a state or local government official or employee, whenever a person pays for any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations with a state or local government credit or debit card, such rooms, lodgings, or accommodations shall be deemed to have been furnished for use by a Georgia state or local government official or employee traveling on official business for purposes of the exemption provided by this subsection (c). For purpose of the exemption provided under this subsection (c), a local government official or employee shall include officials or employees of counties, municipalities, consolidated governments, or City or independent school districts; or 
(d)  Charges made for continuous use of any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations after the first 30 days of continuous occupancy. 
( Ord. No. 2018-06, § 12, 7-2-2018 ) 
Sec. 13. - Innkeepers selling or quitting business. 
In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-13-53.1, if any Innkeeper liable for any tax, interest, or penalty imposed by the Ordinance, sells his or her business or quits the business, he or she shall make a final return and payment of any and all tax, interest and penalty imposed by this Ordinance within fifteen (15) days after the date of selling or quitting the business. The Innkeeper's successors or assigns, if any, shall withhold a sufficient amount of the purchase price as required by said Code section and upon falling to do so shall be personally liable for the payment of any taxes, interest, and penalties due under this Ordinance and unpaid by the former owner or assignor in an amount as provided in said Code Section. 
( Ord. No. 2018-06, § 13, 7-2-2018 ) 
Sec. 14. - Lodges operated under jurisdiction of Department of Natural Resources or Other State Authority. 
Any state park or authority subject to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-54 shall agree as required by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-54 to collect and to remit to the City the amounts provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-54. The sums so collected and remitted shall be expended only as provided by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-54. 
( Ord. No. 2018-06, § 14, 7-2-2018 ) 
Sec. 15. - Charitable trusts. 
A charitable trust or functionally related business of a charitable trust subject to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-55 shall be subject to taxes levied under this Ordinance only to the extent provided in said O.C.G.A. § 48-13-55. Amounts collected and remitted under the authority of this Section 15 and O.C.G.A. § 48-13-55 shall be expended solely as provided in said O.C.G.A. § 48-13-55. 
( Ord. No. 2018-06, § 15, 7-2-2018 ) 
Sec. 16. - Unpaid tax. 
The tax Imposed by this Ordinance shall become delinquent for each month after the twentieth (20th) day of each succeeding month during which it remains unpaid. 
( Ord. No. 2018-06, § 16, 7-2-2018 ) 
Sec. 17. - Interest. 
Taxes owed the City pursuant to this Ordinance shall bear interest at the rate of one percent (1%) per month from the date the tax is due until it is paid, in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-2-40. Any period of less than one (1) month shall be considered one (1) month. 
( Ord. No. 2018-06, § 17, 7-2-2018 ) 
Sec. 18. - Penalties added to tax for failure to pay. 
In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-13-58, 
(a)  When any Innkeeper fails to make any return or to pay the full amount of the tax required by this Ordinance, the City shall Impose, in addition to other penalties provided by law, a penalty to be added to the tax in the amount of five (5%) percent or $5.00, whichever is greater, if the failure is for not more than thirty (30) days and an additional five (5%) percent or $5.00, whichever is greater, for each additional thirty (30) days or fraction of 30 days during which the failure continues. The penalty for any single violation shall not exceed 25 percent or $25.00 in the aggregate, whichever is greater. 
(b)  If such failure is due to providential cause shown to the satisfaction of the Council in affidavit form attached to the return and remittance is made within ten (10) days of due date, the return may be accepted exclusive of penalties and interest. 
(c)  In the case of a false or fraudulent return or of a failure to file a return where willful intent exists to defraud the Council of any tax due under this Ordinance, a penalty of fifty (50%) percent of the tax due shall be assessed. 
( Ord. No. 2018-06, § 18, 7-2-2018 ) 
Sec. 19. - Waiver of interest and penalties; periods of limitation. 
The provisions of O.C.G.A. § 48-13-57 relating to authority to waive interest on unpaid taxes, authority to waive penalties, and periods of limitation for assessment of taxes shall apply to taxes imposed by this Ordinance. As such, the City may: 
(a)  Waive interest on unpaid taxes in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-2-41; 
(b)  Waive penalties in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-2-43; and 
(c)  The periods of limitation for assessment of taxes set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-2-49 shall apply to the assessment of the amount of any tax imposed by this Ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 2018-06, § 19, 7-2-2018 ) 
Sec. 20. - Annual report to department of community affairs. 
The City shall, as a condition of continuing authorization to impose the tax levied by this Ordinance, annually file with the Georgia Department of Community Affairs the report required by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-56. 
( Ord. No. 2018-06, § 20, 7-2-2018 ) 
Sec. 21. - Violations of ordinance. 
In addition to the other provisions of this Ordinance, to the fullest extent permitted by law, violations of this Ordinance may be cited to the City of Dahlonega Municipal Court which may Impose penalties for such violations in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 4-10-15 governing violations of City ordinances. 
( Ord. No. 2018-06, § 21, 7-2-2018 ) 
Sec. 22. - Effective date. 
This Ordinance shall become effective the first (1 st ) day of October, 2017. 
( Ord. No. 2018-06, § 22, 7-2-2018 ) 
Sec. 23. - Termination of previously levied tax. 
The tax previously levied by the Council pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(a) shall terminate as of the effective date of this Ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 2018-06, § 23, 7-2-2018 ) 
Sec. 24. - Severability of provisions. 
If any article, section, part, subpart, subsection, paragraph, item, sentence, clause, phrase or word of this Ordinance is declared or adjudged to be invalid or unconstitutional, such declaration or adjudication shall not affect the remaining provisions or portion of this Ordinance, which shall remain of full force and effect as if such portions so declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional were not originally a part of this chapter. The Council declares that it would have enacted the remaining provisions or parts of this Ordinance had it known that such portion hereof would be declared and adjudged invalid or unconstitutional. 
( Ord. No. 2018-06, § 24, 7-2-2018 ) 
Sec. 25. - Repealer. 
All ordinances or parts of ordinances, or resolutions or parts of resolutions, in conflict with this ordinance shall be and the same are repealed as of the effective date of this Ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 2018-06, § 25, 7-2-2018 ) 
RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE 
STATE LAWS 
This table shows the location of related laws. 

 
RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE 
ORDINANCES 
This table shows the location of ordinance amendments to the Related laws by the General Assembly. 

 
Subpart A - GENERAL ORDINANCES 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters shall constitute and be designated "The Code of the City of Dahlonega, Georgia," and may be so cited. This Code shall also be known as the Dahlonega Code. 
State Law reference— Authority to codify ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-19. 
Sec. 1-2. - Rules of construction. 
The following definitions and rules shall apply to this Code unless inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council: 
Generally. 
(1)  When provisions conflict, the specific prevails over the general. All provisions shall be liberally construed so that the intent of the city council may be effectuated. 
(2)  Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words, technical phrases and words and phrases that have acquired peculiar and appropriate meanings shall be construed according to such meanings. 
(3)  Provisions shall be interpreted and applied so as to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. 
(4)  Grammatical errors shall not vitiate, and a transposition of words and clauses may be resorted to when the sentence or clause is without meaning as it stands. 
As soon as possible. The term "as soon as possible" means within a reasonable time, having due regard to all the circumstances. 
Charter. The term "Charter" means the Charter of the City of Dahlonega, Georgia, as now or hereafter amended. 
City. The term "city" means the City of Dahlonega, Georgia. 
City council or council. The term "city council" or "council" means the city council of the City of Dahlonega, Georgia. 
Code. The term "Code" refers to The Code of the City of Dahlonega, Georgia, as designated in section 1-1. 
Computation of time. When a number of days is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, only the first or last day shall be counted. If the last day shall fall on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise such privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action shall fall on a public or legal holiday as set forth in state law, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following business day to exercise such privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, an intermediate Saturday, Sunday and legal holiday shall be excluded in the computation. 
Conjunctions. In a provision involving two or more items, conditions, provisions or events, which items, conditions, provisions or events are connected by the conjunction "and," "or" or "either…or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows, except that the terms "and" and "or" may be interchangeable when the context so requires: 
(1)  The term "and" indicates that all the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply. 
(2)  The term "or" indicates that the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply singly or in any combination. 
(3)  The terms "either…or" indicates that the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply singly but not in combination. 
County. The term "county" means Lumpkin County, Georgia. 
Delegation of authority. Any provision requiring a city officer or city employee or other officer to do an act or perform a duty shall be construed to authorize the officer or employee to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to do the required act or perform the required duty. 
Fees and charges. Words to the effect that a fee or charge is as established by the city mean that the fee or charge is as established by ordinance, resolution or any other lawful method. 
Following. The term "following" means next after. 
Gender and singular and plural. When any subject matter or person is described or referred to by terms importing the singular number or the masculine gender, several matters and persons, and females as well as males, and bodies corporate, as well as individuals, shall be deemed to be included. Whenever terms importing the plural number are used in describing or referring to any matter or persons, any single matter or person shall be deemed to be included, although distributive words may not be used. 
Include, including. The term "include," "including" or any other similar term of inclusion means without limitation or restriction. 
Judge. The term "judge" means the municipal judge. 
May. The term "may" is to be construed as being permissive and not as being mandatory. 
May not. The term "may not" has a prohibitory effect and states a prohibition. 
Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
Must. The term "must" is to be construed as being mandatory and not as being permissive. 
Oath. The term "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
O.C.G.A., state acts. The abbreviation "O.C.G.A." means the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as now or hereafter amended. A reference to a state act, whether by year and act number, year, act number and page, year and page or short title is a reference to such act as now or hereafter amended. 
Officers, departments, etc. References to officers, departments, boards, commissions or employees are to city officers, city departments, city boards, city commissions and city employees. 
Owner. The term "owner," as applied to property, means any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or part of such property. 
Person. The term "person" means any human being, any governmental or political subdivision or public agency, any public or private corporation, any limited liability company, any partnership, any firm, association or other organization, any receiver, trustee, assignee, agent, or other legal representative of any of the foregoing or any other legal entity. 
Personal property. The term "personal property" means money, goods, chattels, things in action, evidences of debt and energy. 
Preceding, following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Premises. The term "premises," as applied to real property, means lands and structures. 
Property. The term "property" means real and personal property. 
Real estate or real property. The term "real estate" or "real property" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments and all rights thereto and interests therein. 
Shall. The term "shall" is to be construed as being mandatory and not permissive. 
Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means a strip of land in front of or on the sides of a house or lot of land, lying between the property line and the street. 
Signature or subscription. The term "signature" or "subscription" includes a mark when a person cannot write. 
State. The term "state" means the State of Georgia. 
Street. The term "street" shall be construed to embrace streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts and all other public highways in the city. 
Tenant or occupant. The term "tenant" or "occupant," as applied to premises, includes any person holding a written or oral lease, or who actually occupies the whole or any part of such premises, alone or with others. 
Tense. The present tense of a verb includes the past and future tenses. The future tense includes the present tense. 
Week. The term "week" means seven consecutive days. 
Writing. The term "writing" means any form of recorded message capable of comprehension by ordinary visual means. 
Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections; history notes; references. 
(a)  The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and are not titles of such sections, or of any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any such section, including the catchline, is amended or reenacted. 
(b)  History notes that appear in this Code after sections or subsections or that otherwise appear in footnote form are provided for the convenience of the user of the Code and have no legal effect. 
(c)  Editor's notes, state law references and other references that appear in this Code after sections or subsections or that otherwise appear in footnote form are provided for the convenience of the user of the Code and have no legal effect. 
(d)  Unless specified otherwise, all references to chapters or sections are to chapters or sections of this Code. 
Sec. 1-4. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinance in force before or at any time the ordinances repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed under the ordinance repealed. 
Sec. 1-5. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein. In the case of repealed chapters, sections or subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code should be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "Chapter (article, division, subdivision, section ____________ or subsection ____________ (as appropriate) of The Code of the City of Dahlonega, Georgia, is hereby amended to read as follows:…." The new provisions shall then be set out in full. 
(c)  In the event a new provision not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language shall be used: "The Code of the City of Dahlonega, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a chapter (article, division, subdivision, section ____________ or subsection ____________ , as appropriate to be numbered ____________ , which such provisions read as follows:…." The new provisions shall then be set out in full. 
(d)  All chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions, sections and subsections desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by chapter, article, division, subdivision, section and subsection, as the case may be. 
Sec. 1-6. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  Supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city. A supplement to this Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of the supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete. The new pages shall be so prepared that when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code that have been repealed shall be removed from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the person authorized to prepare the supplement may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as necessary to do so in order to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the person may: 
(1)  Arrange the material into appropriate organizational units. 
(2)  Supply appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions and sections to be included in the Code and make changes in any such catchlines, headings and titles or in any such catchlines, headings and titles already in the Code. 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions, sections, and subsections to be added to the Code. 
(4)  Where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing numbers assigned to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions, sections, and subsections. 
(5)  Change the words "this ordinance" or similar words to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," "this subdivision," "this section," "this subsection," or "sections ____________ to ____________ " (inserting appropriate numbers that embody the substantive provisions of the ordinance incorporated in the Code). 
(6)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of the ordinances inserted in the Code. 
Sec. 1-7. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)  In this section, the term "violation of this Code" means any of the following: 
(1)  Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared unlawful, an offense, a violation or a misdemeanor by ordinance, by statute adopted by reference in this Code, by state rule or state regulation adopted by reference in this Code, or by order, rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(2)  Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance, by statute adopted by reference in this Code, by state rule or state regulation adopted by reference in this Code or by order, rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(3)  Failure to perform an act if the failure is prohibited or is made or declared unlawful, an offense, a violation or a misdemeanor by ordinance, by statute adopted by reference in this Code, by state rule or state regulation adopted by reference in this Code or by order, rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(b)  In this section, the term "violation of this Code" includes causing, allowing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering, or concealing the fact of a violation of this Code. 
(c)  In this section, the term "violation of this Code" does not include the failure of a city officer or city employee to perform an official duty unless it is specifically provided that the failure to perform the duty is to be punished as provided in this section. 
(d)  Except as otherwise provided, a person convicted of a violation of this Code shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00, imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months, or both such fine and imprisonment. A person convicted of a violation of this Code shall also be subject to alternative sentencing as provided by law. 
(e)  Except as otherwise provided: 
(1)  With respect to violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time, each day that the violation continues is a separate offense. 
(2)  With respect to other violations, each act of violation constitutes a separate offense. 
(f)  The imposition of a penalty does not prevent revocation or suspension of a license, permit or franchise. 
(g)  Violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time are a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of a penalty does not prevent equitable relief. 
State Law reference— Maximum penalty for ordinance violations, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2). 
Sec. 1-8. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code. 
Sec. 1-9. - Continuation of existing ordinances. 
The provisions of this Code, so far as they are the same as ordinances existing at the time of adoption of this Code, shall be considered as a continuation thereof and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-10. - Prior acts, obligations or uses unaffected. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code affects any offense or act committed or done, or any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(b)  The adoption of this Code does not authorize or permit any use or the continuance of any use of a structure or premises in violation of any ordinance of the city in effect on the date of adoption of this Code. 
Sec. 1-11. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code affects any ordinance: 
(1)  Amending the Charter. 
(2)  Extending or contracting the boundaries of the city. 
(3)  Promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligations assumed by the city. 
(4)  Prescribing the number, classification, benefits or compensation of any city officers or city employees. 
(5)  Making any appropriation. 
(6)  Adopting a budget or amending same. 
(7)  Granting any right or franchise. 
(8)  Establishing or prescribing grades of any street. 
(9)  Providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor. 
(10)  Dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city. 
(11)  Dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city. 
(12)  Levying or imposing taxes not codified in this Code. 
(13)  Pertaining to grinder pumps, i.e., Ord. No. 2001-4, Amendment 1. 
(14)  Establishing development regulations (Ord. No. 2000-7). 
(15)  Pertaining to zoning, including ordinances rezoning property or adopting or amending zoning maps or a comprehensive plan. 
(16)  Pertaining to telecommunications towers, i.e., Ord. No. 1998-14. 
(17)  That is temporary, although general in effect. 
(18)  That is special, although permanent in effect. 
(19)  The purpose of which has been accomplished. 
(20)  Declared by the council to be standalone and independent of the Code. 
All such ordinances are on file in the office of the city clerk. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal corporations generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 2-1—2-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY COUNCIL 

Secs. 2-19—2-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES 

Sec. 2-40. - Installation of officers, councilmembers, etc. 
The installation of officers, newly elected members of the council and the mayor elected at a regular election shall be at the first organizational meeting in January immediately following each November election. If elected at a special election, they shall be installed at the next regular meeting of the council following their election. 
(Ord. No. 91-10, 12-2-1991) 
Sec. 2-41. - Personnel policies. 
The personnel policies adopted by ordinance on February 3, 2014, are hereby adopted by reference. 
Sec. 2-42. - Administrative hearing officer. 
(a)  The administrative hearing officer shall be the municipal court judge appointed by the city council and shall serve until a successor is appointed and qualified. The administrative hearing officer who is also the municipal court judge shall be an attorney who is a member in good standing of the State Bar of Georgia. 
(b)  The duties of the administrative hearing officer shall be the hearing of all issues under the ordinances of the city which would determine the granting, denial, probating, suspending or revoking of any license or permit granted under the city ordinances. 
(c)  The jurisdiction of the hearing officer over the licenses or permits shall be in addition to and concurrent with that of the municipal court, except that the hearing officer is specifically prohibited from awarding any punishment involving imprisonment. The administrative hearing officer may award fines and penalties where specifically provided for in other regulations of the city. 
(d)  Jurisdiction of and procedures for the administrative hearing officer. 
(1)  The administrative hearing officer shall have jurisdiction over any action against any licensee or permittee holding a license or permit issued by any department of the city. Said action shall be brought by the city attorney, upon information from any city personnel. 
(2)  Any hearing before the administrative hearing officer shall be on a date and time certain which shall be reflected on the summons issued by the attorney or any other person specifically authorized by city ordinance, regulation or other law to issue such summons to appear in municipal court, or by the clerk of the municipal court on behalf of any aggrieved citizen. 
(3)  The notice of administrative hearing shall contain a place, date and time certain and shall be served on the responding party more than five days before any scheduled hearing. The notice of administrative hearing shall be served as follows: 
a.  By certified mail return/receipt requested; 
b.  By leaving a copy thereof at the licensed business location with an employee working therein (and in the case of an alcohol licensee, said notice shall also be sent by regular mail to the agent set out on the license or listed on the license application); or 
c.  By personal service on the responding party or on an agent authorized by law or by appointment to receive service of process. 
All service shall be by an authorized person in the city attorney's office or by any sworn county deputy or any city code enforcement officer. 
(4)  The administrative hearing officer shall have the authority to hear evidence and subpoena witnesses on behalf of the city or the aggrieved citizen and shall generally conduct the hearings in accordance with the requirements of due process as required by the United States Constitution and the state constitution. The administrative hearing officer shall entertain any and all evidence relevant to the matter without regard to evidentiary rules regarding hearsay. 
(5)  The standard for an action against a licensee or permittee is the standard "preponderance of the evidence." 
(6)  The administrative hearing officer may promulgate any rules of procedure not in conflict with this section or other law. 
(e)  Whenever, from any cause, the administrative hearing officer is unable to be in attendance, or it should appear that he is disqualified in any case, it shall be the duty of the administrative hearing officer to appoint a hearing officer pro hac vice to preside over the hearing in place and stead of the administrative hearing officer, and all actions of the appointee shall be binding as if performed by the administrative hearing officer. 
(f)  In the event of any vacancy in the office of the administrative hearing officer for any cause, whether by death, resignation, sickness, vacancy or removal, one or more persons to fill the vacancy shall be nominated by the mayor and confirmed or rejected by the city council. The person appointed to fill the vacancy shall serve for a term as set by resolution of the mayor and commission at the time of appointment and shall be a member in good standing of the State Bar of Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 2015-6, 8-3-2015) 
Secs. 2-43—2-72. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PUBLIC ETHICS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Public ethics, O.C.G.A. § 45-10-1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-73. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
City councilmember or member of the governing authority means any person who is an elected official, including the mayor, of the city. 
Employee means any person who is a full-time or part-time employee of the city. 
Government, governing authority or city means the City of Dahlonega, Georgia, government. 
Negligible value means something having a monetary value of not more than $100.00. 
(Ord. No. 2004-3, § 1, 7-12-2004) 
Sec. 2-74. - Intent. 
It is the intent of this article that city councilmembers and employees avoid any action whether or not specifically prohibited which might result in, or create the appearance of, the following: 
(1)  Using public office for private gain; 
(2)  Impeding government efficiency or economy; or 
(3)  Affecting adversely the confidence of the public in the integrity of the government. 
(Ord. No. 2004-3, § 2, 7-12-2004) 
Sec. 2-75. - Acceptance of gifts. 
(a)  City councilmembers shall not solicit or accept directly or indirectly anything of greater than negligible value from any person, corporation, or group which: 
(1)  Has, or is seeking to obtain contractual or other business or financial relationships with the city; 
(2)  In exchange for the thing of value, seeks to have a councilmember exercise a matter of discretion in his favor; 
(3)  In exchange for the thing of value, seeks to have interests which may be affected by the performance or nonperformance of the official duty of the councilmember. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to campaign contributions which shall be reported in accordance with state laws, and for the purposes of this section, incidental acceptance of gifts without evidence of unethical intent in amounts not exceeding $100.00 in value shall be deemed excluded from the activity proscribed in this section. 
(Ord. No. 2004-3, § 3, 7-12-2004) 
Sec. 2-76. - Financial interests of councilmembers. 
(a)  City councilmembers may not: 
(1)  Have direct or indirect financial interests that conflict substantially with their responsibilities and duties as government servants; or 
(2)  Engage in, directly or indirectly, financial transactions as a result of, or primarily relying upon, information obtained from their office. Aside from these restrictions, city councilmembers are free to engage in lawful financial transactions to the same extent as private citizens. 
(b)  The term "interest" means any direct pecuniary benefit, which is not a remote interest held by or accruing to a member of the city council as a result of a contract or transaction that is or may be the subject of an official act or action by or with the city. A member of the city council shall be deemed to have an interest in transactions involving: 
(1)  Any person in the member's immediate family; 
(2)  Any person with whom a contractual relationship exists whereby the member may receive any payment or other benefits unless the member is receiving a benefit for goods or services in the normal course of business for which the member has paid a commercially reasonable rate; 
(3)  Any business in which the member is a director, officer, employee, agent, or shareholder, except as otherwise provided herein; or 
(4)  Any person of whom the member is a creditor, whether secured or unsecured. 
(Ord. No. 2004-3, § 4, 7-12-2004) 
Sec. 2-77. - Use of public property. 
A city councilmember shall not use government property of any kind for other than officially approved activities, nor shall he direct employees to use such property for these purposes. 
(Ord. No. 2004-3, § 5, 7-12-2004) 
Sec. 2-78. - Use of confidential information. 
A city councilmember shall not directly or indirectly make use of, or permit others to make use of, for the purpose of furthering a private interest, official information not made available to the general public. 
(Ord. No. 2004-3, § 6, 7-12-2004) 
Sec. 2-79. - Coercion by councilmembers. 
A city councilmember shall not use his position in any way to coerce, or give the appearance of coercing, another person to provide any financial benefit to him or persons within his immediate family, or those with whom a councilmember has business or financial ties. 
(Ord. No. 2004-3, § 7, 7-12-2004) 
Sec. 2-80. - Voting in matters of personal interest. 
A city councilmember shall not vote on an ordinance or amendment in a city council meeting that would directly affect his private business. 
(Ord. No. 2004-3, § 8, 7-12-2004) 
Sec. 2-81. - Disqualification. 
A member of the city council shall disqualify himself from participating in any official act or action of the city which results in a pecuniary benefit to the member or a business or activity in which he has an interest, when such benefit is not available to the public at large. 
(Ord. No. 2004-3, § 9, 7-12-2004) 
Sec. 2-82. - Disclosure of conflicts of interest. 
A city councilmember shall disclose the nature of any interest he has at the time such matter is presented to the mayor and council for discussion. Such written or verbal statements shall be recorded into the minutes of the meeting and thus become part of the public record. Following any disclosure made pursuant to this section, the member shall refrain from all ex parte communications with other members regarding the application in which he has an interest. 
(Ord. No. 2004-3, § 10, 7-12-2004) 
State Law reference— Conflicts of interest, O.C.G.A. § 45-10-20 et seq. 
Sec. 2-83. - Prohibited contracts. 
The city shall not enter into any contract involving services or property with a member of the city council or with a business in which a member of the city council has an interest. This section shall not apply in the case of: 
(1)  The designation of a bank or trust company as a depository for city funds; 
(2)  The borrowing of funds from any bank or lending institution which offers the lowest available rate of interest in the community for such loan; 
(3)  Contracts entered into in accordance with the O.C.G.A. § 16-10-6; 
(4)  Contracts entered into under circumstances that constitute an emergency situation, provided that the mayor prepares a written record explaining the emergency; 
(5)  Contracts entered into with a member of the city council, or with a business in which a member of the city council has an interest, provided that such contract is the result of a competitive bid, disclosure of the nature of such member's interest is made prior to the time any bid is submitted, and a waiver of the prohibition contemplated by this section is issued by the city manager or his designee following disclosure. 
(Ord. No. 2004-3, § 11, 7-12-2004) 
Sec. 2-84. - Unauthorized purchases. 
A city councilmember shall not order any goods and services for the city without prior official authorization for such an expenditure. 
(Ord. No. 2004-3, § 12, 7-12-2004) 
Sec. 2-85. - Meetings of the council. 
Meetings of the council shall be conducted in accordance with O.C.G.A. title 50, ch. 14 (O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 et seq.). 
(Ord. No. 2004-3, § 13, 7-12-2004) 
Sec. 2-86. - City attorney used for private business. 
A city councilmember shall not use the city attorney without paying just compensation. 
(Ord. No. 2004-3, § 14, 7-12-2004) 
Sec. 2-87. - Unauthorized use of public employees. 
A city councilmember shall not use his superior position to request or require an employee to: 
(1)  Do clerical work on behalf of his family, business, social, church or fraternal interests; 
(2)  Purchase goods and services to be used for personal, business, or political purposes; and 
(3)  Work for him personally without offering just compensation. 
(Ord. No. 2004-3, § 15, 7-12-2004) 
Sec. 2-88. - Travel expenses. 
A city councilmember shall not draw per diem or expense monies from the city to attend a seminar, convention, or conference and then fail to attend the seminar, convention, or conference without refunding the pro rata unused per diem or expense monies to the city except for illness or other circumstances in which the demanding of a refund would be unjust. 
(Ord. No. 2004-3, § 16, 7-12-2004) 
Sec. 2-89. - Penalties. 
The standards of ethics to be observed by city councilmembers are set forth in this article, and any violation thereof shall subject the offender to disciplinary action which may include a penalty in the nature of a warning imposed by the grievance committee council, and if determined by the city council to require a penalty greater than a warning, then penalties available shall be censure or public or private reprimand. Power to administer a greater punishment shall include power to administer the lesser. 
(Ord. No. 2004-3, § 17, 7-12-2004) 
Secs. 2-90—2-106. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 2-107. - Complaints. 
(a)  Any person having a complaint against the mayor or any member of the city council for an alleged ethics violation as defined in this article shall file in writing a verified complaint alleging, with specificity and particularity, significant facts and circumstances which, if true, would be sufficient to establish a violation. The complaint shall be filed with the mayor, or in the event the complaint regards the mayor, shall be filed with the mayor pro tem. 
(b)  Upon receipt of a complaint, a determination shall be made whether the complaint sets forth significant facts and circumstances sufficient to warrant a hearing before the board of ethics. For purposes of this determination: 
(1)  Facts and circumstances are "significant" if they are key to the alleged violation underlying the complaint and not merely extraneous or tangential; and 
(2)  Significant facts and circumstances are "sufficient to warrant a hearing before the board of ethics" if they are not found to be frivolous, unfounded, unjustified, speculative, based on rumor or conjecture, based on hearsay or other inherently unreliable evidence, or deficient for some other appropriate reason. 
(c)  To facilitate the determination stated in this section, the mayor or the mayor pro tem, as appropriate: 
(1)  Shall appoint three members of the council (or himself and two members of the council) who, along with the city attorney, shall constitute an investigating committee tasked with making said determination; or 
(2)  Shall direct that, following an administrative review of the complaint (conducted in consultation with the city attorney), an administrative report shall be submitted to the council which, acting as a committee of the whole, shall make said determination based on its review of the information set forth in said report. 
(d)  In the event the complaint, or alternatively, the administrative report, is determined to not set forth significant facts and circumstances sufficient to warrant a hearing before the board of ethics, it shall be dismissed with no further action taken apart from issuance of appropriate notifications. In the event the complaint is found to set forth significant facts and circumstances sufficient to warrant a hearing before the board of ethics, the board shall be appointed as provided in this article. The referral to the board shall contain an authorization of expenditure for investigatory services by a professional approved by the city manager or his designee in consultation with the city attorney. 
(Ord. No. 2004-3, § 18, 7-12-2004; Ord. No. 2004-3, Amend. 1, 5-2016) 
Sec. 2-108. - Board of ethics. 
(a)  Composition. 
(1)  The board of ethics of the city shall be composed of five residents of the city to be appointed as provided in subsections (a)(2) and (3) of this section. Each member of the board of ethics shall have been a resident of the city for at least one year immediately preceding the date of taking office and shall remain a resident of the city while serving as a member of the board of ethics. No person shall serve as a member of the board of ethics if the person has, or has had within the preceding one-year period, any interest in any contract, transaction, or official action of the city. 
(2)  The mayor and councilmembers shall each designate two qualified citizens to provide a pool of 14 individuals who have consented to serve as a member of such board of ethics and who will be available for a period of two years to be called upon to serve in the event a board of ethics is appointed. 
(3)  The city manager or his designee shall maintain a listing of these 14 qualified citizens. Should the investigating committee determine a complaint warrants a hearing before the board of ethics, the mayor and council, at the first public meeting after such determination, shall draw names randomly from the listing of qualified citizens until the specified five members of the board of ethics have been appointed. Such board will elect one of its members to serve as chairperson. 
(4)  The members of the board of ethics shall serve without compensation. The city council shall provide meeting space for the board of ethics. Subject to budgetary procedures and requirements of the city, the city shall provide the board of ethics with such supplies, equipment and legal support services as may be reasonably necessary for it to perform its duties and responsibilities. The city attorney shall initially respond to legal support issues, but may then designate such other legal counsel as, in the opinion of the city attorney, may be appropriate in consideration of potential conflicts and in keeping with the code of professional responsibility. 
(b)  Duties and powers. The constituted board of ethics shall have the following duties and powers: 
(1)  To establish procedures, rules and regulations governing its internal organization and conduct of its affairs; 
(2)  To hold a hearing within 60 days after the receipt of a complaint. Failure to hold a hearing within the specified time shall result in dismissal of the complaint as to the transaction and shall prevent refiling if a complaint arises in the same incident for at least a period of six months; 
(3)  To prescribe forms, approved by the city attorney, for the disclosure required in this article and to make available to the public information disclosed as provided in this section; 
(4)  To receive and hear complaints of violations of the standards required by this article; 
(5)  To make such investigation and response to a complaint as it deems necessary to determine whether any person has violated any provisions of this article; 
(6)  To hold such hearings and make such inquiries as deemed necessary to investigate and rule upon complaints; 
(7)  To report its findings to the city council for such action as the city council deems appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 2004-3, § 19, 7-12-2004) 
Sec. 2-109. - Additional regulations. 
This article shall be cumulative to any other ordinance, resolution or act now existing. 
(Ord. No. 2004-3, § 20, 7-12-2004) 
Sec. 2-110. - Right to appeal. 
Any final decision by the city council pursuant to this article shall be reviewable by the superior court of the county. The review by the superior court shall be limited to an inquiry of whether there was any evidence before the city council which supported the decision of the council. 
(Ord. No. 2004-3, § 21, 7-12-2004) 
Secs. 2-111—2-133. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CONFLICT OF INTEREST, POLITICAL ACTIVITIES AND CODE OF ETHICS AS TO EMPLOYEES; PENALTIES AND METHODS OF ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 2-134. - Acceptance of gifts, gratuities, special privileges. 
(a)  Employees shall not, other than items of negligible value, accept any gifts, loans, rewards, favors, or services that may reasonably tend to improperly influence them in the discharge of their official duties. This limitation is not intended to prohibit the acceptance of articles of negligible value which are distributed generally nor to prohibit employees from accepting loans from regular lending institutions. It is particularly important that employees guard against relationships which might be construed as or give the appearance of favoritism, coercion, unfair advantage or collusion. 
(b)  Employees shall not use or attempt to use their position to secure economic benefits or advantages, special privileges or exemptions for themselves or others including the use of knowledge obtained through their employment or by virtue of their position. 
(c)  Employees shall not accept employment or engage in any business or professional activity which they may reasonably expect would require or induce them to disclose confidential information acquired by them by reason of their official position. 
(d)  Employees shall not accept payment from outside sources for professional services (i.e., teaching, instructing, speaking engagements, consulting, honorariums) when such activities are done on city time or when such services pertain to the purchase or sale of city property. 
(Ord. No. 2004-3, § 22, 7-12-2004) 
Sec. 2-135. - Proprietorship of creations. 
All plans, designs, reports, specifications, drawings, devices, inventions, and other items produced or created by employees during working hours or through the use of city facilities or equipment or at the request of the city shall be and become the sole property of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2004-3, § 23, 7-12-2004) 
Sec. 2-136. - Confidential information. 
Employees shall not disclose confidential information gained by reason of their official position, nor shall they otherwise use such information for their personal gain or benefit. 
(Ord. No. 2004-3, § 24, 7-12-2004) 
Sec. 2-137. - Conflict of interest. 
(a)  If an employee of the city is an officer, director, agent or member of, or owns interest in any entity which is subject to the regulation of, or which has financial commitments with the city, he shall file a sworn statement to this effect with the city clerk. 
(b)  An employee shall not transact any business in his official capacity with any business entity of which he is an officer, director, agent, member, or in which he owns a controlling interest, excluding civic, charitable or religious organizations. 
(c)  Employees shall not have personal investment in any enterprise which will create a conflict or a perceived conflict between their private interest and the public interest. 
(Ord. No. 2004-3, § 25, 7-12-2004) 
Sec. 2-138. - Political activity. 
(a)  No person employed by the city shall either publicly or otherwise hold himself out as a candidate in any city election while holding employment with the city. 
(b)  City employees shall not take part in any political management or political campaigns for election of the mayor or any member of the city council for the city during any period of time for which he is expected to perform work or receive compensation from the city. 
(c)  No employee, official or other person shall solicit, orally or by letter, or be in any other manner concerned in obtaining any assessments, contributions, or services for any political party from any employee during his hours of duty, service, or work with the city. 
(d)  Employees shall not represent the city by wearing any uniform or portion thereof that is issued by the city while they are participating in any campaign at any time. 
(e)  The city in no way seeks to influence employees in their choice of party affiliations or candidates, recognizing that this is a matter for each person to decide. Therefore, nothing contained herein shall be construed to restrict the right of the employee to hold membership in and support a political party, to vote as he chooses, to express opinions on political subjects or candidates, to maintain political neutrality, to attend political parties after work hours, or to campaign actively during off-duty hours in all areas of political activity. 
(f)  Employees shall not utilize any city equipment or vehicles in support of any political campaign. 
(Ord. No. 2004-3, § 26, 7-12-2004) 
Sec. 2-139. - Limitations and approval requirement regarding outside employment. 
(a)  City employment shall be considered to be the primary employment of all full-time employees. No employee may engage in outside employment which will interfere with the interests of city service. Standards by which some employment is not acceptable include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Illegal activity; 
(2)  Employment that, by virtue of association, will reflect upon the reputation of the city; 
(3)  High hazard or fatiguing work which might detract from or reduce city performance. 
(b)  Prior to beginning any regularly scheduled outside employment, city employees will obtain specific written approval from their manager or his designee on request forms which indicate the name of the outside employer, the nature of the work, schedule of days and hours of work, and address and telephone number where the employee can be reached. Such information will become a part of the employee's official personnel record. Employees are required to obtain approval from their managers or their designees for any change in a previously approved outside employment request. 
(c)  Any employee accepting or engaging in outside employment under the terms of this section shall make arrangements with the outside employer to be available to respond immediately to any emergency call of duty whenever the city manager or his designee shall determine that the employee's services are necessary. 
(d)  Employees sustaining injuries while engaged in outside employment are normally ineligible to receive benefits under the city's worker's compensation program. If an employee sustains an injury while engaged in outside employment, but is performing duties within the scope of his city responsibilities, he may be eligible for partial city worker's compensation benefits. 
(Ord. No. 2004-3, § 27, 7-12-2004) 
Sec. 2-140. - Administration and penalties. 
Failure to comply with the provisions of this article will result in disciplinary action consistent with the city personnel policy. 
(Ord. No. 2004-3, § 28, 7-12-2004) 
Chapter 4 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Alcoholic beverages generally, O.C.G.A. title 3; local regulation of alcoholic beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 4-1—4-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSING AND REGULATION 

Sec. 4-20. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alcohol means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever process produced. 
Alcoholic beverage means all alcohol, distilled spirits, beer, malt beverage, wine, or fortified wine. 
Ancillary growler license means the document issued by the city which allows, under certain conditions, the filling of reusable containers commonly referred to as growlers on the premises of the licensee directly or vicariously through employees (permittees) who have proper permits issued hereunder. 
Ancillary wine tasting permit means the license allowing licensed wine-only Class C package stores, who have acquired a wine-tasting permit, to provide samples of wine to customers. 
Approved closure means a cork, stopper or twist-type closure approved to close growlers. 
Brewer means a manufacturer of malt beverages. 
Broker means any person who purchases or obtains an alcoholic beverage from an importer, distillery, brewery, or winery and sells the alcoholic beverage to another broker, importer, or wholesaler without having custody of the alcoholic beverage or maintaining stock of the alcoholic beverage. 
Brown bagging means the act of a patron entering any private club, restaurant, music hall, theater, bowling alley, or other establishment providing food or entertainment in the normal course of business and bringing in and consuming the patrons' own alcoholic beverages. (Note: brown bagging is prohibited by this article.) 
Crime of moral turpitude means a crime which is contrary to justice, honesty, modesty, good morals or a person's duty to other people. Offenses that are crimes of moral turpitude for the purpose of this article include, but are not limited to, theft, bad checks, shoplifting, making terroristic threats, giving a false name to a police officer, false swearing, forgery, fraud or extortion. 
Distilled spirits or liquor means any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume, including, but not limited to, all fortified wines. 
Eating establishment or restaurant means any public place, including a place available for rental by the public, selling prepared food for consumption by the public on the premises with a full-service kitchen. A full service kitchen shall consist of a three-compartment pot sink, a stove or grill permanently installed, and refrigerator, all of which must be approved by the health and fire departments. An eating establishment shall be prepared to serve food every hour the establishment is open and shall show that at least 50 percent of its gross purchases at wholesale for food (including nonalcoholic beverages) and at wholesale for alcohol are derived from wholesale purchases of food alone and that its primary sales (50 percent or more) are derived from the sale of food items (meals) prepared on the premises of the licensee. 
Election day means that period of time beginning with the opening of the polls and ending with the closing of the polls. Sales of alcohol on election day are permitted. 
Financial interest includes, but is not limited to, holding any equity or any indebtedness or security interest in a business. 
Gross purchases. For the purpose of this article, gross purchases shall be calculated on the basis of the wholesale price that the licensee paid for the food (including nonalcoholic beverages) and the wholesale price that the licensee paid for the alcoholic beverages purchased. This is in addition to the parallel requirement regarding primary sales of the licensee which shall be calculated on the basis of the price at which the licensee sells such items to consumers. 
Growler means a properly sanitized, reusable non-plastic container capable of holding no less than 32 fluid ounces or no more than 64 fluid ounces and which shall be capable of being sealed with an approved closure type at the time of purchase for off-premises consumption of the contents thereof. 
Hotel means a building or other structure kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public to be a place where sleeping accommodations are offered for adequate pay to travelers and guests, whether transient, permanent or residential, in which rooms are used for the sleeping accommodations of such guests, such sleeping accommodations being conducted in the same building or in separate buildings or structures used in connection therewith that are on the same premises and are a part of the hotel operations and which contain on the premises a licensed eating establishment/restaurant. Motels meeting the qualifications set out in this definition for the term "hotel" shall be classified in the same category as hotels. Hotels shall have the privilege of granting franchises, for example leasing restaurant space, for the operation of any licensed establishment described in this article, and the holder of such franchise shall be included in the definition of a hotel pursuant to this definition. 
Immediate family means any person related to the holder of an alcoholic beverage license within the first degree of consanguinity or affinity as determined according to canon law, which shall include a person's spouse, parents, stepparents, parents-in-law, brothers and sisters, stepbrothers and stepsisters, brothers-in-law and sisters-in-law, children, stepchildren, and children-in-law. 
Importer means any person who imports an alcoholic beverage into the state from a foreign country and sells the alcoholic beverage to another importer, broker, or wholesaler and who maintains a stock of the alcoholic beverage. 
Legal alien means a foreign national who possesses a valid United States government-issued I-551 card. An application for I-551 status does not meet the legal alien definition. Any other status which allows a person to enter the United States does not comply with this definition. 
Legal resident means a United States citizen or a legal alien. 
Licensed alcoholic beverage caterer means any holder of a Class D, E, or F alcoholic beverage license issued under this article who shall show that at least 50 percent of the gross purchases at wholesale for food (including nonalcoholic beverages) and at wholesale for alcohol are derived from wholesale purchases of food alone and that its primary sales (50 percent or more) are derived from the sale of food items (meals) prepared on the premises of the caterer (licensee). A licensed alcoholic beverage caterer shall qualify under and with the provisions set forth in O.C.G.A. § 3-11-1 et seq. 
Licensed premises or premises includes all the space or area owned, leased and/or controlled by the licensee and used for the purpose of operating under the license, including, but not limited to, all rooms wherein alcoholic beverages are stored, sold, furnished, served, or consumed, except when such a room is located in a hotel, motel, or similar facility or in a shopping center, in which case only such room and any adjoining storage, office, toilet, and other similar rooms actually used for the storage, sales, furnishing, service or consumption of alcoholic beverages shall constitute the licensed premises. For Class D, E, or F licenses, such premises include adjoining patios, decks, or porches. A floor plan for each licensed premises, must be submitted with each application and/or renewal for a license under this article. 
Licensee means the person to whom a license under this article is issued. In the case of a partnership or corporation, all partners, officers, and directors of the partnership or corporation are licensees. Employees of the licensee are considered agents of the licensee, and the actions of employees are imputed to and are considered actions of the licensee. All corporations, LLCs and partnerships are also considered persons under the terms of this article. See definition of the term "person" for a complete list of entities included within the term "person." Each owner, member, officer or manager of the licensee or potential licensee shall be considered an applicant for the purposes of this article and, if granted, each individually and collectively shall be considered a licensee. 
Malt beverage means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops, or any other similar product, or any combination of such products in water, containing not more than 14 percent alcohol by volume and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager beer, small beer, and strong beer. The term "malt beverage" does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine. 
Manager means a person who has responsibility for management of the operations, including sale of alcoholic beverages, at the location to be licensed or supervision of management of the operations, including sale of alcoholic beverages at the location to be licensed and who is a full-time employee of the corporation, partnership, proprietor, or other ownership entity. 
Manufacturer means any maker, producer, or bottler of an alcoholic beverage. The term "manufacturer" also means: 
(1)  In the case of distilled spirits, any person engaged in distilling, rectifying, or blending any distilled spirits; 
(2)  In the case of any malt beverages, any brewer; and 
(3)  In the case of wine, any vintner. 
Note: A manufacturer will also be subject to certain state, federal and other licenses or requirements, including, under certain cases, a mandatory referendum. 
Package means a bottle, can, keg, barrel or other original consumer container. 
Person means any individual, firm, partnership, cooperative, nonprofit membership corporation, joint venture, association, company, corporation, agency, syndicate, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, fiduciary, or other entity or group or combination acting as a unit, body politic, or political subdivision, whether public, private, or quasi-public. 
Pouring permit or server permit means an authorization granted by the city to dispense, serve or mix alcoholic beverages in establishments licensed as Class D, E or F establishments and in Class B establishments who hold an ancillary growler license. 
Restaurant or eating establishment means any public place, including a place available for rental by the public, selling prepared food for consumption by the public on the premises with a full-service kitchen. A full-service kitchen shall consist of a three-compartment pot sink, a stove or grill permanently installed, and refrigerator, all of which must be approved by the health and fire departments. A restaurant shall be prepared to serve food every hour it is open and shall show that at least 50 percent of its gross purchases at wholesale for food (including nonalcoholic beverages) and at wholesale for alcohol are derived from wholesale purchases of food alone and that its primary sales (50 percent or more) are derived from the sale of food items (meals) prepared on the premises of the licensee. 
Retail beer or wine package store means a retail establishment which engages in the sale of packaged food, fresh produce, uncooked meats, dairy or other nonalcoholic food items and conducts all of its alcohol sales inside the building containing its retail floor space. Included in this definition are food stores, supermarkets, convenience food stores and discount/general merchandise stores. Gross sales of food must equal $1,500.00 per month. 
Retail consumption dealer means any person who sells alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises only to consumers and not for resale. These include retail malt beverages, wine and distilled spirits licensees. 
Retail package or package means sales of malt beverages or wine packaged to go and not for consumption on the sales premises. 
Retailer or retail dealer means any person who sells alcoholic beverages, either in unbroken packages or for consumption on the premises, at retail only to consumers and not for resale. These include retail malt beverage package and retail wine package licensees. 
Tap takeovers means for one day of each calendar quarter the growler licensee may allow its taps to be taken over by a licensed brewer or beer distributor. Notice shall be given to the city clerk in writing not later than 30 days prior to each tap takeover. No permit or fee shall be required. Calendar quarters shall be as follows: (January through March); (April through June); (July through September) and (October through December.) 
Wholesaler or wholesale dealer or wholesale distributor means any person who sells alcoholic beverages to other wholesale dealers, to retail dealers, or to retail consumption dealers. Note: A wholesaler, wholesale dealer or distributor will also be subject to certain state, federal and other licenses or requirements, including, under certain cases, a mandatory referendum. 
Wine means any alcoholic beverage containing not more than 24 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term "wine" includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, champagnes, combinations of such beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines and like products. The term "wine" does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. A liquid shall first be deemed to be a wine at that point in the manufacturing process when it conforms to this definition of wine. 
(Ord. No. 2016-12, art. I, 12-5-2016; Ord. No. 2016-12, Amend. 1, 8-7-2017) 
State Law reference— General definitions, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq. 
Sec. 4-21. - License required; classes and fees. 
(a)  License required. It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture or offer for sale, at retail or wholesale, within the corporate limits of the city any alcoholic beverage, including malt beverage or wine, without having a manufacturer's license or retail or wholesale alcoholic beverage dealer's license. It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture, furnish, sell or offer for sale, at retail or wholesale, within the corporate limits of the city any alcoholic beverage, including malt beverage or wine, in violation of the terms of such license or this article. Note: Manufacturing and wholesaling of alcoholic beverages may be conditioned upon other requirements and regulations, including, but not limited to, state and federal licensure as well as, in some cases, referendum requirements. 
(b)  Classes. The licenses shall be divided into the following classes: 
(1)  Class B, retail beer package, eligible for an ancillary growler license as permitted under section 4-27. 
(2)  Class C, retail wine package, eligible for ancillary wine tasting permit if wine-only (pursuant to requirements and conditions set forth in section 4-32). 
(3)  Class D, retail liquor by the drink. 
(4)  Class E, retail beer by the drink. 
(5)  Class F, retail wine by the drink. 
(6)  Special wine tasting permits. A temporary wine tasting permit issued to certain types of charitable organizations and others under section 4-24(b)(2). 
(7)  Class H, wholesale beer. 
(8)  Class I, wholesale wine. 
(9)  Class J, licensed alcoholic beverage caterer. 
(10)  Class K, brewer, manufacturer of malt beverages or wine. 
(c)  Fees. Base fees, administrative fees, and other specific fees: 
(1)  The base fees for each type of license listed in subsection (b) of this section shall be as follows: 

 
(2)  Temporary special event fees are established by the city. 
(3)  Collection of fees or taxes; sums due. If any person shall fail to pay the sum due under this article, then the city council or the city council's designee shall issue an execution against the delinquent person and such person's property for the amount of the fee or tax and may, further, administratively act to discontinue city utilities to the premises of the applicant. The city may institute any other action in law or equity to collect any sum due under this article or to enforce any provision of this article. 
(4)  Ancillary wine-tasting permit fee. Class C licensees who engage in wine tastings as permitted under certain conditions shall pay, in addition to the fees in this section, a fee as established by the city annually at the same time as the annual Class C license fee is paid. The conditions are as set forth in section 4-32. 
(5)  Ancillary growler license fee. Any applicant for or holder of a valid Class B license shall be eligible for an ancillary growler license as permitted under section 4-27. In addition to the fees in this section, the licensee shall pay a fee as established by the city annually at the same time as the annual Class B license fee is paid. 
(6)  Administrative and background check fees. New applications and annual background checks, which are required for renewal applications for any license under this article, shall be accompanied by a check for an administrative fee to defray investigative and administrative costs. Should the applicant be denied a license, or should the applicant withdraw the application prior to its being submitted to the city council, the deposit representing the license base fee shall be refunded; however, the administrative fee paid for administrative costs and investigation shall be retained. Administrative fees for investigation and administration costs are as established by the city. 
(d)  Change of business. A new owner shall be treated as if the application were an initial filing for the purpose of the background check. 
(e)  Payment. The fees referred to in this section shall be payable annually on or before October 31 for all consumption licenses (Classes D, E and F) and on or before November 15 for all package licenses (Classes B, C and all other classes). Any application filed on or before July 1 of the calendar year shall pay the full price for the application. If the license is applied for after July 1, then the base fee is half of the full amount. If the license is purchased and is not used for the full calendar year or if the license is revoked or suspended following issuance thereof, there shall be no refunds for any portion of the fees. All new license fees must be paid and received by the city at the time of application. Refunds will be issued if the license is not approved. Payment shall be made by means of a cashier's check or credit card. 
(Ord. No. 2016-12, art. II, 12-5-2016; Ord. No. 2018-03, 3-5-2018 ) 
State Law reference— Local licenses and fees, O.C.G.A. §§ 3-4-50, 3-4-110, 3-5-40 et seq., 3-6-40 et seq. 
Sec. 4-22. - General application procedure. 
(a)  Generally. 
(1)  The applicant for a license under this article shall make a written application under oath on the form as provided by the city clerk or his designated representative. Except as otherwise provided by law, such application shall be a public record and open to public inspection by any citizen of the city at a reasonable time and place. In the event of annexation into the city of businesses operating lawfully within the unincorporated county, that business may be issued a license instanter. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article to the contrary, a second license may be issued to an existing licensee upon payment by the applicant of the applicable occupational tax and the fees set forth herein, provided that all other requirements set out in this article have been met prior to the date of application, and provided that the applicant has no violation of any city alcohol regulations within the 120 days immediately preceding the application. 
(2)  Applications for licenses shall contain but not be restricted to the following statements and information: 
a.  The name, age, address and length of residency of the applicant; 
b.  The name, location and description of the premises or place of business which is to be operated under such license; 
c.  A statement of whether the applicant, or any person with any interest in the application has made application at any previous time for any malt beverage, wine or distilled spirits license and the disposition of that application, stating in detail the governmental authority involved and the business entity for which the license was sought; 
d.  Whether the applicant or any person with any interest in the application has ever been convicted of a crime, other than for traffic violations; and submit to a Georgia Crime Information Center verification of that statement; 
e.  Whether a previous license issued to the applicant or any person with any interest in the application has been revoked by any state or subdivision thereof or by the federal government and the reason therefor; 
f.  Whether any other person is to be interested directly or indirectly in the profits or losses or both of the proposed business. 
(b)  Administrative and background check fee. 
(1)  The applicant, upon turning in his complete application to the city clerk or his designated representative, at the same time shall provide a certified check or credit card payment for the applicable administrative and background check fee as listed in section 4-20(c) made payable to the city for the application fee, plus any additional related fees required by any other governmental agencies or departments for individual fingerprinting and related searches. All managers, officers and anyone having an ownership interest in the licensee or potential licensee must submit to a background check. A new administrative and background check fee must be paid for each additional investigation done during the year due to ownership or manager change. 
(2)  Additionally, each applicant for a new license shall submit to the city clerk such information as may be required by the Georgia Crime Information Center and by the Federal Bureau of Investigation, including classifiable sets of fingerprints. Application for a license under this article shall constitute consent for performance of a records check comparison for all the individuals required by this article to be checked. 
(c)  Entities—Ownership. All applicants other than individual persons shall list the names and addresses of all individual persons who have an ownership interest in such entity and the percentage ownership of each person, unless the corporate stock or other ownership interest is listed on a stock exchange or available for over-the-counter sales and subject to regulation by federal and state securities laws. If a named interest owner therein is another corporation or other entity, the same information shall be given for such corporation or entity. If during the life of the license, the identity of the interest owners or their percentage of ownership should change, that information shall be sent to the city clerk or any designated representative for processing. A change in ownership shall require a new application. Corporations and limited liability companies must file a compliance copy from the office of the secretary of state showing active status as an incorporated business. 
(d)  Same—Additional data for corporate, partnership, sole proprietors, and limited liability company applications. All corporate applicants shall list the names and addresses of the officers of the corporation. All sole proprietors shall apply in the name of the sole proprietor. All limited liability applicants shall provide the names and addresses of all members and managers of the limited liability company. In addition, thereto, all applicants, including sole proprietors and partnerships if the sole proprietor or at least one partner is not working fulltime in a managerial capacity on the premises, shall name a manager, whose name shall appear as such on the license issued. The corporation, partnership, sole proprietor, or limited liability company shall provide the name and address of said manager, who shall be a full-time employee of the corporation, partnership, sole proprietorship, or limited liability company and who shall be the individual who does in fact have regular, managerial and supervisory authority over the business conducted on the licensed premises. In addition, the manager shall be an agent for service for the corporation, partnership, sole proprietorship, or limited liability company in addition to all other methods allowed for serving a corporation or other entity by the laws of the state. Any person who has been a manager of a corporation, partnership, sole proprietorship, or limited liability company whose alcohol license has been revoked is ineligible to act as manager for any licensee thereafter for a period of ten years after such revocation. A change in ownership shall require a new application. 
(e)  Investigation. The city clerk or designated city official or agent shall submit the application after filing to the county sheriff's office. Each applicant authorizes the city and its agents to secure from any court, law enforcement agency, or other public agency his criminal history and the criminal history of all individuals required to be listed on the application, including, but not limited to, sole proprietor, partners, members, corporate officers, stockholders, and managers, and authorizes the city to use such information in determining whether the license applied for shall be issued. Each applicant waives any right that he would otherwise have to preclude the city or its agents from obtaining and using such information and each applicant further waives any liability of the city or its agents for obtaining and using such information, and agrees to indemnify and hold city harmless against the claims of any person listed by the applicant on the application and by doing so has authorized the city to investigate. The county sheriff's office shall make an arrest and conviction investigation concerning any applicants hereunder and all individuals required to be listed on the application, including, but not limited to, sole proprietor, partners, LLC members, corporate officers, corporate stockholders, and managers. The county sheriff's office shall submit the results of the investigation to the city clerk or other city official or agent within 30 days of submission. 
(f)  Offenses. Any individual making a false statement in any application for a license or false statement in connection with renewal thereof shall be guilty of an offense and punished as provided by state law relating to false swearing, and, further, a license, if previously granted or renewed, may be revoked for the violation in the discretion of the administrative hearing officer as provided in section 2-42 after notice and hearing. It shall be an offense for any person to give other than the true and correct legal name of the intended licensee, and a conviction for a violation thereof shall be punished as provided by state law. 
(g)  Duration; renewal. All licenses are issued only on a yearly basis and shall be eligible for renewal each year following issuance. Any license that is renewed pursuant to this article shall be subject to any of the enforcement actions and imposition of any of the remedies provided in section 4-31 of this, even though conduct that is the basis of such enforcement action may have occurred in a previous license year, or an administrative hearing with respect to such license may have been initiated in a prior license year. In the event that a license has been revoked by the administrative hearing officer, and the licensee has appealed such revocation to the superior court, or the time for filing such an appeal has not expired, consideration or issuance of any application for renewal of such license for a subsequent year shall be suspended until final judgment in the appeal has been entered by the court or the revocation has become final with no appeal being filed. Each licensee shall make a written application for renewal on or before October 31 for Class D, E and F licenses or on or before November 15 for Class B and C and all other licenses of each calendar year which shall swear to the truthfulness of such information that is the same as the prior application and shall set forth facts which are different from the prior year's application. The form shall be approved by the city clerk or his designated representative. All fees shall be tendered with the application in the form of a cashier's check or credit card. 
(h)  Penalty for filing renewal application and license fee payment late. 
(1)  There shall be a penalty fee charged for filing alcoholic beverage renewal application and license fee payment after October 31 for Class D, E and F licenses or after November 15 for Class B and C licenses. Such penalty fee shall be established by the city. 
(2)  If an alcoholic beverage license renewal application and license fee have not been filed with the city clerk by the last business day in December of each year, the license shall expire by operation of law and any relicensing shall require a new application. 
(i)  Taxes and fees. All taxes, fees, and utility bills due to the city must be paid prior to license issuance or renewal. 
(j)  State license; forfeiture for failure to comply; revocation of state license. A state alcoholic beverage license must be obtained by the applicant in order for the license issued by the city to be valid. Failure of the licensee to obtain a state license before beginning operation of the premises shall result in cancellation of the license issued by the city, and no refund of license fees shall be made to the licensee. If a state alcoholic beverage license is revoked or suspended by the state, then the license issued by the city shall automatically be revoked or suspended as of the date of such revocation or suspension and, in the case of suspension, for an identical term. 
(k)  Licenses or permits require conformance to article provisions. All alcoholic beverage licenses or permits issued hereunder are subject to all terms and conditions imposed by this article and related laws and other ordinances of the city relating to such business, as amended from time to time by the mayor and council. 
(l)  Objections to ownership . After receipt of application and notice of ownership interests, where city investigation determines that one or more persons disclosed in the application are ineligible to hold an interest in an alcoholic beverage license in the city, the city council shall notify the applicant and disqualified person within a reasonable time of any objections to the ownership or interest set forth therein, and it shall then be incumbent upon the disqualified person to dispose of such interest within 30 days after the mailing of the notice to do so by the city council to such person at his address as shown on such notice of interest; the applicant shall provide proof to the city of the change of interest required. No license shall be issued by the city until removal of the disqualified person has been verified. In the event a disqualifying interest is discovered during the renewal process, the applicant shall be given the same 30-day period to correct the defective interest after the mailing of the notice by the city council. Upon failure of an existing license holder to complete the substitution of a qualified interest for a disqualified interest, then the license as provided for in this section is subject to revocation until disposition of the interest has been made or notice given to the city council of the transfer. Notice and hearing before the administrative hearing officer shall be required to determine the issue of revocation. 
(m)  No alcohol license shall be issued to any person unless the building on the premises is complete and pictures of the four sides of the location are attached to the application. The completed building or the proposed building shall comply with the building codes and ordinances of the city and the regulations of the state. The proposed building shall also be subject to final inspection and approval when completed by the building inspector. 
(n)  Each applicant for an alcohol license shall attach to his application evidence of ownership of the premises or a copy of the current lease if the applicant is leasing the premises. 
(o)  The city council shall have final approval of all alcohol license applications. No application shall be acted upon by the city council except at a regular or special called meeting of the city council. No application shall be denied except after hearing before the city council with notice to the applicant and an opportunity for the applicant to be heard and to provide evidence and witnesses. Appeals from any denial by the council pursuant to this article shall be by writ of certiorari to the superior court of the county. 
(p)  Every application for a license hereunder shall be accompanied by a drawing to scale, showing the property upon which the licensee shall operate its business. 
(q)  No new application for a license hereunder shall be acted upon by the city council until after the applicant shall have run a notice of said application in a local newspaper at least one time per week for four weeks preceding the regular meeting at which time the application is to be presented and considered. Said notice shall contain the name of the person applying and the name of the person for which the application is submitted, if different, and the location of the proposed premises together with such other information from the application as deemed pertinent by the city clerk. An affidavit of the publisher or his authorized agent certifying the advertisement has been published shall accompany such application. 
(r)  Personal statements may be required. The council may, in its discretion, require a personal statement from any owner, manager or employee of any licensed establishment for licensing purposes. 
(s)  Disqualified applicants. The following persons are disqualified from holding an interest in an alcoholic beverage license: 
(1)  Any person who has been convicted of or pled guilty under any federal, state, or local law within the past ten years to any felony offense involving alcoholic beverages, narcotics, gambling or tax evasion or any misdemeanor or felony involving moral turpitude. 
(2)  Any person who is an employee of the city, although family members and relatives of employees are eligible to hold such a license. Elected officials are not considered employees for the purpose of this section. 
(3)  Any person, firm, partnership, association or corporation proposing to employ any manager who has been convicted of or pled guilty within the preceding ten years to any felony offense involving alcoholic beverages, narcotics, gambling, tax evasion or to any misdemeanor or felony involving moral turpitude. 
(t)  City council licensing decision (new application or renewal). The city council shall consider the following factors in making its determination as to whether issuance of a license to sell alcoholic beverages supports or is contrary to the public health, safety and welfare: 
(1)  The business experience, financial standing, trade associations, personal associations, record of arrest, or reputation in any community in which each applicant and interested person has resided; 
(2)  Whether the proposed business location is suitable in the judgment and discretion of the city council considering traffic congestion, general character of the neighborhood, and the effect which such an establishment would have on the adjacent and surrounding properties, or on the neighborhood generally; 
(3)  Whether the number of alcohol licenses already granted in the immediately surrounding area makes an additional license contrary to the public interest or welfare; 
(4)  Whether the location of the proposed business would be in violation of the zoning ordinance or other similar regulation of the city; 
(5)  Whether the location is the same as that at which a previous license has been revoked or suspended, and where, in the judgment of the city council, the problems which have arisen from the operation of an alcohol license at such location indicate that it is not in the interest of public health, safety, welfare or morals that the sale of alcoholic beverages be permitted at such location; 
(6)  Whether the granting of such license would constitute a violation of state or local law, regulation or ordinances regulating the sale of alcoholic beverages; 
(7)  Whether the applicant is for any reason disqualified under the terms of this article; 
(8)  Whether the applicant meets or can meet all the terms of this article; 
(9)  Whether the applicant has been cited at the location for violation of other city ordinances or regulations. 
No license application shall be denied without notice to the applicant and an opportunity for the applicant to be heard. 
(u)  Special disqualifications. In addition to those disqualifications from holding an interest in a license set forth in subsection (s) of this section, no license defined herein shall be issued to a person: 
(1)  Who is not a legal resident of the United States; 
(2)  Who is not at least 21 years of age prior to the date of application; 
(3)  Who owes any debt or obligation to the city, including, but not limited to, excise taxes, occupational taxes, property taxes, or utility fees; or 
(4)  Who indicates on the license application an intention to provide live nude performances on the premises or any other form of adult entertainment on the premises. 
(v)  Disqualifications regarding local ordinance violations. Further, no license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of three violations of the ordinances of the city governing alcoholic beverages licensed hereunder within the last ten years immediately prior to the filing of the licensee's application with the city clerk, except as specifically provided in subsection (x) of this section, concerning selling alcohol to underage persons. If at the time of application, the applicant is charged with any of the offenses proscribed in this subsection, consideration of the application shall be suspended until entry of a plea or verdict or dismissal. 
(w)  Disqualification following revocation. No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be granted to any person who has had a license to sell alcoholic beverages revoked within five years prior to the filing of an application. 
(x)  Immediately following a citation. 
(1)  Except as provided in subsection (x)(2) of this section, for 24 consecutive months immediately following the date of a conviction in a proceeding before the administrative hearing officer or the municipal court judge for any violation involving selling alcohol to underage persons within a licensed premises, no application for change in ownership of the license at the same location where the violation occurred shall be allowed unless there is a 100 percent change in ownership and control between the old licensee and the new applicant. For purposes of this subsection (x), the term "100 percent change in ownership and control" shall mean a 100 percent change in all individuals, partners, officers, directors, shareholders, members, managers and/or all persons having any whole, partial, beneficial or other interest in the business where the alcoholic beverage license is located. The term "100 percent change in ownership and control" shall not include a transfer in ownership and control to any person in the immediate family of any individuals, partners, officers, directors, shareholders, members, managers and/or any persons having any interest in the business where the alcoholic beverage license is located. The application for the alcoholic beverage license must be applied for and approved prior to the sale of the business. An alcoholic beverage license may not be issued until the new owner has established that the sale of the business is bona fide. The applicant for the new license must provide documentation concerning the sale, including, but not limited to, documentation concerning ownership of and all business interests in the old license in addition to documentation concerning the ownership of and all business interests in the new license, as requested by the city clerk. 
(2)  For 24 consecutive months immediately following the date of a conviction before the administrative hearing officer or the municipal court judge for any violation for selling alcohol to underage persons within a licensed premises, an application for less than 100 percent change in ownership and control between the old licensee and the new application shall be allowed only if the following requirements are met: 
a.  The applicant for less than 100 percent change in ownership of the license at the same location where the violation occurred must agree as part of the application that any past convictions for selling alcohol to underage persons within the licensed premises shall become part of the record of violations for the new business as if the new owners had been cited and found in violation. Such record of violations shall be taken into consideration in any future hearings against the new licensee. 
b.  Such applications for less than 100 percent change in ownership shall be made prior to the sale of the business but after any pending citations for violations for selling alcohol to underage persons within the licensed premises are adjudicated. 
(y)  Holding retail license and wholesale license prohibited. No person shall hold a license in any retail category hereunder and a license under any wholesale category at the same time. 
(Ord. No. 2016-12, arts. III, IV, 12-5-2016) 
Sec. 4-23. - General regulations pertaining to all licensees. 
(a)  License not transferable to another location. Each license is issued for a specific location only and may not be transferred to another location. A new application is required for each licensed premises. No license, except for a manufacturer license, may be issued to different licensees for the same location. 
(b)  Transfer of license to another person. No alcoholic beverage license shall be transferred from one person to another during the year in which the license was obtained, except in the case of the death of a person holding a license, in which event his personal representatives or his heirs may continue to operate under the said license for the balance of the year without payment of any fee, if otherwise qualified as license holders and approved by the city after background checks. 
(c)  Location. None of the licenses in this article shall be issued except in zones allowing such establishments as established in the zoning ordinance of the city. No person may sell or offer to sell alcohol within 100 yards of an alcohol treatment facility. 
(d)  Interests of public employees; prohibited. No license shall be granted to any city employee. Further, no license shall be granted to any state or federal employee whose duties include the regulation or policing of alcoholic beverages or licenses or any tax-collecting activity. Elected officials are not considered employees of the city. 
(e)  Inspection of books and accounts. Upon demand by the city clerk or the city attorney, or his designated representative, any person holding a license from the city shall furnish to the city's designated representative during normal business hours at such person's place of business all books of account, invoices, papers, reports and memoranda containing entries showing amount of purchases, sales receipts, inventory and other information, including exhibition of bank deposit books, bank statements, and copies of sales tax reports, and any other such documents as the city may deem necessary. Any person holding a license from the city shall secure, preserve, maintain and keep for a period of three years the records and documents enumerated and referred to in this subsection. 
(f)  Failure to open. All holders of licenses issued hereunder must, within 45 days after the issuance of such license, open for business the establishment referred to in the license. Failure to open the licensed establishment as referred to within such period shall serve as a forfeiture and cancellation of the unused license and no refund of the license fee shall be made to the license holder. 
(g)  False representation of age. It shall be unlawful for any person to falsely misrepresent his age in any manner whatsoever for the purposes of purchasing or otherwise acquiring any beverage licensed hereunder. 
(h)  Adding to, refilling bottles, misrepresentations as to quantity, etc. It shall be unlawful for a licensee hereunder, his employees, subcontractors or his agents, to add to the contents of a bottle or to refill an empty bottle or in any manner to misrepresent the quantity, quality or brand name of any beverage licensed hereunder. 
(i)  Hours of operation. The following hours of operation shall apply to the sale of alcoholic beverages licensed hereunder: 
(1)  Class B and C, retail package beer and/or wine—7:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight, Monday through Saturday; Sunday sales between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m.; 
(2)  Class D, retail distilled spirits by the drink—Monday through Friday beginning at 10:00 a.m. until 1:00 a.m. the next day; Saturday from 10:00 a.m. until 1:00 a.m. Sunday morning, further on Sunday as otherwise provided pursuant to appropriate permit and consistent with state law; 
(3)  Class E and F, retail malt beverages and/or wine by the drink—Monday through Friday beginning at 10:00 a.m. until 1:00 a.m. the next day; Saturday from 10:00 a.m. until 1:00 a.m. Sunday morning, further on Sunday as otherwise provided pursuant to appropriate permit and consistent with state law; 
(4)  Class D, E, and F licenses for alcoholic beverages which also have a valid Sunday sales permit shall be authorized to sell, offer for sale, serve and/or permit the consumption of alcoholic beverages upon the licensed premises between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 12:00 midnight on Sundays for all alcohol which is allowed to be sold on Sundays in the city. 
(j)  Active engagement in business required. All licenses issued pursuant to this article shall be valid only so long as the licensee is actively engaged in such business, with the exception of holidays, vacations, and periods of redecoration, and in the event the licensee shall cease to actively engage in such business, the licensee of such business shall immediately notify the council, in writing, and return the license to the city. 
(k)  Sales on election day. The sale of alcoholic beverages on any election day shall be permitted in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 3-3-20. 
(l)  Sales, etc., to persons under legal age. No licensee, employee or agent of the licensee shall provide alcoholic beverages to any person under the age permitted by O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23. 
(m)  Display of license. Every licensee, its agents or employees, shall post the most current state and local alcoholic beverage license issued for the licensed premises in public view at eye level (an approximate height of five feet from the floor) within 15 feet of the entrance to the licensed premises. 
(n)  Bringing beverages purchased elsewhere onto premises. No licensee for the sale of malt beverages, wine or distilled spirits shall authorize or permit any patron or customer to bring onto the premises malt beverages, wine or distilled spirits purchased elsewhere. Further, no licensee for the sale of malt beverages, wine or distilled spirits shall bring onto the premises any malt beverages, wine or distilled spirits purchased from a retailer for the purpose of resale or from any entity other than a licensed distributor. 
(o)  Brown bagging. Brown bagging, as defined in this article, is prohibited within the city. 
(p)  On-premises entertainment. It shall be unlawful to permit on the premises so licensed any contest or form of entertainment which consists of the wetting or soaking of the upper torso of a female or the pelvic areas of a male or female. 
(q)  Sales areas, activities. Except as otherwise allowed under the terms of this article, it shall be unlawful for any licensee to make delivery of any alcoholic beverages licensed to be sold except within the premises or area licensed for sale thereof. No package store licensee shall permit the consumption of alcohol sold by the licensee to be consumed on the lot or premises where the licensed establishment is located, nor shall any individual consume the contents of such packages on the lots or premises where the licensed establishment is holding a Class B or C license. This subsection shall not pertain to samples and tastings on the premises which are licensed or otherwise regulated under this article. 
(r)  Possession of unlicensed beverages. All licensees hereunder are forbidden to possess, keep, maintain or otherwise store or keep any alcoholic beverages for which the licensee does not hold a license on the premises so licensed. 
(s)  Consumption of alcohol by employees of licensee. It shall be unlawful for any employee of any licensee to consume alcoholic beverages on the premises of the licensee during such employee's working hours. 
(t)  Limitation on persons who may serve alcohol. Alcoholic beverages shall only be served by the licensee or the licensee's employees who hold valid pourer (a.k.a. server) permits issued under the terms of this article. 
(u)  Suspension of sales during civil emergency. The city manager may, upon determining that there is an immediate danger of civil disorder or natural disaster or any other immediate threat to the public peace and order, by executive order, suspend the sales of all beverages licensed under this article until such danger or threat has passed and for a reasonable period of time thereafter. 
(v)  No license holder, nor any agent or employee of the licensee shall knowingly sell any alcoholic beverage to any person while such person is in an intoxicated condition. 
(w)  No license holder nor any agent or employee of the licensee shall permit on the licensed premises any disorderly conduct or breach of the peace. 
(x)  No license holder nor any agent or employee of the licensee shall sell, offer for sale, possess, or permit the consumption on the licensed premises of any kind of alcoholic or malt beverages and wines, the sale or possession of which is not authorized under his license. 
(y)  No license holder nor any agent or employee of the licensee shall sell or offer for sale alcoholic beverages by use of vending machines. 
(z)  No license holder nor any agent or employee of the licensee shall receive or allow alcoholic beverages to be delivered to the premises of the licensee by means other than a conveyance owned and operated by a wholesale dealer with authority to make deliveries in the city. Transportation of alcoholic beverages by any other means shall be grounds for revocation of all licenses concerned. 
(aa)  No licensee of the city shall accept delivery of alcoholic beverages from any wholesale dealer unless the wholesale dealer has fully complied with the laws of the state regulating and taxing the sale of same at wholesale. 
(bb)  The failure of the license holder to promptly report to the sheriff's department and the city of any violation of law, regulation, or city ordinance, or breach of the peace, disturbance, or altercation occurring on the premises shall be grounds for the suspension and/or revocation of the license to be determined by the administrative hearing officer. 
(cc)  The failure of the license holder to furnish to the city clerk any report required by this article or requested in writing by the city clerk shall subject the license to suspension to be determined by the administrative hearing officer. 
(dd)  The failure of any license holder to pay any tax due to the city for the sale of said commodities promptly when due shall subject said license holder to a penalty of 25 percent of the amount of tax due, or shown to be due in addition to said tax. 
(ee)  The holder of a license to sell alcoholic beverages in the city shall have available at all times at the licensed premises a copy of this article and shall be responsible for compliance herewith by all persons on the premises. 
(ff)  It is prohibited for a licensee to acquire alcoholic beverages provided by a licensee other than by purchase in person within the licensed premises, except as specifically permitted by the city under the terms and conditions of this article. Neither shall persons acquire alcoholic beverages from a licensee and consume them in the outdoor area adjacent to the premises, except as otherwise permitted by the city under the terms and conditions of this article. 
(gg)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee to sell alcoholic or malt beverages on the streets or sidewalks, or elsewhere outside of the building, premises, or place of business licensed for such sale, except for temporary events specifically licensed for outside consumption. Businesses with licenses to dispense alcoholic beverages by the drink for consumption on the premises may serve such beverages only within the confines of the licensed building structure; provided, however, that any business with such license which has an approved outside patio area may serve alcoholic beverages in the patio area. Sale or dispensing of alcoholic beverages to persons through windows, doors, or other openings to sidewalks, parking lots, or to any other area outside the licensed premises, except for patios described in this subsection, is prohibited. 
(hh)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee to dispense or furnish or cause to be furnished or permit any person in his employ to furnish or dispense alcoholic beverages in any form to any person from the confines of a motor vehicle, when the vehicle is parked on any city street, alley, way or parking lot, except to make a delivery for subsequent consumption within licensed premises. 
(ii)  Notwithstanding any provision of this article to the contrary, a nonprofit civic and cultural center approved as such by the city clerk and/or qualified under section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, serving alcohol and food for consumption on the premises as a licensee shall be exempt from provisions of this article regarding server permits and the qualifications regarding wholesale and/or retail sales ratios. 
(Ord. No. 2016-12, art. V, 12-5-2016) 
State Law reference— Location restrictions, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-21. 
Sec. 4-24. - Regulations pertaining to certain classes of licenses only. 
(a)  Retail beer and wine package store. 
(1)  Retail malt beverages and wine by the package (Class B and C) shall be permitted in food stores, grocery stores, supermarkets, convenience food stores and discount/general merchandise stores, and specialty stores. 
(2)  Except as specifically provided for in subsection (b) of this section concerning certain wine tastings and section 4-27 concerning growlers, the original retail containers of any alcoholic beverage sold by a package store retail licensee hereunder shall not be opened on the lot or premises of the location licensed for the sale thereof. 
(3)  Visibility of premises from public street. No licensee for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the package shall operate under the license, unless the front entrance to the licensed premises is clearly visible from the public street; provided, however, that this restriction shall not apply where the licensee is a motel, hotel, private club, country club or is located in a shopping center or multiple-story business building. 
(4)  Visibility into interior, lighting of retail package store. No screens, blinds, curtains, partitions, articles or things which shall prevent a clear view into the interior shall be permitted in the window or from the doors of any retail store for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the package; and no booth, screen, partition or other obstruction shall be permitted within the interior of any such store. Each store shall be so lighted that the interior of the store is visible day and night. 
(5)  Units of malt beverage regulated. The sale of single units of malt beverage in containers 16 ounces or greater is allowable. Any unit of malt beverage in a container of less than 16 ounces must be sold together in units of four or more. 
(6)  Minimum monthly sales required for package store licenses; reporting requirements. 
a.  Package store Class B and C licenses shall be revoked if gross sales of groceries and food products, excluding sale of malt beverages and wines, fall below the sum of $1,500.00 monthly for three consecutive months. No licensee under the terms of this article shall offer either free or at a reduced price malt beverages or wine in conjunction with the sale of any food item. Such sales shall be unlawful and cannot be counted in satisfying the sales requirement of this article. 
b.  On or before November 15 of each year, each applicant for a retail license for package sales renewal shall furnish to the city clerk for the months of August, September and October of the then-current calendar year an affidavit showing the gross sale of groceries and food products, excluding sale of malt beverages and wines, the gross sales of malt beverages and wines, and the gross sale of other merchandise for the preceding month. This affidavit shall be on a form furnished by the city clerk, and attached to this affidavit shall be a copy of the Georgia Sales and Use Report for the same period. These reports shall remain confidential. The city manager or city council at any time during the year may make special requests of any one or all licensees under the terms of this article requiring them to submit either audited or unaudited reports, affidavits, or such other materials as may be necessary to ensure compliance by the licensee with the terms of this article. These reports may be requested for any month or series of months deemed necessary by the requesting official. 
(b)  By the drink sales for consumption on the premises; temporary license for consumption and/or package sales; affidavit requirements and other regulations. 
(1)  Extensions of sales areas. Any licensee for the sale of malt beverages and/or wine for the consumption on the premises or distilled spirits by the drink shall be authorized to extend the area utilized by such licensee to an adjoining patio or deck area properly permitted by the city clerk upon advice by the city code enforcement officer and planning director and having received a certificate of occupancy, or expansion on the same lot of record, so long as the business operation is under the same business management and licensed area under the same ownership. No licensee shall offer for sale food or alcohol except in areas permitted by the building official in writing. Occupancy of each sales area shall be defined on the face of each license. Exceeding said occupancy limit shall be a violation of this article. 
(2)  Temporary license for bona fide nonprofit, tax-exempt organization (a.k.a. temporary special event license). Upon the filing of an application as required by the city clerk and payment of a fee as established by the city per day by a bona fide nonprofit, tax-exempt organization, the city clerk may issue a special permit authorizing the organization to conduct a wine tasting event or to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption or by the package for a period not to exceed three consecutive days. 
a.  No more than five permits may be issued to an organization in any one calendar year pursuant to this subsection (b)(2). 
b.  Permits issued pursuant to this subsection (b)(2) shall be valid only for the place specified in the permit. No permit may be issued unless the sale is lawful under the zoning ordinances of the city in the zone for which the permit is issued. The zoning restrictions and distance restrictions contained in section 4-23(c) shall apply. 
c.  Proof of such nonprofit, tax-exempt status, such as a determination from the Internal Revenue Service that the organization is exempt under section 501(C)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code must be provided. 
d.  The special event should be noticed to the county sheriff's department for approval of any necessary crowd control and security measures. 
e.  The special event must receive approval from the city council on traffic control measures and such other regulations of the city as applicable. 
f.  The premises at which the special event is to take place must be approved by the city council. 
g.  Any employee or volunteer of the special event licensee, working the special event in any position dispensing, selling, serving, taking orders or mixing alcoholic beverages, shall not be required to obtain a pouring permit for the special event. 
h.  The city council or its designee may immediately revoke any temporary license for a special event if continued alcohol sales may endanger the health, welfare or safety of the public. 
i.  As a condition on the issuance of a temporary special event license, the licensee may be required to provide insurance satisfactory to the city and/or to indemnify and hold the city harmless from claims, demands or causes of action that may arise from activities associated with the special event. 
(3)  Monthly affidavit and ratio requirements. On or before the 25th of each month, each holder of a retail license to sell by the drink for consumption on the premises shall furnish to the city clerk a monthly affidavit for the preceding month (the month prior to the month in which the affidavit is filed) which shall use gross purchases for the wholesale price that the licensee paid for the purchase of food (including nonalcoholic beverages) and the wholesale price paid for the purchase of alcoholic beverages to calculate the ratio of food to alcoholic beverages purchased by the licensee's establishment. The licensee is required to maintain a ratio of 50 percent or greater of gross purchases of wholesale food to wholesale alcohol purchases. Via the same affidavit, the licensee is also required to show that its primary sales (50 percent or more) are derived from the sale of food items (meals) prepared on the premises of the licensee. This affidavit shall be on a form furnished by the city clerk. Attached to this affidavit shall be a copy of the Georgia Sales and Use Report for the same period and such other items as set forth as requirements on the form provided by the city clerk. These affidavits shall remain confidential subject only to the requirements of the Georgia Open Records Act. The city clerk, at any time during the year, may make special requests of any one or all licensees under the terms of this article requiring them to submit either audited or unaudited reports, affidavits, receipts, invoices or such other materials as may be necessary to ensure compliance by the licensee with the terms of this article. These reports may be requested for any month or series of months deemed necessary by the requesting official. Affidavits shall be reviewed quarterly. The failure of the licensee to maintain either of the required ratios for one quarter shall result in a warning. The failure of the licensee to maintain either of the ratios for two consecutive quarters shall be grounds for nonjudicial sanctions revocation, suspension, probation, fines and other penalties as determined by the administrative hearing officer. 
(4)  Open beverages prohibited; exception. It is prohibited for customers to leave the premises with open alcoholic beverages, and it is the licensee's responsibility to ensure that no open beverages are sold and carried out. However, nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the carrying out of wine or malt beverages for consumption on a golf course or the sale of wine or malt beverages outside on a golf course to golfers. Additionally, notwithstanding any other contrary provision of law, any licensee licensed to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises may permit a patron to remove one unsealed bottle of wine per patron for consumption off-premises, if the patron has purchased a meal and consumed a portion of the bottle of wine which has been purchased on the premises with such meal on the restaurant's premises. A partially-consumed bottle of wine that is to be removed from the premises must be securely resealed by the licensee or its employees before removal from the premises. The partially consumed bottle of wine shall be placed in a bag or other container that is secured in such a manner that is visibly apparent if the container has been subsequently opened or tampered with, and a dated receipt for the bottle of wine and meal shall be provided by the licensee and attached to the container. 
(c)  Open area and patio sales. 
(1)  Alcoholic beverage sales can be made by a licensed consumption-on-the-premises establishment in a patio/open area type environment if the establishment has been approved to do so by the city council and building official in compliance with any and all other regulations of the city regarding outdoor sales; provided, however, that sales of distilled spirits, wines and fortified wines must be in glass containers only. Beer and malt beverages may be sold in either glass containers or predominantly clear/translucent plastic containers. 
(2)  The requirement for approval is that the patio/open area be enclosed by some structure providing for public ingress/egress only through the main licensed premises. The purpose of this requirement is to prevent a customer from leaving the outside sales area with an open drink without the licensee's knowledge. 
(3)  The height of such structure shall be a minimum of three and one-half feet above the patio floor, but the structure does not have to be solid or restrict visibility into or out of the patio/open sales area. It must be permitted and approved by the city's code enforcement officer, city clerk and the county fire department as required by governing regulations or codes. 
(4)  The only exit from this area is to be through the licensed establishment's main premises and through an approved fire exit, not for general public use unless an emergency exists. The fire exit should be of the type that sounds an alarm so that the establishment will be alerted in the event of unauthorized use when no emergency exists. 
(5)  If a licensee desires a patio/open sales area inside an existing structure, plans will be reviewed and approved on an individual basis by the city council. Interior type patio/open sales areas must also meet the requirements of the city's development and fire codes. 
(6)  Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit a hotel or motel with a consumption-on-the-premises license from makings sales and allowing consumption of alcoholic beverages in rooms rented by hotel guests, or in ballrooms, meeting rooms, reception rooms, or patio areas of such hotel or motel, provided such functions are catered in connection with a meeting, conference, convention or similar type of gathering at such hotel or motel. Patio areas, as used in this subsection, do not have to conform to the standards in this section. 
(7)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code to the contrary, outdoor alcohol sales on public sidewalks shall be allowed by the licensee so long as the licensee meets the standards of and is permitted under the provisions of Ordinance 91-9, article XVI, section 1604 as amended, the same appearing in appendix B of this Code at article XVI-B-3, historical business district, section 1604, outdoor sales, storage and display prohibited. 
(d)  Rental of licensed premises for private functions. Class D, E, and F licensees are permitted to rent the licensed premises for private functions which have been scheduled in advance; provided that the licensee, its agents, managers, and employees shall retain complete control over the licensed premises and over selling, serving, or furnishing alcoholic beverages during the private function to the same extent required as if the function were open to the public. Nothing in this subsection shall be deemed to waive any provisions of this article or state law governing the sale of alcoholic beverages on the licensed premises. The licensed premises shall remain open to all agents of the state, the county and city for law enforcement and inspection purposes during such private functions. No doors to the licensed premises shall be locked preventing egress or ingress during such functions. Nothing in this subsection shall be deemed to waive the prohibition governing selling, furnishing, or delivering alcoholic beverages to underage persons by any person within the licensed premises. 
(Ord. No. 2016-12, art. VI, 12-5-2016; Ord. No. 2018-05, 7-3-2018 ) 
Sec. 4-25. - Off-premises alcohol catering. 
(a)  Permit requirements for resident alcohol caterers. 
(1)  Any licensee (hereinafter "resident alcohol caterer") who possesses a valid license from the city to sell or otherwise dispense malt beverages, wine or distilled spirits by the drink at a fixed location within the city may apply for an off-premises permit that permits alcohol sales at authorized catered events or functions. 
(2)  Each off-premises alcoholic beverage catering permit, authorized in this section, shall be valid only for the event for which the permit is issued. The fee for permits and administrative fees due upon application for a permit shall be set by resolution of the city council, and this fee amount shall remain in effect until modified or amended by subsequent resolution adopted by the city council. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, carry on, or conduct the sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages off-premises and in connection with a catered event or function without first having obtained a permit as provided in this section. 
(b)  Permit requirements for nonresident caterers. 
(1)  A nonresident alcoholic beverage caterer (hereinafter "nonresident alcohol caterer" or "alcoholic beverage caterer") shall submit an application for an off-premises alcoholic beverage catering permit to the city. The fee for each such permit shall be as established by the city as authorized by O.C.G.A. § 3-11-3. The term "nonresident caterer" shall mean any alcoholic beverage caterer who holds a valid license which was issued by a locality other than the city to sell or distribute distilled spirits, malt beverages or wine by the drink. 
(2)  An application for a permit shall include the name of the nonresident caterer, a copy of the caterer's alcoholic beverage license, the date, address, time, and name of the event and the quantity and type of alcoholic beverages to be transported from the nonresident caterer's primary location to the location of the authorized catered event or function. 
(3)  The original permit shall be kept in the vehicle transporting the alcoholic beverages to the catered event or function. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful for a licensed alcoholic beverage caterer to distribute, sell, or otherwise dispense alcoholic beverages in the city except as specifically authorized by the permit. 
(c)  Alcoholic beverage caterer regulated. A licensed alcoholic beverage caterer holding a valid off-premises permit may sell or otherwise dispense only that which is authorized by his alcoholic beverage license. For example, if the alcoholic beverage caterer possesses a valid license to sell malt beverages, he may sell or otherwise dispense only malt beverages at the authorized catered event or function. 
(d)  Sunday sales. An alcoholic beverage caterer wishing to cater an event or function on Sunday must possess a valid Sunday sales license and comply with the requirements of state law with respect to the service of alcoholic beverages on Sunday. 
(e)  Excise taxes. 
(1)  Excise taxes are imposed upon the sale of alcoholic beverages by resident caterers as provided in section 4-30. 
(2)  Excise taxes are imposed upon the total of individual alcoholic beverage drinks served by a nonresident caterer in the amounts set forth in section 4-30 and shall be paid within 30 days after the conclusion of the catered event or function. 
(f)  Must be a licensed alcoholic beverage caterer. A nonresident caterer applicant must be a licensed alcoholic beverage caterer pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-11-1 et seq. 
(g)  Required food service permits required. All applicants must hold all required food service permits required by the governing authorities, unless food is being provided by a separate food caterer not licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(h)  Must comply with Georgia Department of Revenue. All applicants must comply with the requirements of state department of revenue regulation 560-2-13-.03, including, but not limited to, the following specific requirements: 
(1)  Vehicles used by a licensed alcoholic beverage caterer for the transportation and delivery of alcoholic beverages in connection with an authorized catered event shall be marked only with the state license number. The lettering shall be two inches high and one inch wide on each side of the vehicle. No other working or advertisements relating to the catering service shall be allowed. 
(2)  While transporting and delivering alcoholic beverages in connection with an authorized catered event, the licensee or the employee of the licensed alcoholic beverage caterer shall have in his possession: 
a.  A copy of the caterer's valid state alcoholic beverage license. 
b.  A copy of the caterer's valid local alcoholic beverage license. 
c.  A copy of the caterer's valid off-premises event permit from the city. 
d.  The alcoholic beverage catering quantity/destination report. 
(3)  Delivery of all alcoholic beverages by a licensee to an authorized catered event must be made in unbroken containers. 
(4)  The serving of all alcoholic beverages at the authorized catered event must be by the drink. 
(i)  Applying for an off-premises alcohol event permit. Off-premises alcohol event permits are valid only for the event for which the permit is issued. All applicants for an off-premises alcohol event permit must: 
(1)  Submit a completed application provided by the city clerk. 
(2)  Pay the required application and permit fees. 
(j)  Permitted activities. Only licensed alcoholic beverage caterers who hold a valid event-specific permit are authorized to sell or dispense alcoholic beverages at an authorized alcohol catered event. Licensed alcoholic beverage caterers who hold a valid event-specific permit are authorized to engage in, carry on or conduct the distribution of alcoholic beverages under the following conditions: 
(1)  The distribution of alcoholic beverages is in connection with an "authorized catered event" for which an "off-premises alcoholic beverage catering permit" has been granted authorizing said event. 
(2)  Caterers may sell and dispense only that type of alcoholic beverage authorized by the caterer's alcoholic beverage license. 
(3)  Caterers shall comply with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 3-3-4(e). 
(4)  If the caterer desires to provide alcohol on a Sunday, it must be licensed for Sunday sales. 
(5)  The licensed and properly permitted caterer complies with the requirements of O.C.G.A. title 3, ch. 11 (O.C.G.A. § 3-11-1 et seq.). 
(6)  The licensed and properly permitted caterer complies with all other requirements of this article that are not in conflict with the provisions of this section. 
(k)  Private events. For events where alcoholic beverages are furnished by the host, which are not open to the public and at which no admittance fee, cup fee or by-the-drink fee is required, the event holder shall be exempt from the requirements of this article. However, if alcoholic beverages are to be provided at such an event by a caterer, then the requirements of this article must be met. 
(l)  Eligibility for issuance of on off-premises alcohol event permit. An off-premises alcohol event permit may be issued for a period not to exceed three consecutive days at any one time regardless of state regulations to any person, firm or corporation holding a valid alcoholic beverage license for consumption on the premises in the city or any licensed alcoholic beverage caterer pursuant to O.C.G.A. title 3, ch. 11 (O.C.G.A. § 3-11-1 et seq.). The person, firm or corporation must make application and pay the fees that may be required by the ordinances which govern alcoholic beverage licensing and special events permits within the city and shall be required to comply with all the general ordinances and the licensing and regulations for a consumption-on-the-premises establishment with the exception of the full-service kitchen requirement. 
(m)  Authorized events must be noticed. The authorized catered event should be noticed to and receive approval from the following: 
(1)  The location at which the authorized catered event is to take place must be properly zoned and approved by the city planning and zoning administrator. The city planning and zoning administrator may require further approval from the county sheriff's department and/or fire marshal for any necessary code or public safety measures. 
(2)  The permits for the authorized catered event are to be issued by the city clerk. 
(n)  Pouring permit not required. Any employee or volunteer of the permit holder, working the authorized catered event in any position dispensing, selling, serving, taking orders or mixing alcoholic beverages, shall not be required to obtain a pouring permit for the authorized catered event. 
(o)  Revocation of off-premises permit. The city council or its designee may immediately revoke any off-premises permit for an authorized catered event if continued alcohol sales endanger the health, welfare or safety of the public. 
(p)  Insurance may be required. As a condition on the issuance of the off-premises alcoholic beverage catering permit, the licensee may be required to provide insurance satisfactory to the city and/or to indemnify and hold the city harmless from claims, demands or causes of action that may arise from activities associated with the authorized catered event. 
(q)  Subsequent applications. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any subsequent application by the same applicant for substantially the same event which has previously been reviewed and approved by the city based on the criteria in subsections (l) through (p) of this section shall be eligible for immediate issuance by the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 2016-12, art. VII, 12-5-2016) 
Sec. 4-26. - Employment restrictions; pouring permits (a.k.a. server permits). 
The following regulations shall apply to all Class B, C, D, E, and F licensees who may be serving, mixing, or pouring alcohol by the drink or as tasting samples: 
(1)  Violation. It shall be a violation of this article, for the licensee as well as for the employee, to mix, dispense or serve alcohol in a licensed alcohol establishment without the proper pouring permit. Serving alcohol without a pouring permit shall be punished as provided in section 4-31. 
(2)  Employment restrictions. No person shall be employed to pour, dispense, transport, mix or serve alcoholic beverages, or serve in any managerial position by an establishment holding a Class B ancillary growler permit, Class C holding an ancillary wine tasting permit, Class D, E, or F license until such person has been cleared by the city code enforcement officers or other designee of the city council or city manager indicating that the person is eligible for such employment as per the minimum requirements for an applicant of a city pouring permit. 
(3)  Not applicable to busboys, cooks, or dishwashers. The requirement to acquire a pouring permit shall not be construed to include employees whose duties are limited solely to those of busboys, cooks, or dishwashers and who do not come in contact with alcohol on the licensed premises. 
(4)  Requirements for application. No pouring permit shall be issued until such time as a signed application has been filed with the city clerk or his designee and upon payment of a fee that shall be established by the city council and a search of the criminal record of the applicant completed. Fingerprinting of the applicant for a pouring permit shall not be required if a valid driver's license is provided to the city. The application shall include, but shall not be limited to, the name, date of birth, and prior arrest record of the person, though the fact of an arrest record shall be used for investigative purposes only, and shall give rise to no presumption or inference of guilt. Due to the inclusion of such sensitive information, the same shall only be produced for public inspection pursuant to the Georgia Records Act. 
(5)  Procedure for acceptance and denial. The code enforcement officer or a designee shall have a complete and exhaustive search made relative to any criminal record of the person applying for the permit. If there is no record of a violation of this article's standards, the code enforcement officer or a designee shall issue a permit to the person, by mail, stating that the person is eligible for employment. If it is found that the person is not eligible for employment, the code enforcement officer or other designee of the city council shall notify the person, in writing, that he is not eligible for employment, the cause of such denial and his right to appeal for hearing before the administrative hearing officer with proper notice and an opportunity to be heard. 
(6)  Violations which cause denial of a pouring permit. No person shall be granted a pouring permit unless it appears to the satisfaction of the code enforcement officer or a designee that such person has not been convicted or pled guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any crime involving moral turpitude, illegal gambling, or illegal possession or sale of controlled substances or the illegal sale or possession of alcoholic beverages, including the sale or transfer of alcoholic beverages to minors in a manner contrary to law, within a period of five years of the date of conviction. (The applicant must have been released from parole or probation.) No person shall be granted a pouring permit who has been convicted, pled guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any federal or state felony within five years of the date of conviction and has not been released from parole or probation prior to the filing for application for such permit. For purposes of this article, a conviction or plea of guilt or nolo contendere shall be ignored as to any offense for which a person whose sentence was entered under the Georgia First Offender Act, as amended, or was granted a conditional discharge. Except, however, that any such offense shall not be ignored if the person violated any term of probation imposed by the court granting first offender treatment or committed another crime and the sentence in court entered an adjudication of guilt as to the crime for which the person had previously been sentenced as a first offender or was ultimately not granted a conditional discharge. 
(7)  Duration of validity. An alcohol pouring permit shall be issued for a period of one calendar year from the date of the original application. As noted in subsection (12) of this section, the alcohol pouring permit must be in the possession of the employee while the pouring permit holder is working and must be available for inspection by members of the sheriff's department or the city council's staff, city code enforcement or other parties designated by the city manager. After application for the pouring permit is completed with the city, the employee may immediately commence work on a temporary basis provided the employee retains the receipt for the permit on his person at all times at the premises for which the alcohol license has been issued, and thereafter if a permit is issued, must maintain on his person at the premises the actual pouring permit. 
(8)  Falsifying, concealing or covering up information. No person shall be issued a permit if it is determined that the person falsified, concealed or covered up any material fact by any device, trick or scheme while making application to the city clerk for an alcoholic beverage pouring permit under this section. If it is determined that a person is in violation of this subsection and a permit is denied for this reason, then 30 calendar days must elapse from the date of notification per certified mailing before a new application and fee may be resubmitted. 
(9)  Administrative error. All permits issued through administrative error can be terminated and seized by the city clerk or his designee or the designee of the city council. 
(10)  Replacement permits. Replacement permits will be issued within 30 days of original date, upon paying one-half of the fee charged for alcohol pouring permits. After 30 days of original application date, a new application and fee must be submitted. 
(11)  Pouring permits are property of the city. All permits issued under this article remain the property of the city and shall be produced for inspection upon the demand of the clerk or the sheriff's department as provided elsewhere herein. Such permits remain as the property of the city. 
(12)  Licensees required to inspect and verify pouring permits. No licensee shall allow any employee or manager required to hold a permit to work on the premises unless the employee or manager has in his possession a current valid city pouring permit. For new employees, a receipt issued by the city clerk may be used for a maximum of 30 days from the date of its issue. Licensees are required by this article to inspect and verify that each employee required to do so has in their possession a valid current alcohol pouring permit. 
(13)  Licensee requirements to file with the city clerk. It shall be the duty of all persons holding any license to sell alcoholic beverages to file with the city clerk or a designee the name of the establishment, the license number and a list of all employees, with their home addresses and home telephone numbers, twice annually during the month of June and again during the month of December. 
(14)  Pouring permit fee charged. An annual pouring permit fee, as established by the city, shall be charged. 
(15)  Pouring permits are issued to the individual. The permit issued under this section shall be issued to individuals only, regardless of who pays the compensation to the city for its issuance, and may be used at any employer licensed by the city until said license is revoked, suspended, terminated, or expires. 
(16)  Suspension or revocation of pouring permit. Pouring permits may be suspended or revoked and other penalties assessed after notice and hearing before the administrative hearing officer as identified and described elsewhere herein should the holder of the pouring permit be determined to have violated any term of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2016-12, art. VIII, 12-5-2016) 
Sec. 4-27. - Growlers. 
(a)  Ancillary growler license. Any applicant for or holder of a valid Class B license in the city shall also be eligible for an ancillary growler license upon approval of the Class B license and payment of an additional annual regulatory fee in the amount stated in section 4-21(c)(5). The regulatory fee shall be paid upon original application and upon each renewal application and shall be in addition to any other fees associated with the applicant's mandatory primary license. 
(b)  Pouring permit required. Any employee of the licensee filling a growler or handling a growler after filled must have a valid city pouring permit issued by the city. See section 4-26 for complete information regarding city pouring permits. 
(c)  Kegs. Growlers may only be filled with malt beverages or craft beers from kegs procured from duly licensed wholesalers. 
(d)  Licensee must comply with sanitation regulations. It shall be the responsibility of the individual or entity filling the growler to sanitize such growler prior to filling. The licensee must comply with Georgia Department of Agriculture's General Rules 40-7-1-.40 requiring a "contamination free" transfer process for beverages and the use of washed, rinsed and sanitized growler fill tubes, which must be cleaned between each use and must comply with the state department of agriculture's best management practices for growler refilling. 
(e)  Approved closures required. Each growler must be securely sealed and removed from the premises in its original sealed condition utilizing an approved closure. At the time of the sale and/or refilling, a paper or plastic adhesive band, strip, or sleeve shall be applied to the container and extend over the top of the approved closure forming a tamper-evident seal that must be broken upon opening of the container. The adhesive band, strip, or sleeve shall bear the name and address of the business filling the growler and the contents of the container must be displayed prominently on the container. 
(f)  Packaging and labeling of alcoholic malt beverages. The licensee must comply with all federal and state laws and regulations regarding packaging and labeling alcoholic malt beverages. Each growler filled with a malt beverage or craft beer must contain the following warning which may be printed on the paper or plastic adhesive band, strip or sleeve that is applied to the container after filling or which may be affixed separately to the container on a preprinted label as follows: 
"GOVERNMENT WARNING: (1) According to the Surgeon General, women should not drink alcoholic beverages during pregnancy because of the risk of birth defects. (2) Consumption of alcoholic beverages impairs your ability to drive a car or operate machinery, and may cause health problems." 
(g)  Samples. Establishments licensed to fill growlers shall be authorized to offer, with or without charge, samples of malt beverage or craft beer to patrons over the age of 21 years. Samples shall not exceed two ounces in volume, nor shall any one individual be offered more than eight samples within a 24-hour period. The person pouring the sample must hold a valid city pouring permit. It shall be the responsibility of the licensee and any employee of the licensee, prior to filling a growler or supplying a sample to a patron, to ensure the patron is of legal age to purchase and consume alcohol. 
(h)  Filling a growler regulations. The filling of growlers by means of a tapped keg, when properly dispensed by a permitted employee of a licensed retailer under the provisions of this article, shall not constitute the breaking of a package as contemplated by O.C.G.A. § 3-3-26 or any other provision of any ordinance regulating the sale of package beer and wine in the city. Every customer who purchases a growler shall, at the time of the purchase, be provided written documentation by the licensee regarding the open container laws of the state. 
(i)  Tap takeovers. A tap takeover shall mean for one day of each calendar quarter the growler licensee may allow its taps to be taken over by a licensed brewer or beer distributor. Notice shall be given to the city clerk in writing not later than 30 days prior to each tap takeover. No permit or fee shall be required. Calendar quarters shall be as follows: January through March; April through June; July through September and October through December. 
(Ord. No. 2016-12, art. IX, 12-5-2016; Ord. No. 2016-12, Amend. 1, 8-7-2017) 
Sec. 4-28. - Dive defined; prohibited. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Dive means any place or establishment where illegal drugs are found, possessed, kept or sold; or where any person possesses or consumes any illegal or unlicensed alcoholic beverage or possesses or uses any illegal drug; or where any person commits any illegal sexual act; or where any person engages in illegal gambling activities. 
(b)  Prohibition. It shall be unlawful for any person or organization or group of persons to have, operate or maintain any place or establishment defined as a dive. 
(Ord. No. 2016-12, art. X, 12-5-2016) 
Sec. 4-29. - Alcohol promotions; pricing of alcoholic beverages. 
(a)  All alcoholic beverages included. This section shall be construed to cover, include and apply to every type of alcoholic beverage licensed to be sold in the city, including wine, malt beverages and distilled spirits. 
(b)  Unlawful practices. Except at private functions not open to the public that meet the requirements of section 4-24(d), it shall be unlawful for any Class D, E, or F licensee or employee or agent of such licensee to engage in or allow any of the following practices in connection with the sale or other disposition of alcoholic beverages: 
(1)  Offer or deliver any free alcoholic beverage to the general public; 
(2)  Sell, offer to sell, or deliver to any person or group of persons any alcoholic beverage at a price less than $1.00 except pursuant to other provisions of this article allowing free sample tastings; 
(3)  Sell, offer to sell, or deliver to any person or group of persons two or more alcoholic beverages during any set period of time at a fixed price; 
(4)  Sell, offer to sell, or deliver alcoholic beverages to any person or group of persons at reduced prices less than the normal retail price of the establishment for that alcoholic beverage charged the general public on that day; 
(5)  Increase the volume of alcohol contained in a drink without increasing proportionately the price regularly charged for such alcoholic beverage; 
(6)  Sell two or more alcoholic beverages for a price substantially the same as is charged for one such alcoholic beverage; 
(7)  Require or encourage the purchase of a second or subsequent alcoholic beverage at the same time another alcoholic beverage is purchased. 
(c)  No advertisement or promotion of prohibited practices allowed. There shall be no advertisement or promotion in any way, whether within or without the licensed premises, of any of the practices prohibited under this section. 
(d)  Certain promotions allowed. No provision of this section shall be construed to prohibit licensees from offering entertainment at any time; or to prohibit the sale or delivery of wine by bottle or carafe when sold with meals or to more than one person, or to prohibit any hotel or motel containing an eating establishment/restaurant as defined under the terms of this article from offering room service to registered guests. 
(Ord. No. 2016-12, art. XI, 12-5-2016) 
Sec. 4-30. - Excise taxes. 
(a)  Per-drink excise tax. Every purchaser of distilled spirits by the drink shall be liable for a tax thereon at the rate of three percent of the retail price or charge for such drink. Such taxes shall be collected by the licensee licensed under this article, and such licensee shall remit the same to the city on or before the 20th day of the succeeding month, along with a summary of the licensee's gross sales derived from the sale of distilled spirits by the drink, excluding malt beverages. Gross sales shall include all credit card sales and shall be reported and taxes collected thereon to the same extent as required of cash sales. Each licensee shall be allowed a deduction equal to that rate authorized for deductions from state tax under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-50, provided that the tax is not delinquent at the time of payment. It shall be the duty of every such licensee required to make a report and pay any tax levied pursuant to this article, to keep and preserve suitable records of the sales taxable pursuant to this article, and such other books or accounts as may be necessary to determine the amount of tax due. It shall be the duty of every licensee to keep and preserve such records for a period of three years. 
(b)  Package excise tax. Said excise tax shall be paid by persons selling malt beverages and wines, retail package and/or consumption on the premises licensees, or by their respective wholesalers as their designated agents, by the 20th day of each month following the month in which deliveries were made. Copies of Summaries of Sales and State Form ATT-122 shall be furnished to the city clerk with each monthly payment. Any misstatement or concealment of fact in reports or applications shall be grounds for revocation of the license issued and shall make the applicant or licensee liable to prosecution for perjury under the laws of the state. 
(c)  Late penalty. Excise taxes received in the business license department after the 20th day of the month shall be charged a ten percent penalty. 
(d)  Audit may be required. If the city council deems it necessary to conduct an audit of the records and books of the licensee, it will notify the licensee of the date, time and place of the audit. 
(e)  Excise tax and bond requirement on wholesalers. 
(1)  There is hereby levied an excise tax computed at the rate of $0.22 per liter that shall be paid to the city council on all distilled spirits and wine sold by wholesalers to retailers in the city. Such tax shall be paid to the designee of the city council by the wholesale distributors on all distilled spirits and wine sold to the licensees for the sale of distilled spirits and wine in the city as follows: Each wholesaler selling, shipping, or in any way delivering distilled spirits or wine to any licensees hereunder shall collect the excise tax at the time of delivery and shall remit the same together with a summary of all deliveries to each licensee on or before the tenth day of the month following. Excise taxes received in the business license department after the 20th day of the month shall be charged a ten percent penalty. The $0.22 per liter shall be prorated so that all containers of distilled spirits and wine shall be taxed on the basis of $0.22 cents per liter. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any wholesaler to sell, ship or deliver, in any manner, any distilled spirits or wine to a retail dealer without collecting said tax. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any retail dealer to possess, own, hold, store, display or sell any distilled spirits or wine on which such tax has not been paid. 
(2)  There is hereby levied an excise tax on all malt beverages sold by wholesalers to retailers in the city at the following rates: 
a.  Where malt beverages, commonly known as tap or draft beer, are sold in or from a barrel or bulk container, a tax of $6.00 on each container sold containing not more than 15½ gallons and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 15½ gallons; 
b.  Where malt beverages are sold in bottles, cans or other containers, except barrel or bulk containers, a tax of $0.05 per 12 ounces and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 12 ounces. 

 
  
All provisions as to excise tax in this article shall apply to this tax on malt beverages except the tax rate which is set out in this subsection (state law says excise taxes are due on malt beverages on the tenth of the month). 
(3)  A wholesaler may be excused from posting a performance bond after demonstrating full and satisfactory compliance with the provisions herein for a period of 12 months subsequent to the commencement of business operations within the city. Continued exemption from the requirement of posting the performance bond shall be conditioned upon continued compliance with the terms of this article and the payment of all sums as required by the provisions herein. 
(4)  Any wholesale dealer in malt beverages, wines, or distilled spirits licensed by the state and maintaining a permanent place of business within the city will be granted a license upon payment of the annual fee set in section 4-21(c). All other wholesalers shall pay fees as established by the city annually. 
(Ord. No. 2016-12, art. XII, 12-5-2016) 
State Law reference— Local excise taxes on alcohol, O.C.G.A. §§ 3-4-80, 3-4-130 et seq., 3-5-80 et seq., 3-6-60. 
Sec. 4-31. - Compliance; violations; penalties; hearings. 
(a)  Nonjudicial sanctions for violation of this article. Any person who owns, manages, operates, or is otherwise responsible for an establishment selling alcoholic beverages and licensed under the provisions of this article, who by his own actions or by the actions of employees or agents, is in violation of the terms of this article, or who directs, consents to, permits, or acquiesces in such violation either directly or indirectly shall, by such conduct, subject any license issued under this article to suspension, imposition of monetary penalties, revocation and/or probation, or any combination thereof. Monetary penalties in the form of civil fines of up to $1,000.00 may be imposed. Nonjudicial sanctions shall be administered by citation and subpoena to the municipal court, the judge of said court acting as the administrative hearing officer for purposes of hearing all citations for violations of this article and the administering of nonjudicial sanctions. The administrative hearing officer shall consider the following factors in reviewing an alleged violation if a violation is found to exist: 
(1)  The gravity of the violation; 
(2)  Any previous violations within a five-year period; 
(3)  The costs to the city related to compliance or enforcement efforts undertaken by the city in pursuing the case; 
(4)  Actions of the licensee, its employees, subcontractors or agents in connection with the violation; and 
(5)  Due cause as set forth in subsection (b) of this section. 
No license shall be renewed if any civil fines imposed pursuant to this section have not been paid by the licensee prior to renewal. For purposes of administering and enforcing this article, any act committed by an employee, agent or representative of a licensee shall be deemed to be an act of such licensee, provided, however, that such presumption may be rebutted only by evidence which precludes every other reasonable hypothesis save that such licensee did not know, assist or aid in such occurrence, or in the exercise of due diligence could not have discovered or prevented such activity. A nonjudicial sanction shall be considered a conviction when the term "conviction" is used elsewhere herein. The term "conviction" shall also have its usual and normal meaning of an adjudication adverse to a defendant or a plea of guilty in a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(b)  The term "due cause," for purposes of the imposition of nonjudicial sanctions, shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Conviction (to include a plea of guilty or nolo contendre) by local, state or federal authorities of the licensee including persons holding an ownership interest in the licensee or the manager of the licensee for any ordinance or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, or any felony involving alcoholic beverages, gambling, or tax law violations. 
(2)  Conviction (to include a plea of guilty or nolo contender) by local, state or federal authorities of any employee of the licensee for violation of any law or ordinance regulating alcoholic beverages, including, but not limited to, violation by such employee of any of the standards of this article. 
(3)  Any violation of this article, including, but not limited to, violations upon the licensed premises or by persons acting on behalf of the licensee with respect to the violation. 
(4)  Suspension or revocation of any state license required as condition for the possession, sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages. 
(5)  Material falsification of any fact given in application for a license issued under this article or bearing upon the licensee's qualification therefor, or any act which may be construed as a subterfuge in an effort to circumvent any of the qualifications for a license under this article. 
(6)  The licensed business fails to properly account for, file, report and/or maintain any records and/or remit or pay any renewal license fee imposed, sales taxes, or excise taxes required under city ordinances. 
(7)  Conduct of the licensed business in such a manner as to require excessive enforcement monitoring or response to preserve the public order and secure compliance with federal, state and local laws and ordinances regulating alcoholic beverages. 
(c)  Actions to suspend, revoke, or place a license on probation and/or for nonjudicial sanctions shall be commenced by the city clerk by giving written notice to the licensee, either by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by personal service upon the licensee or his agent at the licensed location or as may be shown on the records of the Georgia Secretary of State stating the grounds therefor, and the date, time and place such matter will be heard by the administrative hearing officer. Notice shall be served at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. Any licensee requiring subpoenas to compel the attendance of city witnesses or documents at the hearing shall file a written request with the city clerk at least five days prior to the hearing. Hearings may be continued for good cause only. 
(d)  Hearings shall only be as formal as necessary to preserve order and shall be compatible with the principles of justice. The city attorney or his designee shall present the city's case and shall bear the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that due cause exists to suspend, revoke or probate the license or to assess fines or other penalties. The licensee may be represented by legal counsel, may confront and cross examine witnesses, and shall have the right to call witnesses and present evidence on his behalf. A hearing record shall be maintained by the city; however, either party may arrange for transcription by a court reporter at his sole expense. Hearings shall be presided over by the administrative hearing officer who shall preserve order and rule upon all matters of evidence. Irrelevant, immaterial and unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded. 
(e)  All final decisions to suspend, revoke, or place a licensee on probation or to invoke fines or other penalties shall be made by the administrative hearing officer, in writing, with the reasons therefor stated. Notice of a final decision shall be given to the licensee within three business days following the date of the hearing. 
(f)  Appeals from an action by the administrative hearing officer to revoke, suspend or probate a license pursuant to this article shall be by writ of certiorari to the superior court of the county. 
(Ord. No. 2016-12, art. XIII, 12-5-2016) 
Sec. 4-32. - Conditions for issuance of an ancillary wine tasting permit. 
An ancillary wine tasting permit shall be issued subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  The applicant for an ancillary wine tasting permit must hold a valid current wine-only package license. 
(2)  No wine tasting may be conducted on the premises of any place of business licensed to sell malt beverages. 
(3)  No permit to conduct a wine tasting will be issued to conduct a wine tasting on the premises of a wine store operating in connection with a licensed retail liquor or beer store. 
(4)  Wine sampling shall be on limited occasions when a customer requests a sample of wine offered for sale within the premises, or in conjuncture with wine education classes and sampling designed to promote wine appreciation and education. 
(5)  All wines used for tasting purposes must have been purchased from a licensed state wine wholesaler/distributor. 
(6)  Wine tastings must comply with all laws and regulations otherwise pertaining to the sale and distribution of alcoholic beverages in the state. 
(7)  All applicants and permit holders must comply with all state statutes and sections of this article and other city ordinances concerning alcoholic beverages, including, but not limited to, those dealing with hours of operation, zoning, and distance requirements. 
(8)  The holder of a Class C wine-only license shall be eligible for an ancillary wine tasting permit. 
(9)  The holder of a Class C wine-only license with a wine tasting permit is hereby exempted from the prohibition of wine displays but he must still abide by section 4-24(a)(6). 
(10)  Wine tastings for customers shall only be conducted at a wine counter area constituting no more than ten percent of the entire floor area of the premises. 
(11)  Wine sampling for customers shall be limited to two ounces or less. 
(12)  Wine bottles shall be opened only by the licensee or an employee, and samples shall only be poured by the licensee and/or an employee with a valid pouring permit as issued by the city. 
(13)  No open containers of wine shall be removed from any building on the licensed premises. 
(14)  Not more than one time a week for a period of not to exceed two consecutive hours, the holder of an ancillary wine tasting license may conduct educational classes and sampling for classes. All conditions of sampling set forth in this section shall apply to such classes, except for the limitation on floor areas where the classes can be conducted. 
(15)  Holders of ancillary wine tasting permits shall not charge for samples or tastings, but may accept donations for a charitable organization of their choice. 
(16)  Wine sampling and tasting is only permitted within the enclosed portion of the premises. 
(17)  All managers and employees who will be serving samples must have a valid city pouring permit as contained in section 4-26. 
(Ord. No. 2016-12, app. A, 12-5-2016) 
Secs. 4-33—4-52. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FARM WINERY TASTING ROOMS 

Sec. 4-53. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Farm winery and tasting room shall be defined according to O.C.G.A. § 3-6-21.1 and as may be hereafter amended. 
(Ord. No. 93-3, Amend. 1, § 1, 4-12-2005) 
Sec. 4-54. - Type of sale. 
Wine sold under the provisions of farm wineries shall be sold for retail purposes only and shall be sold only in special, limited retail facilities operated under a license issued hereunder. Such farm winery may operate a tasting room in connection with such retail sales so long as upon the same immediate premises as the retail sales. Sale by the drink may be allowed in such tasting rooms to the extent consistent with the law, rules and regulations of the state. 
(Ord. No. 93-3, Amend. 1, § 2, 4-12-2005) 
Sec. 4-55. - Retail licensee qualifications. 
The retail licensee must be a person of good moral character and a citizen of the United States. 
(1)  No license shall be granted to any person who shall have been convicted of a felony; nor any crime including misdemeanors involving moral turpitude, or any misdemeanor involving abuse of alcohol in any form. The applicant shall provide a clear Georgia Crime Information Center report of the manager of the premises prior to the issuance of any license under the terms of this article. 
(2)  Licenses may be issued to individual applicants, partnerships, or corporations. Upon making application for a license, an individual, partnership, or corporation shall be required to divulge the names of any and all persons who have or will have any interest, monetary or otherwise, in the business he will operate under said license. In addition, the application shall set forth the purpose, location for said business operation, including the plans for the building in which said business shall be operated, and a plat of the property on which said building shall be situated. 
(3)  The licensee shall be the owner, lessee, or manager of the premises for which the license is held, and said licensee shall be active in, and solely responsible for, the management and operation of the business for which the license is granted. If a corporation, the licensee will be the manager, and said licensee shall be active in, and responsible for, the management and operation of the business, whether or not a shareholder of said corporation. The manager of said premises must be a bona fide resident of the county for at least six months prior to making application for a license. 
(4)  No license shall be granted to any public official, state, county, or municipal, nor shall any license be granted to any person to operate a business wherein a public official has any interest in a business being operated under a license issued hereunder. Subsequent to the issuance of same, said license shall be automatically revoked. However, unless otherwise prohibited by state law, family members and relatives of public officials will not be deemed to be public officials under the provisions of these regulations. 
(5)  Each applicant shall make a sworn statement of his qualifications pursuant to this section and place same on file with the clerk before any license is issued. Any misrepresentation or concealment of fact in said application or sworn statement shall be grounds for revocation of the license. 
(Ord. No. 93-3, Amend. 1, § 3, 4-12-2005) 
Sec. 4-56. - Regulations. 
No holder of a license under this article, nor any agent or employee of the licensee, shall do any of the following upon the licensed premises: 
(1)  Knowingly sell or serve wine to a minor; 
(2)  Knowingly sell or serve wine to any person while such person is in an intoxicated condition; 
(3)  Sell wine upon the licensed premises at any time except between 7:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight, Monday through Saturday, and between 12:30 p.m. and 12:00 midnight on Sundays if permitted by state law; 
(4)  Permit on the licensed premises any disorderly conduct, breach of the peace, or any lewd, immoral, or improper entertainment, conduct or practices; 
(5)  Operate the licensed business in any building which does not permit full view of the inside from outside the front, or which is not well lighted inside or which does not meet the minimum distance requirements as set forth in the ordinances and resolutions of the city for malt beverage and wine consumption on the premises licenses; or operate in a temporary facility other than as approved by the city and to be utilized solely in conjunction with an event sponsored by the Lumpkin County Farm Wineries Association, and which is also sanctioned by the Dahlonega-Lumpkin County Chamber of Commerce and approved via appropriate festival permit and temporary tasting room license by the city for sales within temporary special entertainment districts so designated by the city; 
(6)  Maintain any type of amusement music machine or video game, or utilize any device which amplifies music or voice beyond the confines of the tasting room facility; 
(7)  Allow any purchase made on the licensed premises to be taken therefrom until put in a bag or otherwise securely wrapped in paper by the proprietor or clerk operating the licensed business. 
(Ord. No. 93-3, Amend. 1, § 4, 4-12-2005) 
Sec. 4-57. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Any violation of the provisions of section 4-56 shall be grounds for immediate revocation of a license by the issuing body. 
(b)  A license shall be a mere grant of privilege to carry on business during the term of the license, subject to all terms and conditions imposed by this article, or any future resolution pertaining thereto, and subject to revocation at any time. In case of revocation, the licensee shall not be entitled to a return of the unearned license fee. All such licenses shall have printed on the front the following: 
"This license is a mere privilege subject to be revoked and annulled by the mayor and city council of the City of Dahlonega, Georgia." 
(c)  Any license granted hereunder may be revoked after hearing, for any cause deemed sufficient by the city council. Notice of such hearing shall be given, either personally or by leaving same at the licensed place of business at least ten days prior to the hearing. Such notice, given in the name of the council or of the mayor, may include notice that the license is suspended pending hearing; in which case the licensee shall immediately cease to operate his business until further order. All decisions approving, denying, suspending, or revoking such permits or licenses shall be in writing, with the reasons therefor stated, and mailed or delivered to the applicant personally upon timely application; any applicant aggrieved by the decision of the city council regarding a permit or license shall be afforded a hearing with an opportunity to present evidence and cross examine opposing witnesses. 
(Ord. No. 93-3, Amend. 1, § 5, 4-12-2005) 
Sec. 4-58. - License fee. 
(a)  The applicant for a retail license for the sale of wine and operation of a tasting room shall pay to the city clerk the sum established by the city as an annual license fee for the operation of one year, beginning on January 1, or alternatively, the sum established by the city as a license fee for a temporary tasting room license, dependent upon the application submitted. 
(b)  All licensed retailers shall store all wine in their possession on the premises for which the license is issued, and at no other place or places except upon written permission from the issuing authority upon written application therefor. 
(Ord. No. 93-3, Amend. 1, § 6, 4-12-2005) 
Sec. 4-59. - Authority to issue licenses. 
Licenses shall be issued only upon the approval of the city, applications for said licenses shall be presented to that body, and all fees shall be paid to the city clerk in the amount and at the time hereinbefore specified. 
(Ord. No. 93-3, Amend. 1, § 7, 4-12-2005) 
Sec. 4-60. - Regulations, future resolutions and revocation of licenses. 
All the provisions of this article are and shall be subject to the regulations hereinafter prescribed by the city council and the same may be from time to time amended, setting forth the rules, terms and conditions upon which such licenses may be issued; the annual fees, the qualifications of licensees; the proscription on advertising and restrictions on the business locations of licensees and building in which said business is operated; the control of customers doing business with licensees and any and all other matters which the city council may deem advisable to set forth as to the proper control and regulation of the sale and consumption of malt beverages and wine; and all such licenses as may be hereafter issued shall be expressly subject to the provisions of such rules and regulations as may be then or thereafter in force; and all such licenses shall be nontransferable and shall convey to the licensee no property right, but only a privilege, which may be revoked by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 93-3, Amend. 1, § 8, 4-12-2005) 
Sec. 4-61. - Limited license. 
The farm winery license created by this article is limited to farm winery tasting rooms licensed by the state and allows the licensee to perform all acts as allowed by such legislation. No license is created by this article authorizing any other such uses. 
(Ord. No. 93-3, Amend. 1, § 9, 4-12-2005) 
Secs. 4-62—4-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - EXCISE TAX ON SALES OF DISTILLED SPIRITS BY THE DRINK[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Excise tax on sales of distilled spirits by the drink, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-130. 

Sec. 4-81. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
City means the city and, variously, the incorporated territory of the city, wherein the city government is empowered to impose this tax by O.C.G.A. § 3-4-130. 
City clerk means the duly appointed city clerk or his designee. 
Due date means the 20th day after the close of the monthly period for which the tax is to be computed. 
Licensee means any person holding a liquor pouring license from the city. 
Monthly period means the calendar months of any year. 
Person means an individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, cooperative, estate, trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, the plural as well as the singular number, excepting the United States, the state and any instrumentality of either thereof upon which the city is without power to impose the tax. 
Tax means the sales tax on liquor by the drink imposed by this article. 
(Ord. No. 2007-3, § 1, 6-12-2007) 
Sec. 4-82. - Imposition; rate of tax. 
There is hereby imposed, and there shall be paid, a tax of three percent on the sale of liquor by the drink in the city. 
(Ord. No. 2007-3, § 2, 6-12-2007) 
Sec. 4-83. - Collection by licensee. 
Every licensee shall collect a tax of three percent on the sale of liquor by the drink at his pouring outlet. 
(Ord. No. 2007-3, § 3, 6-12-2007) 
Sec. 4-84. - Determination generally; returns; payments. 
(a)  Due date of taxes. All amount of such taxes shall be due and payable to the city clerk monthly on or before the 20th day of every month next succeeding each respective monthly period. 
(b)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax by due date. A specific penalty of 15 percent is imposed for failure to pay any amount of tax when due and payable to the city. Delinquent amounts shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, until paid. 
(c)  Return; time of filing; persons required to file; contents. On or before the 20th day of the month following each monthly period, a return for the preceding monthly period shall be filed by every licensee with the city clerk showing the gross sales of liquor by the drink and the amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the period, and such other information as may be required by the city clerk. 
(d)  Collection fee allowed licensees. Licensees collecting the tax shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and paying the amount due, if the amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be the same rate authorized for deductions from state tax under O.C.G.A. § 3-48-50. 
(Ord. No. 2007-3, § 4, 6-12-2007) 
Sec. 4-85. - Deficiency determinations. 
(a)  Recomputation of tax; authority to make; basis of recomputation. If the city clerk is not satisfied with the return of the tax or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the city by any person, he may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information within his possession or that may come into his possession. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one or more monthly periods. 
(b)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax. A specific penalty of 15 percent is imposed upon the amount of any determination. Additionally, the amount of any determination shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, from the due date of taxes until the date of payment. 
(c)  Notice of determination; service of. The city clerk shall give to the licensee written notice of his determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail, such service shall be addressed to the licensee at his address as it appears in the records of the city. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by the addressee. 
(d)  Time within which notice of deficiency determination to be mailed. Except in the case of failure to make a return, every notice of a deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the 20th day of the calendar month following the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined, or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period should last expire. 
(Ord. No. 2007-3, § 5, 6-12-2007) 
Sec. 4-86. - Determination if no return made. 
(a)  Estimate of gross receipts. If any person fails to make a return, the city clerk shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the licensee from the sale of liquor by the drink, or, as the case may be, of the amount of the total of such receipts in the city which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period in respect to which the person failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information which is or may come into the possession of the city clerk. Written notice shall be given in the manner prescribed in subsection (c) of this section. 
(b)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax. A specific penalty of 15 percent is imposed upon the amount of any determination. Additionally, the amount of any determination shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, from the due date of taxes until the date of payment. 
(Ord. No. 2007-3, § 6, 6-12-2007) 
Sec. 4-87. - Collection of tax by city. 
(a)  Action for delinquent tax; time for. At any time within three years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and payable and at any time within three years after the delinquency of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected, the city clerk may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction in the name of the city to collect the amount delinquent together with penalty, interest, court fees, filing fees, attorney's fees and other legal fees incident thereto. 
(b)  Duty of successors or assignees of licensee to withhold tax from purchase money. If any licensee liable for any amount under this article sells out his business or quits the business, his successors or assigns shall withhold sufficiently from the purchase price to cover such amount until the former owner produces from the city clerk either a receipt reflecting full payment or a certificate stating that no amount is due. 
(c)  Liability for failure to withhold. If the purchaser of a business fails to withhold purchase as required, he shall be personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld by him to the extent of the purchase price. 
(d)  Credit for tax, penalty or interest paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected. Whenever the amount of any tax, penalty or interest has been paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city, it may be offset by the city clerk. If the operator or person determines that he has overpaid or paid more than once, which fact has not been determined by the city clerk, such person shall have three years from the date of payment to file a claim in writing stating the specific ground upon which the claim is founded. The claim shall be audited. If the claim is approved by the city clerk, the excess amount paid the city may be credited on any amounts then due and payable from the person by whom it was paid. 
(Ord. No. 2007-3, § 7, 6-12-2007) 
Sec. 4-88. - Administration of article; recordkeeping. 
(a)  Authority of city clerk. The city clerk shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article for the collection of the tax. 
(b)  Records required from licensees, etc.; form. Every licensee shall preserve, for a minimum of three years, all records, receipts, invoices and such other documents as the city clerk may prescribe, and in such form as he may require. 
(c)  Examination of records; audits. The city clerk or any person authorized in writing by him may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, inventory, equipment and other facilities of any licensee liable for the tax, in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or, if no return is made, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. 
(d)  Authority to require reports; contents. In administration of the provisions of this article, the city clerk may require the filing of reports by any person or class of persons having in his or their possession or custody information relating to the sale of liquor by the drink. The reports shall be filed with the city clerk when required by said official, and shall set forth the gross sales from the sale of liquor by the drink, the amount of tax collected thereon, or such other information as the city clerk may prescribe. 
(Ord. No. 2007-3, § 8, 6-12-2007) 
Sec. 4-89. - Violations. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or imprisonment for a term not to exceed 60 days. Each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this article is committed, continued or permitted by such person, and shall be punished accordingly. Any licensee who fails to furnish any return required to be made, or who fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the city clerk, or who renders a false or fraudulent return, shall be deemed guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as aforesaid. 
(Ord. No. 2007-3, § 9, 6-12-2007) 
Chapter 6 - ANIMALS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Animals generally, O.C.G.A. title 4; Responsible Dog Ownership Law, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq. 

Sec. 6-1. - Ordinances saved from repeal. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code affects ordinance no. 91-5, as amended. 
Sec. 6-2. - Nuisance control. 
Without regard to other provisions of this Code, it shall be unlawful for owners of domestic animals (animals normally maintained as household pets including, but not limited to, dogs and cats) to allow, permit, or by negligence fail to prevent such animals from acting or performing in such a manner as to cause damage, unsanitary conditions to the property of another, public streets, public parks and recreation areas, or otherwise to cause a nuisance in Dahlonega, Georgia. Actions determined to be nuisances shall include, but not be limited to, the following activities of a domestic animal: 
(1)  To crawl upon, sleep on, scratch or otherwise soil furniture, porches, automobiles or other tangible property of a neighbor or person other than the owner. 
(2)  To feed from, turn over, or otherwise disturb garbage containers. 
(3)  To scratch or dig in lawns, yards or flower beds, or to soil or damage any property other than that of the owners. 
(4)  To cause dangerous conditions to exist. 
(5)  To soil, defile, or defecate on public or private property, other than the property of the owner/keeper, unless it is immediately removed and properly disposed of by the owner/keeper. 
( Ord. No. 2018-04, 6-12-2018 ) 
Chapter 8 - BUSINESSES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 8-1. - Nontraditional tobacco paraphernalia. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Nontraditional tobacco paraphernalia means nontraditional instruments (such as bongs and hookah pipes) designed so as to facilitate the smoking, consumption or ingestion of tobacco leaf in any form, provided that the term "nontraditional tobacco paraphernalia" shall exclude cigarette papers or wrappers, blunt wraps, traditional tobacco pipes (such as brand names Briar and Meerschaum), holders, cigarette rolling machines, or other products, devices, or substances used for the purpose of making cigarettes or tobacco in any form whatsoever. 
(b)  Any person or entity subject to the occupation tax imposed by the city who offers for sale any item of nontraditional tobacco paraphernalia shall be subject to the provisions of this section. 
(c)  Each person or entity subject to this section shall maintain all entire inventory of nontraditional tobacco paraphernalia in a location completely screened from view by the public. It shall be unlawful for a licensee to allow any item of nontraditional tobacco paraphernalia to be in view of the public, except during actual sales of such items of nontobacco paraphernalia to customers. 
(d)  Any person found to be in violation of this section shall be subject to the following penalties: 
(1)  For the first violation, a fine not less than $250.00; 
(2)  For a second violation within one year, a fine not less than $250.00 but not to exceed $500.00; and 
(3)  For each additional violation within one year, a fine not less than $500.00 but not to exceed $1,000.00. 
(Ord. No. 2014-1, 5-5-2014) 
Secs. 8-2—8-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS 

Sec. 8-21. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to regulate certain types of businesses, including, but not limited to, adult entertainment establishments, to the end that the many types of criminal activities frequently engendered by such businesses will be curtailed. However, it is recognized that such regulation cannot de facto approach prohibition. Otherwise, a protected form of expression would vanish. As to adult dance establishments, this article represents a balancing of competing interests: reduced criminal activity and protection of the neighborhoods through the regulation of adult entertainment establishments versus the protected rights of adult entertainment establishments and patrons. 
(Ord. No. 98-15, 12-7-1998) 
Sec. 8-22. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adult bookstore means an establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, magazines or other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section comprising 20 percent of its net sales consisting of printed materials which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult business. 
(1)  Any business other than those expressly specified in this article, where employees or patrons expose specified anatomical areas or engage in specified sexual activities; or 
(2)  Another business or establishment which offers its patrons services or entertainment characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, discussing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult dancing establishment means a business that features dancers displaying or exposing specified anatomical areas. 
Adult hotel or motel means a hotel or motel wherein material is presented which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult mini motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of less than 50 persons used for commercially presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult motion picture arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin- or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult video store means any establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, videotapes or movies or their reproductions. whether for sale or rent, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section comprising five percent of its total floor space devoted to the sale or display of such material or which derives more than five percent of its net sales from videos which are characterized or distinguished by their emphasis on matter depicting. describing or relating to specific sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Encounter center or rap establishment means any business, agency or person who, for any form of consideration or gratuity, provides a place where two or more persons may congregate, assemble or associate for the primary purpose of engaging in, describing or discussing specified sexual activities, or exposing specified anatomical areas. 
Erotic dance establishment means a nightclub, theater or other establishment which features live performances by topless and/or bottomless dancers, go-go dancers, strippers or similar entertainers, where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Escort bureau; introduction services means any business, agency, or person who, for a fee, commission, hire, reward or profit, furnishes or offers to furnish names of persons, or who introduces, furnishes or arranges for persons who may accompany other persons to or about social affairs, entertainments or places of amusement, or who may consort with others about any place of public resort or within any private quarters. 
Good moral character. A person is of good moral character, according to this article, if that person has not been convicted of a felony, or any crime not a felony if it involves moral turpitude, in the past five years. The city may also take into account such other factors as are necessary to determine the good moral character of the applicant or employee. Conviction shall include pleas of nolo contendere or bond forfeiture when charged with such crime. 
Minor means any person who has not attained the age of 18 years. 
Specified anatomical areas means any of the following: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region, buttock, or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
(2)  Human male genitalia in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Specified sexual activities means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral-anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory function in the context of a sexual relationship and any of the following sexually oriented acts or conduct: analingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sophism, zooerasty; 
(2)  Clearly depicts human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal, or tumescence; 
(3)  Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus or masturbation; 
(4)  Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast; 
(5)  Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the infliction of pain; 
(6)  Erotic or lewd touching, fondling, or other sexual contact with an animal by a human being; or 
(7)  Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation. 
(Ord. No. 98-15, 12-7-1998) 
Sec. 8-23. - Erotic dance establishment regulations. 
(a)  No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall advertise or cause to be advertised an erotic dance establishment without a valid adult entertainment establishment license issued pursuant to this article. 
(b)  No later than March 1 of each year, an erotic dance establishment licensee shall file a verified report with the city manager or his designee showing the licensee's gross receipts and amounts paid to dancers for the preceding calendar year. 
(c)  An erotic dance establishment licensee shall maintain and retain for a period of two years the names, addresses and ages of all persons employed as dancers. 
(d)  No adult entertainment establishment licensee shall employ or contract with as a dancer a person under the age of 18 years or a person not licensed pursuant to this article. 
(e)  No person under the age of 18 years shall be admitted to an adult entertainment establishment. 
(f)  An erotic establishment may be open only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight, Monday through Friday, and Saturday from 8:00 a.m. through 1:00 a.m. on Sunday. No licensee shall permit his place of business to open on Christmas Day or on Sundays. 
(g)  No erotic dance establishment licensee shall serve, sell, distribute or suffer the consumption or possession of any intoxicating liquor, malt beverage, wine, any other alcoholic beverage, or controlled substance upon the premises of the licensee. 
(h)  An adult entertainment establishment licensee shall conspicuously display all licenses required by this article. 
(i)  All dancing shall occur on a platform intended for that purpose which is raised at least 18 inches from the level of the floor. 
(j)  No dancing shall occur closer than four feet to any patron. 
(k)  No dancer shall fondle or caress any patron and no patron shall fondle or caress any dancer. 
(l)  No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any dancer. 
(m)  No dancer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron. 
(n)  All areas of an establishment licensed hereunder shall be fully lighted at all times patrons are present. The term "full lighting" means illumination equal to 3½ footcandles per square foot. 
(Ord. No. 98-15, 12-7-1998) 
Sec. 8-24. - Certain activities prohibited. 
No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall publicly display or expose or suffer the public display or exposure, with less than a full opaque covering, of any portion of a person's genitals, pubic area or buttocks in a lewd and obscene fashion. 
(Ord. No. 98-15, 12-7-1998) 
Sec. 8-25. - Permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, association, partnership or corporation to engage in, conduct or carry on, in or upon any premises within the city any of the adult entertainment establishments defined in this article without a permit so to do. No permit so issued shall condone or make legal any activity thereunder if the same is deemed illegal or unlawful under the laws of the state or the United States. 
(Ord. No. 98-15, 12-7-1998) 
Sec. 8-26. - Operation of unlicensed premises unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, adult mini motion picture theater, adult hotel or motel, adult motion picture arcade, cabaret, encounter center, escort bureau or adult business or adult dancing establishment unless such business shall have a currently valid license or shall have made proper application for renewal within the time required thereof under this article, which license shall not be under suspension or permanently or conditionally revoked. 
(Ord. No. 98-15, 12-7-1998) 
Sec. 8-27. - Admission of minors unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for a licensee to admit or permit the admission of minors within a licensed premises. 
(Ord. No. 98-15, 12-7-1998) 
Sec. 8-28. - Sales to minors unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, barter or give or to offer to sell, barter or give to any minor any service, material, device or thing sold or offered for sell by an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, adult business or adult dancing establishment or other adult entertainment establishment. 
(Ord. No. 98-15, 12-7-1998) 
Sec. 8-29. - Location. 
No adult entertainment establishment, business, or use shall be located within 1,000 feet, measured from the closest point of the real property on which the adult entertainment establishment is sought to be erected and operated in a straight line to the closest point of the real property of the following: 
(1)  Any parcel of land which is either zoned or used for residential uses or purposes; 
(2)  A church, school, government-owned-or-operated public facility, library, public park, or hospital; 
(3)  Any other adult entertainment establishment; 
(4)  An establishment licensed to sell alcoholic beverages. 
If the adult entertainment establishment or the activity to which a measurement is required is a part of a tract of land occupied by other uses, the measurements shall be from the closest point of the total tract of land and not the building in which the activities are located. 
(Ord. No. 98-15, 12-7-1998) 
Sec. 8-30. - Adult entertainment establishment employees. 
(a)  Qualifications. Employees of an adult entertainment establishment shall be not less than 18 years of age. Every employee must be of good moral character as defined in this article. Any employee who is convicted of a crime that is a felony, or any crime not a felony if it involves moral turpitude, while employed as an adult entertainment establishment employee, shall not thereafter work on any licensed premises for a period of five years from the date of such conviction unless a longer time is ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction. The term "convicted" shall include an adjudication of guilt on a plea of guilty or nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond when charged with a crime, and the terms "employed on the premises" and "work on any licensed premises" shall include as well work done, or services performed, while in the scope of employment elsewhere than the licensed premises. 
(b)  Approval for employment. Before any person may work on a licensed premises, he shall file a notice with the city manager or his designee of his intended employment on forms supplied by the city manager or his designee and shall receive approval of such employment from the city manager or his designee. The prospective employee shall supply such information as the city manager or his designee requires, including a set of fingerprints, on regular city or United States Department of Justice forms. Upon approval, the employee may begin working on the licensed premises. If approval is denied, the prospective employee may, within ten days of said denial, apply to the city manager or his designee in writing for a hearing. The decision of the city manager or his designee after hearing may be appealed to the mayor and city council which may issue such order as is proper in the premises. An investigation fee ,as established by the city, shall accompany the notice of intended employment or a receipt of the city manager or his designee evidencing the payment of such fee at the time the notice is filed. 
(c)  Suspension, revocation of license. Violation of the provisions of this article, the ordinances of the city, laws and regulations of the state, or the rules and regulations of the city shall subject an employee to suspension or revocation of his license. 
(d)  Independent contractors. For the purpose of this article, independent contractors shall be considered as employees and shall be licensed as employees, regardless of the business relationship with the owner or licensee of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(Ord. No. 98-15, 12-7-1998) 
Sec. 8-31. - Application for permit. 
(a)  Any person, association, partnership or corporation desiring to obtain a permit to operate, engage in, conduct or carry on any adult entertainment establishment shall make application to the city manager or his designated representative. Prior to submitting such application, a nonrefundable fee, established by resolution of the mayor and city council, shall be paid to the city manager or his designee to defray, in part, the cost of investigation and report required by this article. The city manager or his designee shall issue a receipt showing that such application fee has been paid. The receipt or a copy thereof shall be supplied to the city manager or his designee at the time such application is submitted. 
(b)  The application for permit does not authorize the engaging in, operation of, conduct of or carrying on of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(Ord. No. 98-15, 12-7-1998) 
Sec. 8-32. - Application contents. 
Each application for an adult entertainment establishment permit shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The full true name and any other names used by the applicant; 
(2)  The present address and telephone number of the applicant; 
(3)  The previous addresses of the applicant, if any, for a period of five years immediately prior to the date of the application and the dates of residence at each; 
(4)  Acceptable written proof that the applicant is at least 18 years of age; 
(5)  The applicant's height, weight, color of eyes and hair and date and place of birth; 
(6)  Two photographs of the applicant at least two inches by two inches taken within the last six months; 
(7)  Business, occupation or employment history of the applicant for the five years immediately preceding the date of application. Business or employment records of the applicant, partners in a partnership, directors and officers of a corporation and, if a corporation, all shareholders holding more than five percent of the shares of corporate stock outstanding; 
(8)  The business license history of the applicant and whether such applicant, in previous operations in this or any other city, state or territory under license, has such license or permit for an adult entertainment business or similar type of business revoked or suspended, the reason therefor and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation; 
(9)  All convictions, including ordinance violations, exclusive of traffic violations, stating the dates and places of any such convictions; 
(10)  If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation or charter, together with the place and date of incorporation, and the names and addresses of each of its current officers and directors, and each stockholder holding more than five percent of the stock in the corporation. If the applicant is a partnership, the applicant shall set forth the name, residence address and dates of birth of the partners, including limited partners. If the applicant is a limited partnership, it shall furnish a copy of its certificate of limited partnership filed with the county clerk. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this subsection pertaining to corporations shall apply; 
(11)  The names and addresses of the owner and lessor of the real property upon which the business is to be conducted and a copy of the lease or rental agreement; 
(12)  Such other identification and information as the police department may require in order to discover the truth of the matters specified in this section as required to be set forth in the application; 
(13)  The age and date of birth of the applicant, of any partners, or of any and all officers, of any stockholders of more than five percent of the shares of the corporation stock outstanding, directors of the applicant if the applicant is a corporation; 
(14)  If the applicant, any partners or any of the officers or stockholders holding more than five percent of the outstanding shares of the corporation, or the directors of the applicant if the applicant is a corporation, have ever been convicted of any crime constituting a felony, or any crime not a felony involving moral turpitude, in the past five years and, if so, a complete description of any such crime including date of violation, date of conviction, jurisdiction and any disposition, including any fine or sentence imposed and whether terms or disposition have been fully completed; 
(15)  The city shall require the individual applicant to furnish nine fingerprints of the applicant; 
(16)  If the applicant is a person doing business under a trade name, a copy of the trade name properly recorded. If the applicant is a corporation, a copy of authority to do business in the state, including articles of incorporation, trade name affidavit, if any, and last annual report, if any; 
(17)  At least three character references from individuals who are in no way related to the applicant or shareholders, officers or directors of a corporation and who are not or will not benefit financially in any way from the applicant if the license is granted and who have not been convicted of any felony or a crime not a felony involving moral turpitude in the past five years. The city manager or his designee shall prepare forms consistent with the provisions of this subsection for the applicant, who shall submit all character references on such forms; 
(18)  Address of the premises to be licensed; 
(19)  Whether the premises are owned or rented and, if the applicant has a right to legal possession of the premises, copies of those documents giving such legal right; 
(20)  A plat by a registered engineer, licensed by the state, showing the location of the proposed premises in relation to the neighborhood, the surrounding zoning, its proximity to any church, school, public park, governmental building or site or other business hereunder regulated; 
(21)  Each application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall be verified and acknowledged under oath to be true and correct by: 
a.  If the applicant is an individual, the individual; 
b.  If by a partnership, by the manager or general partner; 
c.  If a corporation, by the president of the corporation; 
d.  If any other organization or association, by the chief administrative official. 
(Ord. No. 98-15, 12-7-1998) 
Sec. 8-33. - Applicant to appear. 
The applicant, if an individual, or designated responsible managing officer, if a partnership or corporation, shall personally appear at the city and produce proof that a nonrefundable application fee, established by resolution of the mayor and city council, has been paid and shall present the application containing the aforementioned and described information. 
(Ord. No. 98-15, 12-7-1998) 
Sec. 8-34. - Application; investigation. 
The city shall have 30 days to investigate the application and the background of the applicant. Upon completion of the investigation, the city manager or his designee may grant the permit if he finds: 
(1)  The required fee has been paid; 
(2)  The application conforms in all respects to the provisions of this article; 
(3)  The applicant has not knowingly made a material misrepresentation in the application; 
(4)  The applicant has fully cooperated in the investigation of his application; 
(5)  The applicant, if an individual, or any of the stockholders of the corporation, any officers or directors, if the applicant is a corporation, or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership, has not been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of an offense involving conduct or convicted of an attempt to commit any of the abovementioned offenses, or convicted in any state of any offense which, it committed or attempted in this state, would have been punishable as one or more of the abovementioned offenses, or any crime involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit or moral turpitude; 
(6)  The applicant has not had an adult entertainment establishment permit or other similar license or permit denied or revoked for cause by this city or any other city located in or out of this state prior to the date of application; 
(7)  The building, structure, equipment or location of such business, as proposed by the applicant, would comply with all applicable laws, including, but not limited to, health, zoning, distance, fire and safety requirements and standards; 
(8)  The applicant is at least 21 years of age; 
(9)  That the applicant, his employee, agent, partner, director, officer, stockholder or manager has not, within five years of the date of the application, knowingly allowed or permitted any of the specified sexual activities as defined in this article to be committed or allowed in or upon the premises where such adult entertainment establishment is to be located or to be used as a place in which solicitations for the specified sexual activities as defined in this article openly occur; 
(10)  That on the date the business for which a permit is required herein commences, and thereafter, there will be a responsible person on the premises to act as manager at all times during which the business is open; 
(11)  That the proposed premises is not to be located too close to any church, school, library, governmental building or site or any other business restricted hereunder; 
(12)  That the grant of such license will not cause a violation of this article or any other ordinance or regulation of the city, state or the United States; 
(13)  Any other inquiry deemed necessary or desirable by the city to ensure the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city or the preservation of its neighborhoods. 
(Ord. No. 98-15, 12-7-1998) 
Sec. 8-35. - Persons prohibited as licensees. 
(a)  No license provided by this article shall be issued to or held by: 
(1)  An applicant who has not paid all required fees and taxes for a business at that location or property taxes; 
(2)  Any person who is not of good moral character; 
(3)  Any corporation, any of whose officers, directors or stockholders holding over five percent of the outstanding issues shares of capital stock are not of good moral character; 
(4)  Any partnership or association, any of whose officers or members holding more than five percent interest therein are not of good moral character; 
(5)  Any person employing, assisted by or financed in whole or in part by any person who is not of good moral character; 
(6)  Any applicant who is not qualified to hold and conduct a business according to the laws of the United States, the state or the city. 
(b)  Should there be a sufficient number of current licenses to meet the needs and desires of the inhabitants of the city, no new licenses shall issue. In determining the needs and desires of the inhabitants, the standard of review shall be that the market is virtually unrestrained as defined in Young v. American Mini Theaters, Inc. 
(Ord. No. 98-15, 12-7-1998) 
Sec. 8-36. - Permit Refusal; appeal. 
If the city, following investigation of the applicant, deems that the applicant does not fulfill the requirements as set forth in this article, it shall notify the city manager or his designee of such opinion and, within 30 days of the date of application, provide copies of the investigation report to the city manager or his designee. The city manager or his designee shall, within ten days, notify the applicant by certified mail of such denial. Any applicant who is denied a permit may appeal such denial to the mayor and city council. 
(Ord. No. 98-15, 12-7-1998) 
Sec. 8-37. - Permit renewal. 
Permits for adult entertainment establishments may be renewed on a year-to-year basis, provided that the permittees continue to meet the requirements set out in this article. The renewal fees for the adult entertainment establishment permits shall be established by resolution of the mayor and city council. 
(Ord. No. 98-15, 12-7-1998) 
Sec. 8-38. - Permit nontransferable. 
No adult entertainment establishment permit may be sold, transferred or assigned by a permittee, or by operation of law, to any other person. Any such sale, transfer or assignment or attempted sale, transfer or assignment shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of such permit, and such permit shall thereafter be null and void; provided and excepting, however, that if the permittee is a partnership and one or more of the partners should die, one or more of the surviving partners may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, the interest of the deceased partner without effecting a surrender or termination of such permit, and in such case the permit, upon notification to the city, shall be placed in the name of the surviving partner. An adult entertainment establishment permit issued to a corporation shall be deemed terminated and void when either any outstanding stock of the corporation is sold, transferred or assigned after the issuance of a permit or any stock authorized but not issued at the time of the granting of a permit is thereafter issued and sold, transferred or assigned. 
(Ord. No. 98-15, 12-7-1998) 
Sec. 8-39. - Change of location or name. 
(a)  No adult entertainment establishment shall move from the location specified on its permit until a change of location fee, established by resolution of the mayor and city council, has been deposited with the city and approval has been obtained from the city manager or his designee and the zoning department. Such approval shall not be given unless all requirements and regulations as contained in this Code have been met. 
(b)  No permittee shall operate, conduct, manage, engage in or carry on an adult entertainment establishment under any name other than his name and the name of the business as specified on his permit. 
(c)  Any application for an extension or expansion of a building or other place of business where an adult entertainment establishment is located shall require inspection and shall comply with the provisions and regulations of this article. 
(Ord. No. 98-15, 12-7-1998) 
Sec. 8-40. - Appeal—Procedure. 
(a)  The permittee shall, within ten days after he has been notified of an adverse determination, submit in writing a notice of appeal to the city manager or his designee. 
(b)  The notice of appeal shall be addressed to the mayor and city council and shall specify the subject matter of the appeal, the date of any original and amended application or requests, the date of the adverse decision (or receipt of notice thereof), the basis of the appeal, the action requested of the mayor and city council and the name and address of the applicant. 
(c)  The city manager or his designee shall place the appeal on the agenda of the next regular mayor and city council meeting occurring not less than five nor more than 30 days after receipt of the application for mayor and city council action. 
(Ord. No. 98-15, 12-7-1998) 
Sec. 8-41. - Same—Mayor and city council determines procedure. 
When an appeal is placed on the mayor and city council agenda, the mayor and city council may take either of the following actions: 
(1)  Set a hearing date and instruct the city manager or his designee to give such notice of hearing as may be required by law; 
(2)  Appoint a hearing officer and fix the time and place for hearing. The hearing officer may or may not be a city employee and may be appointed for an extended period of time. The city manager or his designee shall assume responsibility for such publication of notice of the hearing as may be required by law. If a hearing officer is appointed, the hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures set out in this article. 
(Ord. No. 98-15, 12-7-1998) 
Sec. 8-42. - Mayor and city council hearing. 
Whenever the city manager or his designee has scheduled an appeal before the mayor and city council, at the time and date set therefor, the mayor and city council shall receive all relevant testimony and evidence from the permittee, from interested parties and from city staff. The mayor and city council may sustain, overrule or modify the action complained of. The action of the mayor and city council shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 98-15, 12-7-1998) 
Sec. 8-43. - Powers of hearing officer. 
The hearing officer appointed pursuant to the procedure set out in this article may receive and rule on admissibility of evidence, hear testimony under oath and call witnesses as he may deem advisable with respect to the conduct of the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 98-15, 12-7-1998) 
Sec. 8-44. - Rules of evidence inapplicable. 
The mayor, city council and the hearing officer shall not be bound by the traditional rules of evidence in hearings conducted under this article. Rules of evidence as applied in an administrative hearing shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 98-15, 12-7-1998) 
Sec. 8-45. - Hearing officer—Report. 
(a)  The hearing officer shall, within a reasonable time not to exceed 30 days from the date such hearing is terminated, submit a written report to the mayor and city council. Such report shall contain a brief summary of the evidence considered and state findings, conclusions and recommendations. All such reports shall be filed with the city manager or his designee and shall be considered public records. A copy of such report shall be forwarded by certified mail to the permittee/appellant the same day it is filed with the city manager or his designee, with additional copies furnished to the chief of police. 
(b)  The city manager or his designee shall place the hearing officer's report on the agenda of the next regular mayor and city council meeting occurring not less than ten days after the report is filed and shall notify the permittee/appellant of the date of such meeting at least ten days prior to the meeting unless the permittee/appellant stipulates to a shorter notice period. 
(Ord. No. 98-15, 12-7-1998) 
Sec. 8-46. - Same—Action by mayor and city council. 
The mayor and city council may adopt or reject the hearing officer's decision in its entirety or may modify the proposed recommendation. If the mayor and city council does not adopt the hearing officer's recommendation, it may: 
(1)  Refer the matter to the same or another hearing officer for a completely new hearing or for the taking of additional evidence on specific points; in either of such cases, the hearing officer shall proceed as provided in this article; 
(2)  Decide the case upon a review of the entire record before the hearing officer with or without taking additional evidence. 
(Ord. No. 98-15, 12-7-1998) 
Sec. 8-47. - Unlawful operation declared nuisance. 
Any adult entertainment establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this article shall be and the same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The city may, in addition to, or in lieu of, prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action, proceeding for abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof in the manner provided by law. It shall take such other steps and shall apply to such court as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such adult entertainment establishment and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining an adult entertainment establishment contrary to the provisions of this article. In addition, violation of the provisions of this article shall be per se grounds for suspension or revocation of a license granted hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 98-15, 12-7-1998) 
Sec. 8-48. - Cleaning of licensed premises. 
Each licensed premises shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be cleaned at least once daily and more frequently when necessary. This activity shall be supervised by the person in charge of the licensed premises. There shall be provided adequate facilities, equipment and supplies on the licensed premises to meet this requirement, and adequate ventilation and illumination shall be provided to permit thorough, complete cleaning of the entire licensed premises. Trash and garbage shall not be permitted to accumulate or to become a nuisance on or in the immediate vicinity of the licensed premises but shall be disposed of daily or as often as collections permit. 
(Ord. No. 98-15, 12-7-1998) 
Sec. 8-49. - Self-inspection of licensed premises. 
The licensee of a licensed premises or his designated representative shall make sanitary inspections of the licensed premises at least once a month and shall record his findings on a form supplied by the city manager or his designee. Each licensed premises shall post and maintain in a readily accessible place a schedule for maintaining the sanitation of the premises. 
(Ord. No. 98-15, 12-7-1998) 
Sec. 8-50. - Sealing for unsanitary or unsafe conditions. 
A licensed premises, or any part thereof, may be sealed by order of the city manager or his designee on his finding of a violation of this article resulting in an unsanitary or unsafe condition. Prior to sealing. the city manager or his designee shall serve on the licensee, by personal service on him or by posting in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises, a notice of the violations and order to correct it within 24 hours after service. If the violation is not so corrected, the city manager or his designee may physically seal that portion of the licensed premises causing the violation and order the discontinuance of use thereof until the violation has been corrected and the seal removed by the city manager or his designee. The city manager or his designee shall affix to the sealed premises a conspicuous sign labeled "Unclean" or "Unsafe," as the case may be. 
(Ord. No. 98-15, 12-7-1998) 
Sec. 8-51. - Abatement as sanitary nuisance. 
A licensed premises, or any part thereof, may be abated as a sanitary nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 98-15, 12-7-1998) 
Sec. 8-52. - Violations; penalty. 
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00 per violation or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. In addition to such fine or imprisonment violation of this article shall also be grounds for immediate suspension or revocation of the license issued hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 98-15, 12-7-1998) 
Secs. 8-53—8-74. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SIDEWALK FOOD SALES 

Sec. 8-75. - Intent and purpose. 
The city council finds and declares that: 
(1)  The uncontrolled placement and maintenance of restaurant tables and chairs in public rights-of-way and in access ways to buildings presents an inconvenience and danger to the safety and welfare of persons using such rights-of-way; including pedestrians, persons entering and leaving vehicles and buildings, and persons performing essential utility, traffic control and emergency services. 
(2)  Restaurant tables and chairs so located as to cause an inconvenience or danger to persons using public rights-of-way constitutes public nuisances. 
(3)  It is a matter of public necessity that the city protect persons on its public streets, sidewalks, transportation facilities and other public rights-of-way from any dangerous condition created by sidewalk dining facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2004-4, 9-16-2004) 
Sec. 8-76. - Permit. 
An application generated by the office of the planning director shall be provided to any owner of a licensed restaurant within the highway business district (B2), the historic business district (B3) and the central business district (CBD) who desires to implement outdoor dining and seeks to utilize public sidewalk rights-of-way for restaurant sales. Outdoor dining on private property within these districts is also allowed subject to compliance with these regulations except as noted herein. 
(Ord. No. 2004-4, § 1, 9-16-2004; Ord. No. 2004-4, Amend. 1, 4-3-2017) 
Sec. 8-77. - Fee. 
There shall be an annual permit fee in the amount established by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2004-4, § 2, 9-16-2004) 
Sec. 8-78. - Criteria for granting of the permit. 
In reviewing the application, the city manager or his designee must ascertain that the following criteria are satisfied prior to granting of the permit: 
(1)  Arrangement. A drawing of the proposed sidewalk utilization identifying placement of all tables, chairs and any other item to be placed on the sidewalk must accompany the application if the permit application is to be reviewed for compliance. Said drawing shall be identified as the arrangement (hereinafter "arrangement") of tables and chairs. 
(2)  The city manager or his designee shall review the proposed arrangement of tables and chairs within the area to determine whether the arrangement allows for pedestrian, vendor and handicapped access consistent with the width of the sidewalk and the relationship of the sidewalk to streets, crosswalks, parking and access to adjacent businesses. However, at a minimum, the arrangement shall demonstrate that at least five feet of unobstructed space is set aside on the sidewalk between the arrangement and the curb or nearest obstacle. Signs are not allowed in the outside table service area, except as necessary to satisfy the alcohol restrictions set forth elsewhere herein. Further, a divider shall be required which shall separate the sidewalk cafe from the remaining sidewalk area by a removable divider constructed of a sturdy material such as wrought iron, metal or wood posts and chain, or other such materials deemed safe to the appropriate location. The divider shall be not less than three feet nor more than four feet in height. The entirety of the arrangement shall be enclosed within this divider. On private property, these regulations shall be applicable as to the divider requirement only. 
(3)  The applicant must acknowledge by signature his awareness that food and alcoholic beverages may be sold outdoors only under the provisions of the permit granted under this article, and only within the arrangement as defined and under the following conditions: 
a.  Sales shall occur only within an area of the zoned premises approved by the city manager or his designee and that limits access to the outdoor dining area. 
b.  Approved signage must be displayed within said area to advise patrons that alcoholic beverages cannot be removed from the outdoor dining area under any circumstances. 
c.  Any alcohol sold by the permittee cannot be served in bottles, cans, plastic cups, or any other disposable containers, but only in approved glass containers. 
(4)  Area. The area in which sidewalk dining is authorized shall abut the outside front wall of the restaurant to which it is an extension and shall not extend parallel in either direction beyond the outside front wall of the restaurant. This regulation is not applicable as to private property. 
(Ord. No. 2004-4, § 3, 9-16-2004) 
Sec. 8-79. - Regulations. 
The use of the space by the permittee must conform to the arrangement which was approved as part of the application process. 
(1)  All tables and furniture shall be kept in a good state of repair and maintained in a clean, safe, and sanitary condition and in accordance with county health department regulations. 
(2)  A covered trash container of at least 32-gallon capacity, containing a disposable plastic liner or bag, shall be provided within each sidewalk cafe area and shall be emptied and washed as often as necessary to prevent overflow or other unsanitary conditions. It shall be the responsibility of the permittee to maintain such area, including sidewalks, and all equipment and furnishings in such conditions so as to be clean, sanitary and safe at all times. 
(3)  All components of the arrangement shall be placed indoors at the close of the business day or 10:00 p.m., whichever is earlier every day (i.e. leaving the outside space free of any furnishings whatsoever). 
(4)  No music, recorded or live, or other amplified sound shall be allowed within the area of the arrangement, and umbrellas, when used, shall have canopies which extend to at least the same diameter as the tables served by the umbrellas, and shall be anchored with a weighted base. No text, graphics, or logos shall be allowed on the umbrellas or tables, and all umbrellas must be matching in color and size. The umbrella can be of any one of the following colors: black, white, dark green, dark blue, beige, dark red, or maroon and must be approved by the city manager or his designee. The umbrella panels may alternate colors so long as no more than two colors are used alternating on the umbrella panels; however, the umbrellas used throughout the arrangement must be identical in size and colors chosen. 
(5)  The city may suspend or modify the permits granted under this article at any time, including, but not limited to, the time in which the city may grant permits to special events. The city manager, upon petition of the planning director, shall have the authority to require any sidewalk cafe operating under permit issued pursuant to this article to suspend operation and clear such area, or to move or modify the location or operation of the sidewalk cafe and to set the required time period for compliance with the order of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 2004-4, § 4, 9-16-2004) 
Sec. 8-80. - Indemnification of the city. 
(a)  As a condition of issuance, the approved applicant and any person acting under or pursuant to said approval, agrees to indemnify, hold harmless, release and defend (even if the allegations are false, fraudulent, or groundless) to the maximum extent allowed by law, the city manager, planning director, the city, the city council, and each member thereof, and its officers, employees, advisory board members and representatives, from and against any and all liability, loss, suits, claims, damages, costs, judgments and expenses (including attorney's fees and costs of litigation) which in whole or in part result from, arise out of, or are claimed to result from or to arise out of any acts, negligence, errors, or omissions of an approved applicant, its employees, representatives, contractors, subcontractors, or agents by reason of or arising out of, or in any manner connected with, any and all acts, operations, privileges authorized, allowed or undertaken pursuant to the use approval under this article, including, without limitation, any condition or property used in operations. 
(b)  This agreement of indemnity includes, but is not limited to, personal injury (including death at any time) and property or other damage sustained by any person (including, but not limited to, companies, corporations, the approved applicant and its employees or agents, and members of the general public). 
(c)  As a further condition of issuance of the approval, the approved applicant covenants not to sue the city manager or his designee, the city, the city council and each member thereof, and its employees, agents and representatives and shall cause its insurers to waive subrogation against the same with respect to any action, claim or demand in any way resulting from or connected with any or all undertakings and operations conducted pursuant to the use approval. 
(Ord. No. 2004-4, § 5, 9-16-2004) 
Sec. 8-81. - Liability insurance. 
The approved applicant shall be required to have general liability insurance providing for the following limits naming the city as an additional insured in the following minimum amounts: $500,000 per person; and $1,000,000 per occurrence, with an additional $1,000,000 umbrella coverage. This regulation is not applicable as to private property. 
(Ord. No. 2004-4, § 6, 9-16-2004) 
Sec. 8-82. - Penalties for violation. 
Any violation of this article shall be punished by a fine up to $500.00 for each offense via citation to municipal court. Each day in which a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2004-4, § 7, 9-16-2004) 
Secs. 8-83—8-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - HORSE-DRAWN VEHICLES 

Sec. 8-100. - Short title and definitions. 
(a)  Short title. This article shall be known and recited as "The Horse-Drawn Vehicle Ordinance of the City of Dahlonega." 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
City marshal means the individual employee or organizational unit of the city charged with the responsibility for administering and enforcing this article, except for specific responsibilities otherwise provided herein. 
Company means the holder of a permit ("company permittee") to operate a horse-drawn vehicle business under the provisions of this article whether a person, firm, partnership or corporation. There shall be only two holders of such a permit within the city per stand approved and so designated by the city. 
Driver means any person who drives or operates a horse-drawn vehicle on the city streets for an authorized horse-drawn vehicle company. 
Driver's permit means the written authority granted by the city for an individual to drive or operate a horse-drawn vehicle within the city. 
Horse-drawn vehicle means any vehicle, cart, hack or other device which is operated by being drawn by a horse, mule or other beast of burden, for the transportation for hire of passengers. 
Occupation tax certificate means the right and privilege granted by the city for the operation of any business. In some instances that means merely a regulatory permit if the company permittee does not require an occupation tax certificate. 
Stand means a public place alongside the curb of a street or elsewhere that has been designated by the city as available for the use of horse-drawn vehicles. No more than two company permittees shall be permitted per stand made available by the city. 
Street means any street, alley, lane, avenue, court, or public place in the city. 
(Ord. No. 2005-3, § 1, 6-6-2005) 
Sec. 8-101. - Licensing of horse-drawn vehicle companies; headquarters. 
(a)  Occupation tax certificate and company permit required. No person, firm, or corporation shall operate a business involving the use of one or more horse-drawn vehicles on the streets of the city unless an occupation tax certificate for such business has first been granted by the city and the permittee has been granted a company permit on forms provided by the city marshal and shall provide such information as is required herein, and such additional information as may be necessary to allow review of the permit application. 
(b)  Location of operation governed by city. Each horse-drawn vehicle company, as a condition for holding a license under the provisions of this article, shall conform to the ordinances of the city and shall operate within the regulations established for all horse-drawn vehicles. Only two horse-drawn vehicle company permits shall be issued for each stand created by the city. Should the number of applicants exceed the number of stands available, the permits for each stand shall be awarded first to applicants meeting the qualifications of this article with the longest time period as the holder of a horse-drawn vehicle occupation tax certificate within the city, and then on the basis of a waiting list maintained by the city marshal. 
(c)  Operating regulations. Any company permittee must comply with the following regulations: 
(1)  A licensed veterinarian shall certify in writing, after due and proper inspection, the good health of each draft animal before it is placed into service. A minimum of two such health inspections shall be required for each animal each calendar year, to be performed during the months of January and July, with copies submitted to the city marshal within ten days of said inspection. 
(2)  No single animal shall pull a vehicle holding more than ten people, including the driver. Two horses shall not pull more than the seating capacity of the vehicle. 
(3)  Unless a licensed veterinarian gives written approval, no animal having open sores or wounds or any disease or ailment shall be permitted to be in service on the streets of the city. 
(4)  Each draft animal shall have its hooves properly trimmed and shod for street surfaces. Temporary shoes may only be used if the horse has thrown a shoe during a tour and then only to get the horse back to the barn to be shoed. 
(5)  Each animal shall be groomed daily and not have fungus, dandruff, or a dirty coat. 
(6)  Harnesses shall be properly fitted, maintained, and oiled so that no irritating material will come in direct contact with the animal. 
(7)  No animal shall be subject to any condition or treatment, whether in service or out of service, which will impair the good health and physical condition of that animal. 
(8)  Food shall be kept free of all contamination. 
(9)  All stables in which the company permittee houses animals used within the city shall meet all state regulations. 
(d)  The city, through its city marshal, shall be empowered to inspect all operating equipment, and to examine operating practices of any vehicle company to ensure continuous compliance with this article. 
(e)  Any company or driver permittee who refuses or fails to ensure compliance with and to comply with the requirements of this article shall not be issued a permit or renewal until proof of compliance is presented by the applicant and certified by the city marshal. The foregoing licensing requirements shall be ongoing as requirements for continuous operation. 
(f)  The city manager may, upon recommendation of the city marshal, immediately suspend any vehicle company operation for violation of the provisions of this article, subject to revocation action as provided elsewhere herein. 
(Ord. No. 2005-3, § 2, 6-6-2005) 
Sec. 8-102. - Insurance. 
(a)  Indemnity for benefit of city. Any horse-drawn vehicle company operating under this article shall hold the city and its officers, agents, servants, and employees harmless against any and all liability, loss, damages or expense which may accrue to the city by reason of negligence, default, or misconduct of the company in connection with the rights granted to such company hereunder. Nothing in this article shall be considered to make the city or its officers, agents, servants, or employees liable for damages because of any negligent act or omission or commission by any horse-drawn vehicle business or operation by the company of a horse-drawn vehicle business or service, either in respect to injury to persons or with respect to damage to property which may be sustained. 
(b)  Insurance for benefit of passengers. Any horse-drawn vehicle company desiring a business tax certificate to do business shall give and maintain a policy of indemnity from an insurance company authorized to do business in the state for each vehicle in use as a horse-drawn vehicle. The minimum coverage shall be $100,000.00 for bodily injury to any one person, $300,000.00 for injury to more than one person which are sustained in the same accident, and $25,000.00 for property damage resulting from one accident. The indemnity insurance shall inure to the benefit of any person who shall be injured or who shall sustain damage to property. 
(c)  Blanket policy. Any company or person operating a horse-drawn carriage in the city shall provide a policy of indemnity insurance covering all the horse-drawn vehicles who may be jointly operating or doing business under a licensed horse-drawn vehicle name (i.e., the company permittee). 
(d)  Comprehensive general liability insurance. Any horse-drawn vehicle shall maintain, from a licensed insurance company, comprehensive general liability insurance in the amount of $1,000,000.00 for its undertakings associated with designated horse-drawn vehicles within the city. 
(e)  Notice when voided. Before any policy of insurance required by this article is voided for any cause, nonpayment of premium or otherwise, notice thereof shall be given, in writing, to the city at least five days before the same shall take effect. 
(Ord. No. 2005-3, § 3, 6-6-2005) 
Sec. 8-103. - Horse-drawn vehicle driver's permit ("driver's permit"). 
(a)  Permit required. No person shall operate a horse-drawn vehicle for hire upon the streets of the city, and no person who owns or operates a horse-drawn vehicle company shall permit a horse-drawn vehicle to be driven, and no horse-drawn vehicle operating under a horse-drawn vehicle company approved by the city shall be driven at any time for hire, unless the driver of the horse-drawn vehicle shall first have obtained and shall have then in force a horse-drawn vehicle driver's permit issued under the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Application. Any person desiring a permit required by this article shall submit an application in writing to the city marshal on a form to be furnished by the city. The application shall be made under oath. The application shall include a disclosure as to whether the applicant has been convicted of a violation of any of the laws of the state, of this article, or any other ordinances of the city, and if so, when and of what offense, and the sentence of the court. Any false statements made on the application may result in suspension or revocation. 
(c)  Physician's certificate required. Each application for a driver's permit shall be accompanied by a certificate from a physician licensed by the state certifying that, in his opinion, the applicant is not afflicted with any disease or infirmity which might make him an unsafe or unsatisfactory driver. In the case of renewal of a driver's permit, the certificate shall be updated every two years. 
(d)  Qualifications of applicant. An applicant for a driver's permit under this article must: 
(1)  Be at least 18 years of age; 
(2)  Have no physical infirmities which might make the applicant an unsafe or unsatisfactory horse-drawn vehicle driver; 
(3)  Not have been convicted of operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of intoxicating beverages or drugs within two years prior to the date of the application for such permit; 
(4)  Not have been convicted of reckless driving within one year prior to the date of the application for such permit, or been convicted of any of these offenses three or more times within five years prior to the date of the application for such permit. Nor shall a permit be issued to any person who has within three years prior to the date of the application for such permit been convicted of any crime relating to transporting persons for immoral purposes (prostitution, solicitation for prostitution, or any sex-related offense), or who has, within three years prior to the date of the application for such permit, been convicted of, been on probation, parole, or served time, on a sentence for a felony. A plea of nolo contendere to any of the offenses set out in this section shall be deemed a conviction; and 
(5)  Be a citizen of the United States or an alien admitted for permanent residence or who has otherwise been granted employment authorization by the United States Immigration and Naturalization Services. 
(e)  Driver's permit fee. Before any permit is granted under this article, a driver's permit fee as established by the city and a background fee as established by the city shall be paid by the applicant. 
(f)  Current state driver's license required. Any person applying for a horse-drawn vehicle driver's permit under this article must possess and maintain a current valid motor vehicle operator's license issued or approved by the state. A seven-year M.V.R. is required for all new applicants and a three-year M.V.R. at each renewal. 
(g)  Examination of applicant; issuance or denial of permit. It shall be the duty of the city marshal to examine the applicant, his references, police and traffic record, and the other vouchers, and thereafter to either grant or refuse the permit. In the event of a refusal to grant a permit, the applicant shall have the right to enter an appeal as provided in subsection (o) of this section. 
(h)  Permit to be displayed in horse-drawn carriage. The permit issued under the provisions of this article shall be placed on display in the horse-drawn vehicle to be operated by the holder of the permit, where the permit will be in clear view of the passengers at all times when the horse-drawn vehicle is for hire. 
(i)  Alteration of permits prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to alter, deface, obliterate, or destroy a horse-drawn vehicle driver's permit, or cause or allow the same. 
(j)  Permit not transferable. Any horse-drawn vehicle driver's permit issued under this article is not transferable, and is to be used solely by the person to whom it is issued and the company for which it is issued. 
(k)  Duration of permit; renewals. Any horse-drawn vehicle driver's permit shall be in effect for up to a 12-month period expiring at the end of each calendar year. Permits may be renewed, upon application and payment of the required fee, for each 12-month period thereafter, unless the permit for the preceding period has been revoked or is under suspension. 
(l)  Suspension of the driver's permit. The city marshal shall have the authority to suspend a driver's permit for the following reasons: 
(1)  Making false statement in the application for the permit; 
(2)  Operating a horse-drawn vehicle in violation of any provision of this article or state law. 
The suspension shall be lifted at the expiration of 60 days from the date of suspension. From the decision of the city marshal to suspend a permit, the holder of such permit shall have the right to appeal to the city manager, upon presentation of evidence, as set forth elsewhere herein. 
(m)  Revocation of driver's permit. In the event that any driver holding a permit under this article at any time ceases to meet the qualifications described in subsection (d) of this section or fails to correct satisfactorily any false statement made in the application for the permit, or fails to operate his horse-drawn vehicle in accordance with the provisions of this article, the city manager, upon presentation of evidence at a noticed hearing, shall be empowered to permanently revoke the permit. 
(n)  Driving after suspension or revocation. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a horse-drawn vehicle for hire during any period in which his permit to do so is suspended or revoked in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(o)  Appeals. Appeals to the decisions of the city manager and/or city marshal shall be as set forth elsewhere herein. 
(Ord. No. 2005-3, § 4, 6-6-2005) 
Sec. 8-104. - Identification and marking generally. 
Every horse-drawn vehicle shall have a sign clearly displayed on the both sides of the vehicle, in letters not less than four, nor more than 12, inches high, containing the full name of the horse-drawn vehicle company operating the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 2005-3, § 5, 6-6-2005) 
Sec. 8-105. - Numbers generally. 
There shall be displayed on each side and on the rear of each horse-drawn vehicle a number at least six inches high, the number to be a separate and distinct number from that on any other public vehicle or taxicab in the city. The number shall be assigned to such horse-drawn vehicle and the owner thereof by the city marshal and shall not be altered or changed without the consent of the city marshal. 
(Ord. No. 2005-3, § 6, 6-6-2005) 
Sec. 8-106. - Registration of number and names of owner and operator. 
The number assigned a horse-drawn vehicle in accordance with this article, together with the names of the owner and operator of the horse-drawn vehicle, shall be registered with the city marshal in a record to be kept for that purpose. 
(Ord. No. 2005-3, § 7, 6-6-2005) 
Sec. 8-107. - Safe mechanical condition of horse-drawn vehicle required. 
Every horse-drawn vehicle operated on the streets of the city shall be maintained in a safe mechanical condition, with all safety equipment remaining intact and operative at all times when the horse-drawn vehicle is in service. The city may require third-party inspection of equipment at the expense of the company permittee. 
(Ord. No. 2005-3, § 8, 6-6-2005) 
Sec. 8-108. - Cleanliness of horse-drawn vehicle required. 
Each vehicle operating under this article shall be kept painted, and in a clean and sanitary condition, free of litter and debris and at all times suitable for public transportation of passengers. 
(Ord. No. 2005-3, § 9, 6-6-2005) 
Sec. 8-109. - Vehicle inspections required. 
Each horse-drawn vehicle shall be inspected by a designee of the city marshal for the compliance with the provision of the article and shall pass the inspection before the vehicle may be used as a horse-drawn vehicle in the city. The city marshal or his designee shall inspect each horse-drawn vehicle involved in an accident before it may be returned to service transporting passengers for hire. The city marshal or his designee shall inspect each horse-drawn vehicle annually, and each vehicle is subject to random inspections without notice, to ensure continued compliance with the provisions of this article. Failure to have vehicles inspected will result in the immediate suspension of the permit. Inspection may be done by a third-party inspector designated by the city and at the expense of the company permittee. 
(Ord. No. 2005-3, § 10, 6-6-2005) 
Sec. 8-110. - Authority for removal of horse-drawn vehicles from the streets. 
The city marshal shall have the authority to remove from operation on the streets of the city any vehicle used as a horse-drawn vehicle that is in violation of this article, and to prohibit operation of the horse-drawn vehicle until all deficiencies have been corrected. An order of the city marshal to remove a vehicle from the streets may be appealed to the city manager as provided elsewhere herein. 
(Ord. No. 2005-3, § 11, 6-6-2005) 
Sec. 8-111. - Rates of fare; rate card required. 
No owner or driver of a horse-drawn vehicle shall charge a greater sum for the use of the horse-drawn vehicle than in accordance with the published and advertised rates, which shall be displayed in each vehicle. Rates shall be displayed in such place as to be conspicuous and to be in clear view of all passengers. All rate schedules of each company permittee shall be filed with the city marshal. 
(Ord. No. 2005-3, § 12, 6-6-2005) 
Sec. 8-112. - Stands generally. 
(a)  No parking shall be permitted in the corporate limits of the city except at one stand only as established by the city manager upon the recommendation of the city marshal, which parking stands shall be designated by signs. 
(b)  Drivers of horse-drawn vehicles operated under this article shall maintain stands in a sanitary condition at all times. Any failure on the part of the driver to conform to the requirements of this section shall be unlawful and shall subject the driver to the penalties provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 2005-3, § 13, 6-6-2005) 
Sec. 8-113. - Vehicle stands. 
(a)  The city shall allow the company permittee access to its designated vehicle stands for horse-drawn vehicles and shall, upon request, provide said information to the company permittee. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any driver of any horse-drawn vehicle to leave the vehicle, or the immediate premises thereof, while the vehicle is parked in a horse-drawn vehicle stand while waiting to be hired. 
(Ord. No. 2005-3, § 14, 6-6-2005) 
Sec. 8-114. - Soliciting passengers prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit passengers verbally or by gesture, directly or indirectly, at any horse-drawn vehicle stand or upon the streets of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2005-3, § 15, 6-6-2005) 
Sec. 8-115. - Refusal to carry orderly passengers prohibited. 
No driver shall refuse or neglect to convey any orderly person, upon request, unless previously engaged or unable. 
(Ord. No. 2005-3, § 16, 6-6-2005) 
Sec. 8-116. - Prohibitions of solicitation. 
It shall be unlawful for any driver of a horse-drawn vehicle to solicit business for any hotel or other business, or to attempt to divert patronage from one hotel or business to another, or use his vehicle for any purpose other than the transportation of passengers. 
(Ord. No. 2005-3, § 17, 6-6-2005) 
Sec. 8-117. - Horse-drawn vehicle movement activities prohibited under certain circumstances. 
No driver shall collect fares, make change, or take on or discharge passengers while his horse-drawn vehicle is in motion. 
(Ord. No. 2005-3, § 18, 6-6-2005) 
Sec. 8-118. - Property left in horse-drawn vehicle by passenger. 
Any horse-drawn vehicle driver or operator discovering in any horse-drawn vehicle under his control, personal property which is lost or left therein by a passenger of such horse-drawn vehicle, shall report the loss, and deliver all the property to the office of the horse-drawn vehicle company at close of shift. The driver's report shall include brief particulars to enable the company to identify the owner of the property. The company shall retain the property on behalf of the owner for at least 60 days. 
(Ord. No. 2005-3, § 19, 6-6-2005) 
Sec. 8-119. - Safety equipment required. 
Each horse-drawn vehicle shall be equipped with electrically powered lights or lanterns and reflectors, which lights shall be in use when operating during the hours of darkness and when raining. The lights and reflectors shall be mounted so that they are visible from a distance of 500 feet in any direction. Each horse-drawn vehicle shall have on board at all times a four-pound, all-purpose extinguisher and a first aid kit. Reflective devices are to be worn by the horse. 
(Ord. No. 2005-3, § 20, 6-6-2005) 
Sec. 8-120. - Hours of operation. 
No horse-drawn vehicle shall be operated on the city streets between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 8:30 a.m. on any day. 
(Ord. No. 2005-3, § 21, 6-6-2005) 
Sec. 8-121. - Sanitation requirements. 
Manure and urine must be immediately treated with a chemical deodorizing solution, and the vehicle company must remove manure immediately from the street. Horse diapers, or other devices that prevent excrement from being deposited on the street surface, must be used at all times and disposed of properly. 
(Ord. No. 2005-3, § 22, 6-6-2005) 
Sec. 8-122. - Traffic violations. 
(a)  Horse-drawn vehicles shall be prohibited from stopping on any street for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers during the course of a tour, except when stopping to allow other vehicles to pass or pedestrians to cross unless directed to stop by a police officer or city official. 
(b)  Every person riding any animal upon a roadway and every person driving any animal-drawn vehicle within the city limits shall be subject to the provisions of the article and shall operate the vehicles in accordance with the traffic laws of the city. 
(c)  Due to the nature of operating animal-drawn vehicles in areas of congestion and heavy traffic within the city, it shall be unlawful to operate the animal-drawn vehicles except when the animals are under complete control at all times and shall be operated with extra caution and due care for the safety of others. 
(Ord. No. 2005-3, § 23, 6-6-2005) 
Sec. 8-123. - Impediment of traffic flow. 
It shall be unlawful for any horse-drawn vehicle to willfully impede the normal flow of traffic on any city street, alley, or thoroughfare, at any time. The routes of the horse-drawn vehicles of the company permittee must be approved by the city council. No deviations from the approved routes shall be permitted. Horse-drawn vehicles will be required to pull immediately to the nearest curb area when one or more vehicles are unable to safely pass or continue in normal traffic flow. 
(Ord. No. 2005-3, § 24, 6-6-2005) 
Sec. 8-124. - Administration; administrative hearing and appeal. 
(a)  Administration. 
(1)  This article shall be administered by the city marshal, who shall have authority to restrict access to designated vehicle tour stands to a horse-drawn vehicle tour company for violation of this article or state law. The city marshal shall have authority to deny access to designated vehicle stands for a period of up to six months for violation of the article or state law relating to vehicle companies. The city marshal will promptly notify the horse-drawn vehicle tour company owner in writing of such action, in which case the horse-drawn vehicle tour company owner shall have the immediate right to appeal in accordance with subsection (b) of this section. 
(2)  If a horse-drawn vehicle tour company is denied access to designated vehicle stands three times within any three-year period, and if each appealed removal is upheld, the fourth such removal within said three-year period shall be for a period of one year. 
(b)  Administrative hearing and appeal. 
(1)  Any decision of the city marshal to deny a horse-drawn vehicle tour company access to designated vehicle stands may be immediately appealed, but within ten days, by the horse-drawn vehicle tour company in writing to the city manager. All other appeals may be made within 30 days of the decision of the city marshal and must be made in writing to the city manager. 
(2)  The administrative hearing shall be informal and shall be presided over by the city manager or his designee. The decision of the city manager shall be provided to the horse-drawn vehicle tour company in writing within 30 days of the hearing. Appeals from the decision of the city manager may be taken on a de novo basis to the city council by written notice of appeal filed with the city clerk within ten days of the date of the decision of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 2005-3, § 25, 6-6-2005) 
Sec. 8-125. - Compliance required. 
Failure to comply with this article or any of the laws, ordinances and regulations of the city can result in revocation of a permit and punishment in the municipal court as for a misdemeanor not to exceed $500.00. 
(Ord. No. 2005-3, § 26, 6-6-2005) 
Secs. 8-126—8-149. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - TATTOO AND BODY ART BUSINESSES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Tattoo studios, O.C.G.A. § 31-40-1 et seq.; local regulation of tattoo studios, O.C.G.A. § 31-40-9. 

Sec. 8-150. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to establish standards for individuals performing tattoo and body art procedures and the facilities from which the procedures are provided. Such standards should ensure the health and safety of all individuals performing and receiving these services. These standards are written to ensure the health and safety of the public. 
(Ord. No. 2000-6, Amend. 1, § 1, 3-3-2008) 
Sec. 8-151. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Aftercare means written instructions given to the client, specific to the body art procedure rendered, about caring for the body art and surrounding area. These instructions will include information about when to seek medical treatment, if necessary. 
Antiseptic means an agent that destroys disease-causing microorganisms on human skin or mucosa. 
Body art means the practice of physical body adornment by permitted establishments and operators, using, but not limited to, the following techniques: body piercing, tattooing, cosmetic tattooing, branding, and scarification. This definition does not include practices that are considered medical procedures by a state medical board, such as implants under the skin, which shall not be performed in a body art establishment. Nor does this definition include, for the purposes of this article, piercing of the outer perimeter or lobe of the ear with pre-sterilized single-use stud-and-clasp ear piercing systems. 
Body art establishment means any place or premises, whether public or private, temporary or permanent in nature or location, where the practices of body art, whether or not for profit, are performed. 
Body piercing means puncturing or penetration of the skin of a person with pre-sterilized, single-use needles and the insertion of pre-sterilized jewelry or other adornment thereto in the opening, except that puncturing the outer perimeter or lobe of the ear with a pre-sterilized single-use stud-and-clasp ear piercing system shall not be included in this definition. 
Contaminated waste means any liquid or semi-liquid blood or other potentially infectious materials; contaminated items that would release blood or other potentially infectious materials in a liquid or semi-liquid state if compressed; items that are caked with dried blood or other potentially infectious materials and are capable of releasing these materials during handling; sharps and any wastes containing blood and other potentially infectious materials, as defined in 29 CFR part 1910.1030 (latest edition), known as "Occupational Exposure to Blood-Borne Pathogens." 
Cosmetic tattooing. See Tattooing. 
Department means the agency or its authorized representatives, having jurisdiction to promulgate, monitor, administer, and enforce these regulations; defined here to mean the county health department as agent of the city and the county, together with other designated authorities of the city and the county. 
Disinfection means the destruction of disease-causing microorganisms on inanimate objects or surfaces, thereby rendering these objects safe for use or handling. 
Ear piercing means the puncturing of only the outer perimeter or lobe of the ear with a pre-sterilized, single-use stud-and-clasp ear piercing system following manufacturer's instructions. Under no circumstances shall ear piercing studs and clasps be used anywhere on the body other than the outer perimeter and lobe of the ear. 
Equipment means all machinery; including fixtures, containers, vessels, tools, devices, implements, furniture, display and storage areas, sinks, and all other apparatus and appurtenances used in connection with the operation of a body art establishment. 
Hand sink means a lavatory equipped with hot and cold running water under pressure, used solely for washing hands, arms, or other portions of the body. 
Hot water means water that attains and maintains a temperature of a least 100 degrees Fahrenheit. 
Instruments used for body art means hand pieces, needles, needle bars, and other instruments that may come in contact with a client's body or may be exposed to bodily fluids during body art procedures. 
Invasive means entry into the body either by incision or insertion of an instrument into or through the skin or mucosa, or by any other means intended to puncture, break, or compromise the skin or mucosa. 
Jewelry means any personal ornament inserted into a newly pierced area, which must be made of surgical implant-grade stainless steel; solid 14k or 18k white or yellow gold, niobium, titanium, or platinum; or a dense, low-porosity plastic, which is free of nicks, scratches, or irregular surfaces and which has been properly sterilized prior to use. 
Liquid chemical germicide means a disinfectant or sanitizer registered with the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or dilution of household chlorine bleach made fresh daily and dispensed from a spray bottle (500 ppm, one-quarter cup per gallon or two tablespoons per quart of tap water). 
Mobile body art establishment/unit means a mobile establishment or unit or person who performs body art in various locations. 
Operator/technician means any person who controls, operates, manages, conducts, or practices body art activities. This person is responsible for compliance with these regulations, whether actually performing body art activities or not. The term "operator/technician" includes technicians who work under the operator and perform body art activities. 
Permit means written approval by the department to operate a body art establishment. Approval is given in accordance with these regulations and is separate from any other licensing requirement that may exist within communities or political subdivisions comprising the jurisdiction. 
Physician means a person licensed by the state to practice medicine in all its branches and may include other areas such as dentistry or osteopathy, depending on the rules and regulations particular to the state. 
Procedure surface means any surface of an inanimate object that contacts the client's unclothed body during a body art procedure, skin preparation of the area adjacent to and including the body art procedure, or any associated work area, which requires sanitizing. 
Sanitization procedure means a process of reducing the number of microorganisms on cleaned surfaces and equipment to a safe level as judged by public health standards, and which has been approved by the department. 
Sharps means any objects (sterile or contaminated) that may purposefully or accidentally cut or penetrate the skin or mucosa, including, but not limited to, pre-sterilized, single-use needles, scalpel blades, and razor blades. 
Sharps container means a puncture-resistant, leak-proof container that can be closed for handling, storage, transportation, and disposal, and that is labeled with the international biohazard symbol. 
Single use means products or items that are intended for one-time, one-person use and are disposed of after use on each client, including, but not limited to, cotton swabs or balls, tissues or paper products, paper or plastic cups, gauze and sanitary coverings, razors, piercing needles, scalpel blades, stencils, ink cups, and protective gloves. 
Sterilization means a very powerful process resulting in the destruction of all forms of microbial life, including highly resistant bacterial spores or viruses. 
Tattooing means any method of placing ink or other pigment into or under the skin or mucosa by the aid of needles or any other instrument used to puncture the skin, resulting in permanent coloration of the skin or mucosa. The term "tattooing" includes all forms of cosmetic tattooing. 
Temporary body art establishment means any place or premises operating at a location where an operator performs body art procedures. 
Universal precautions means a set of guidelines and controls, published by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), as "Guidelines for Prevention of Transmission of Human Immunodeficiency Virus and Hepatitis B Virus to Health-Care and Public-Safety Workers," in Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report (MMWR), June 23, 1989, Vol. 38, No. S-6, and as "Recommendations for Preventing Transmission of Human Immunodeficiency Virus and Hepatitis B Virus to Patients During Exposure-Prone Invasive Procedures," in MMWR, July 12, 1991, Vol. 40, No. RR-8. This method of infection control requires the employer and the employee to assume that all human blood and specified human body fluids are infectious for HIV, HBV, and other blood pathogens. Precautions include hand washing, gloving, personal protective equipment, injury prevention, and proper handling and disposal of needles; other sharp instruments; and blood and body fluid-contaminated products. 
(Ord. No. 2000-6, Amend. 1, § 2, 3-3-2008) 
Sec. 8-152. - Requirements and professional standards for body art operator/technician. 
(a)  The following information shall be kept on file on the premises of a body art establishment and available for inspection by the department: 
(1)  Employee information for each and every operator or technician: 
a.  Full names and exact duties. 
b.  Date of birth. 
c.  Gender. 
d.  Home address. 
e.  Home/work phone numbers. 
f.  Photo identification (driver's license). 
g.  Yearly health examination with photo identification stating operator/technicians to be free of communicable diseases (including, but not limited to, HIV, HBV, and TB). 
h.  Law enforcement certification stating that operator/technician has not been convicted of a felony. 
(2)  Establishment information: 
a.  Establishment name, address and telephone number. 
b.  Hours of operation. 
c.  Owner's name, residential address and telephone number. 
d.  Current biohazard collection contract. 
e.  Current liability insurance in an amount not less than $200,000.00. 
f.  Emergency contact name and phone number. This emergency contact information must be posted on the main exterior door of the establishment. 
(3)  A complete description of all body art procedures performed. 
(4)  An inventory of all instruments and body jewelry, all sharps, and all inks used for any and all body art procedures, including names of manufacturers and serial or lot numbers, if applicable. Invoices or orders shall satisfy this requirement. 
(5)  A copy of these regulations. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to perform body art procedures unless such procedures are performed in a body art establishment with a current permit. 
(c)  The body art operator/technician must be a minimum of 18 years of age. 
(d)  Smoking, eating, or drinking is prohibited in the area where body art is performed. 
(e)  Operators/technicians shall refuse service to any person who is under the influence of alcohol or drugs or appears to be under the influence. 
(f)  The operator/technician shall maintain a high degree of personal cleanliness, conform to hygienic practices, and wear clean clothes when performing body art procedures. Before performing body art procedures, operators/technicians must thoroughly wash their hands in hot running water with liquid soap, then rinse hands and dry with disposable paper towels. This shall be done as often as necessary to remove contaminants. 
(g)  In performing body art procedures, the operator shall wear disposable medical gloves. Gloves must be changed if they become contaminated by contact with any non-clean surfaces or objects or by contact with a third person. The gloves shall be discarded, at a minimum, after the completion of each procedure on an individual client, and hands shall be washed before the next set of gloves is donned. Under no circumstances shall a single pair of gloves be used on more than one person. The use of disposable medical gloves does not preclude or substitute for hand washing procedures as part of a good personal hygiene program. 
(h)  If, while performing a body art procedure, the operator's/technician's glove is pierced, torn, or otherwise contaminated, the procedure delineated in subsection (g) of this section shall be repeated immediately. The contaminated gloves shall be immediately discarded, and the hands washed thoroughly before a fresh pair of gloves is applied. Any item or instrument used for body art that is contaminated during the procedure shall be discarded and replaced immediately with a new disposable item or a new sterilized instrument or item before the procedure resumes. 
(i)  Contaminated waste that may release liquid blood or body fluids when compressed or may release dried blood or body fluids when handled must be placed in an approved "red" container marked with the international biohazard symbol. It must then be disposed of by a waste hauler approved by the department or, at a minimum, in compliance with 29 CFR part 1910.1030, "Occupational Exposure to Blood-Borne Pathogens." Sharps ready for disposal shall be disposed of in approved sharps containers. Contaminated waste that does not release liquid blood or body fluids when compressed or does not release dried blood or body fluids when handled may be placed in a covered receptacle and disposed of through normal, approved disposal methods. Storage of contaminated waste on site shall not exceed the period specified by the department or more than a maximum of 30 days, as specified in 29 CFR part 1910.1030, whichever is less. 
(j)  No person shall perform any body art procedure upon a person under the age of 18 years. Regardless of whether parental consent is given, it is illegal to perform any body art on a person under 18 years of age. 
(k)  Any skin or mucosa surface to receive a body art procedure shall be free of rash or any visible infection. 
(l)  The skin of the operator/technician shall be free of rash or infection. No person or operator affected with boils, infected wounds, open sores, abrasions, keloids, weeping dermatological lesions or respiratory infection shall work in any area of a body art establishment in any capacity in which there is a likelihood that that person could contaminate body art equipment, supplies, or working surfaces with body substances or pathogenic organisms. 
(m)  Proof shall be provided upon request of the department that all operators/technicians have completed the Hepatitis B vaccination series. This should be included as a pre-employment requirement. 
(n)  No operator/technician shall be under the influence of drugs or alcohol while performing body art. Department inspectors who suspect drug or alcohol use on the premises may call law enforcement to perform a field sobriety test or alcohol/drug test. 
(Ord. No. 2000-6, Amend. 1, § 3, 3-3-2008) 
Sec. 8-153. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Physicians licensed by the state who perform independent body art procedures as part of patient treatment are exempt from these regulations. 
(b)  Individuals who pierce only the outer perimeter and lobe of the ear with a pre-sterilized, single-use stud-and-clasp ear piercing system are exempt from these regulations. Individuals who use ear-piercing systems must conform to the manufacturer's directions on use and applicable U.S. Food and Drug Administration requirements. The department retains authority to investigate ear piercing establishments as well as consumer complaints relating to alleged misuse or improper disinfection of ear-piercing systems. 
(Ord. No. 2000-6, Amend. 1, § 4, 3-3-2008) 
Sec. 8-154. - Public notification requirements. 
(a)  Verbal and written public educational information, approved by the department, shall be required to be given to all clients wanting to receive body art procedures. Verbal and written instructions, approved by the department, for the aftercare of the body art procedure site shall be provided to each client by the operator upon completion of the procedure. The written instructions shall advise the client to consult a physician at the first sign of infection or swelling and shall contain the name, address, and phone number of the establishment as well as emergency contact name and telephone numbers. These documents shall be signed and dated by both parties, with a copy given to the client and the operator retaining the original with all other required records. In addition, all establishments shall prominently display a disclosure statement, approved by the department, which advises the public of the risks and possible consequences of body art services. The facility permit holder shall also post in public view the name, address and phone number of the local/state department that has jurisdiction over this program and the procedure for filing a complaint. The disclosure statement and the notice for filing a complaint shall be included in the establishment permit application packet. 
(b)  All infections, complications, or diseases resulting from any body art procedure that become known to the operator shall be reported to the department by the operator within 24 hours. 
(Ord. No. 2000-6, Amend. 1, § 5, 3-3-2008) 
Sec. 8-155. - Client records. 
(a)  Photo identification must be kept with client records. 
(b)  So that the operator/technician can properly evaluate the client's medical condition for receiving a body art procedure and not violate the client's rights or confidential medical information, the operator or technician shall ask for the information as follows: 
"So your body art procedure heals properly, we ask that you disclose if you have or have had any of the following conditions: 
a.  Diabetes; 
b.  History of hemophilia (bleeding); 
c.  History of skin disease, skin lesions, or skin sensitivities to soaps, disinfectants, etc.; 
d.  History of allergies or adverse reactions to pigments, dyes, or other skin sensitivities; 
e.  History of epilepsy, seizures, fainting, or narcolepsy; or 
f.  Use of medications such as anticoagulants, which thin the blood and/or interfere with blood clotting." 
(c)  The operator/technician should ask the client to sign a release form confirming that the information in subsection (b) of this section was obtained or that the operator/technician attempted to obtain it. The client should be asked to disclose any other information that would aid the operator/technician in evaluating the client's body art healing process. 
(d)  Each operator shall keep records of all body art procedures administered, including date, time, identification and location of the body art procedure performed; operator's name; and copy of photo identification of client. All client records shall be confidential and be retained for a minimum of three years and made available to the department upon notification. 
(e)  Should the establishment close, all records must be stored within the county for a minimum of three years. The department must be notified of the storage location and how to access the information. 
(f)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to require the operator to perform a body art procedure upon a client. 
(Ord. No. 2000-6, Amend. 1, § 6, 3-3-2008) 
Sec. 8-156. - Record retention. 
The body art establishment shall keep a record of all persons who have had body art procedures performed. The record shall include the name, date of birth, address, and copy of photo identification (driver's license) of the client, the date of the procedure, the name of the operator who performed the procedure, type and location of procedure performed, and signature of client. Such records shall be retained for a minimum of three years and shall be available to the department upon request. The department and the body art establishment shall keep such records confidential. The department may use such record for the health and safety of the client, the body art technicians and/or the general public. 
(Ord. No. 2000-6, Amend. 1, § 7, 3-3-2008) 
Sec. 8-157. - Preparation and care of the body art area. 
(a)  Before a body art procedure is performed, the immediate skin area and the areas of skin surrounding where the body art procedure is to be placed shall be washed with soap and water or an approved surgical skin preparation, depending on the type of body art to be performed. If shaving is necessary, single-use disposable razors or safety razors with single-service blades shall be used. Blades shall be discarded after each use, and reusable holders shall be autoclaved after use. Following shaving, the skin and surrounding area shall be washed with soap and water. The washing pad shall be discarded after a single use. 
(b)  In the event of blood flow, all products used to check the flow of blood or to absorb blood shall be single use and disposed of immediately after use in appropriate covered, leak-proof biohazard containers. All blood products shall be placed in bio-waste containers. 
(Ord. No. 2000-6, Amend. 1, § 8, 3-3-2008) 
Sec. 8-158. - Sanitation and sterilization procedures. 
(a)  All non-single-use, nondisposable instruments used for body art shall be cleaned thoroughly in a separate sink not less than three feet from the hand wash sink after each use by scrubbing with an appropriate soap or disinfectant solution and hot water or by following the manufacturer's instructions to remove blood and tissue residue, and shall be placed in an ultrasonic unit also operated in accordance with manufacturer's instructions. 
(b)  After being cleaned, all nondisposable instruments used for body art shall be packed individually in peel-packs and subsequently sterilized (see subsection (c) of this section). All peel-packs shall contain either a sterilizer indicator or internal temperature indicator. Peel-packs must be dated with an expiration date not to exceed six months. 
(c)  All cleaned, nondisposable instruments used for body art shall be sterilized in a steam autoclave or dry-heat sterilizer (if approved by the department). The sterilizer shall be used, cleaned, and maintained according to manufacturer's instruction. A copy of the manufacturer's recommended procedures for the operation of the sterilization unit must be available for inspection by the department. Sterile equipment may not be used if the package has been breached or after the expiration date without first repackaging and re-sterilizing. Sterilizers shall be located away from workstations or areas frequented by the public. If the body art establishment uses only single-use, disposable instruments and products, and uses sterile supplies, an autoclave shall not be required. 
(d)  Each holder of a permit to operate a body art establishment shall demonstrate that the sterilizer used is capable of attaining sterilization by monthly spore destruction tests. These tests shall be verified through an independent laboratory. The permit shall not be issued or renewed until documentation of the sterilizer's ability to destroy spores is received by the department. These test records shall be retained by the operator for a period of three years and made available to the department upon request. The cost of these tests shall be borne by the operator. 
(e)  All reusable needles used in tattooing and cosmetic tattooing shall be cleaned and sterilized prior to use and stored in peel-packs. After sterilization, the instruments used for tattooing/body piercing shall be stored in a dry, clean cabinet or other tightly-covered container reserved for the storage of such instruments. 
(f)  All instruments used for tattooing/body piercing shall remain stored in sterile packages until just prior to the performance of a body art procedure. When assembling instruments used for body art procedures, the operator shall wear disposable medical gloves and use medically recognized techniques to ensure that the instruments and gloves are not contaminated. 
(g)  All inks, dyes, pigments, needles, and equipment shall be specifically manufactured for performing body art procedures and shall be used according to manufacturer's instructions. The mixing of approved inks, dyes, or pigments or their dilution with potable water is acceptable. Immediately before a tattoo is applied, the quantity of the dye to be used shall be transferred from the dye bottle and placed into single-use paper cups or plastic cups. Upon completion of the tattoo, these single cups and their contents shall be discarded in non-leaking biohazard containers. 
(Ord. No. 2000-6, Amend. 1, § 9, 3-3-2008) 
Sec. 8-159. - Requirements for single-use items. 
(a)  Single-use items shall not be used on more than one client for any reason. After use, all single-use needles, razors, and other sharps shall be immediately disposed of in approved sharps biohazard containers. 
(b)  All products applied to the skin, including body art stencils, shall be single-use and disposable. Acetate stencils shall not be allowed for reuse. The gauze shall be used only once and then discarded. 
(Ord. No. 2000-6, Amend. 1, § 10, 3-3-2008) 
Sec. 8-160. - Requirements for premises. 
(a)  Body art establishments applying after adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall submit a scale drawing and floor plan of the proposed establishment for a plan review by the department, as part of the permit application process. The department may charge a fee for this review. 
(b)  All walls, floors, ceilings, and procedure surfaces of a body art establishment shall be smooth, free of open holes or cracks, light colored, washable, and in good repair. Walls, floors, and ceilings shall be maintained in a clean condition. All procedure surfaces, including client chairs/benches, shall be of such construction as to be easily cleaned and sanitized after each client. All body art establishments shall be completely separated, by solid partitions or by walls extending from floor to ceiling, from any room used for human habitation, any food establishment or room where food is prepared, any hair salon, any retail sales, or any other such activity that may cause potential contamination of work surfaces. 
(c)  Effective measures shall be taken by the body art operator to protect against entrance into the establishment and against the breeding or presence on the premises of insects, vermin, and rodents. Insects, vermin, and rodents shall not be present in any part of the establishment, its appurtenances, or appertaining premises. 
(d)  There shall be a minimum of 45 square feet of floor space for each operator in the establishment. All body art stations shall be screened from public view. Multiple body art stations shall be separated by permanent walls. 
(e)  The establishment shall be well-ventilated and provided with an artificial light source equivalent to at least 20 footcandles three feet off the floor, except that at least 100 footcandles shall be provided at the level where the body art procedure is being performed, and where instruments and sharps are assembled. 
(f)  No animals of any kind shall be allowed in a body art establishment except service animals used by persons with disabilities (e.g., guide dogs). Fish aquariums shall be allowed in waiting rooms and non-procedural areas. 
(g)  A separate, readily accessible hand sink with hot and cold running water, under pressure, preferably equipped with wrist- or foot-operated controls and supplied with liquid soap and disposable paper towels, shall be readily accessible within the body art establishment. One hand sink shall serve no more than three operators. In addition, there shall be a minimum of one lavatory, excluding any service sinks, and one toilet in a body art establishment. An additional sink shall be available for contaminated equipment, which shall be at least three feet from the hand-washing sink. 
(h)  At least one covered waste receptacle shall be provided in each operator area and each toilet room. Receptacles in the operator area shall be emptied daily, and solid waste shall be removed from the premises at least weekly. All refuse containers shall be lidded, cleanable, and kept clean. 
(i)  All instruments and supplies shall be stored in clean, dry, and covered containers. 
(j)  Reusable cloth items shall be mechanically washed with detergent and dried after each use. The cloth items shall be stored in a dry, clean environment until used. 
(k)  All working areas must be accessible to emergency medical services and equipment. 
(Ord. No. 2000-6, Amend. 1, § 11, 3-3-2008) 
Sec. 8-161. - Permit requirements. 
(a)  Establishment permit. 
(1)  No person, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, business trust, corporation or organized group of persons may operate a body art establishment except with a body art establishment permit from the department. 
(2)  Any person operating a body art establishment must obtain an annual permit from the department. 
(3)  The applicant shall pay fees as set periodically by the department for each body art establishment permit. 
(4)  A permit for a body art establishment shall not be transferable from one place or person to another. 
(5)  A current body art establishment permit shall be posted in a prominent and conspicuous area where it may be readily observed by clients. 
(6)  The holder of a body art establishment permit must only hire operators who have complied with the operator permit requirements of this article. 
(b)  Operator permit. 
(1)  No person shall practice body art procedures without first obtaining an operator permit from the department. The department shall set a fee for such permits and inspections. 
(2)  The operator permit shall be valid from the date of issuance and shall automatically expire in one year from the date of issuance unless revoked sooner by the department in accordance with section 8-164. 
(3)  Application for operator permits shall include: 
a.  Name shown on photo identification. 
b.  Date of birth. 
c.  Gender. 
d.  Residence address. 
e.  Mailing address. 
f.  Phone numbers. 
g.  Prior place of employment. 
h.  Training and/or experience. 
i.  Proof of attendance at a blood-borne pathogen training program (or equivalent), given or approved by the department. 
j.  Health certificate not more than 90 days old showing operator/technician to be free of communicable disease (including, but not limited to, TB, HBV, HIV). 
k.  Liability insurance in the amount of $200,000.00. 
l.  Statement signed by the operator/technician that he has not been denied a permit to practice body art in another location and has never had a permit revoked in another location. 
m.  Biohazard waste disposal contract. 
n.  Law enforcement certification that operator/technician has not been convicted of a felony. 
(4)  Applicant shall demonstrate knowledge of the following subjects: 
a.  Anatomy. 
b.  Skin diseases, disorders and conditions (including diabetes). 
c.  Infectious disease control, including waste disposal, hand-washing techniques, sterilization equipment operation and methods, and sanitization/disinfection/sterilization methods and techniques. 
Facility safety and sanitation knowledge of the above subjects may also be demonstrated through submission of documentation of attendance and completion of courses or completion of an examination approved or given by the department with a passing grade of 80 percent, attained prior to issuance of the operator's permit. Examples of courses approved by the department include courses such as "Preventing Disease Transmission" (American Red Cross) and "Bloodborne Pathogen Training" (U.S. OSHA). Training/courses provided by professional body art organizations or associations or by equipment manufacturers may also be submitted to the department for approval. 
(5)  No operator permit shall be issued unless, following investigation by the department, the body art operator has demonstrated compliance with the provisions of this section and all other provisions of this article. 
(6)  All operator permits shall be conditioned upon continued compliance with the provisions of this section as well as all applicable provisions of this article. 
(7)  All operator permits shall be posted in a prominent and conspicuous area where they may be readily observed by clients. 
(Ord. No. 2000-6, Amend. 1, § 12, 3-3-2008) 
Sec. 8-162. - Prohibitions. 
The following acts are prohibited: 
(1)  It is prohibited to perform body art on a person under the age of 18 years. 
(2)  It is prohibited to perform body art on a person who is inebriated or appears to be under the influence of alcohol or drugs. 
(3)  It is prohibited to own, operate, or solicit business as a body art establishment or operator without first obtaining all necessary permits and approvals from the department. 
(4)  It is prohibited to obtain or attempt to obtain any body art establishment or operator permit by means of fraud, misrepresentation, or concealment. 
(5)  Temporary body art and mobile body art establishments are prohibited. 
(6)  No person may perform tattooing/body art in any form without a permit from the department. 
(Ord. No. 2000-6, Amend. 1, § 13, 3-3-2008) 
Sec. 8-163. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Licensed and inspected establishments operating at the time of the enactment of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall be given 90 days to comply with these regulations. Establishments that continue to operate without proper permits from the department or operate in violation of these regulations will be closed immediately and subject to legal remedial actions and sanctions as provided by law. This may include a jail term of not more than 180 days and fines not to exceed $500.00. 
(b)  A representative of the department shall identify himself upon entering a body art establishment to make an inspection. Such an inspection shall be conducted as often as necessary throughout the year to ensure compliance with this article. A medical specialist or biohazard sterilization expert may be brought in for inspection purposes. The cost of this inspection shall be borne by the operator. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any person to interfere with the department in the performance of its duties. Establishments refusing inspection will be closed immediately. 
(d)  A copy of the inspection report shall be furnished to the permit holder or operator of the body art establishment, with the department retaining possession of the original. 
(e)  If, after investigation, the department should find that a permit holder or operator is in violation of this article, the department may advise the permit holder or operator, in writing, of its findings and instruct the operator to take specific steps to correct such violations within a reasonable period of time, not to exceed 30 days. 
(f)  If the department has reasonable cause to suspect that communicable disease is or may be transmitted by an operator or technician, by use of unapproved or malfunctioning equipment, or by unsanitary or unsafe conditions that may adversely affect the health of the public, upon written notice to the owner or operator, the department may do any or all of the following: 
(1)  Issue an order excluding any or all operators from the permitted body art establishment who are responsible, or reasonably appear responsible, for the transmission of a communicable disease until the department determines there is no further risk to public health; 
(2)  Issue an order to immediately suspend the permit of the licensed establishment until the department determines there is no further risk to the public health. Such an order shall state the cause for the action. 
(g)  Any person performing body art in violation of these regulations shall be guilty of an offense. 
(h)  The department may refuse to grant a permit for the operation of any body art establishment which does not fulfill the requirements of these rules and regulations and may revoke a permit which has been issued and invoke other sanctions if a studio violates any of these rules or regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2000-6, Amend. 1, § 14, 3-3-2008; Ord. No. 2000-6, Amend. 1, 4-3-2017) 
Sec. 8-164. - Suspension or revocation of permits. 
(a)  Permits issued under the provisions of this Code may be suspended temporarily or permanently by the department for failure of the holder to comply with the requirements of this article or for falsification or misrepresentation of any documents. 
(b)  Whenever a permit holder or operator has failed to comply with any notice issued under the provisions of this article, the operator shall be notified in writing that the permit is, upon service of this notice, immediately suspended. The notice must also contain a statement informing the permit holder or operator that an opportunity for a hearing will be provided if a written request for a hearing is filed with the department within the time specified by law. 
(c)  Any person whose permit has been suspended may, at any time, make application for reinstatement of the permit. Within ten days of receipt of a written request, including a statement signed by the applicant that in his opinion the conditions causing the suspension have been corrected and submission of the appropriate re-inspection fees, the department shall re-inspect the body art establishment or evaluate documentation provided by an operator. If the applicant is in compliance with the provisions of this article, the permit will be reinstated. 
(d)  For repeated or serious (any article infraction that threatens the health of the client of operator) violations of any of the requirements of this article or for interference with department personnel in the performance of their duties, a permit may be permanently revoked after a hearing. Before taking such actions, the department shall notify the permit holder or operator in writing, stating the reasons for which the permit is subject to revocation and advising the permit holder or operator of the requirements for filing a request for a hearing. A permit may be suspended for cause, pending its revocation or hearing relative thereto. 
(e)  The department may permanently revoke a permit after five days following service of the notice, unless a request for a hearing is filed within the five-day period with the department by the permit holder. 
(f)  The hearings provided for in this section must be conducted by the department at a time and place designated by the department. On the basis of the record of the hearing, the department shall make a finding and may sustain, modify, or rescind any official notice or order considered in the hearing. A written report of the hearing decision must be furnished to the permit holder or operator by the department. 
(Ord. No. 2000-6, Amend. 1, § 15, 3-3-2008) 
Sec. 8-165. - Competency requirement. 
Medical persons trained in sterilization techniques may be used by the department for inspections at the expense of the operator. 
(Ord. No. 2000-6, Amend. 1, § 16, 3-3-2008) 
Chapter 10 - CEMETERIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Cemeteries generally, O.C.G.A. § 10-14-1 et seq.; abandoned cemeteries, O.C.G.A. § 36-72-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 10-1—10-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY CEMETERIES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-19. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Cemetery means Memorial Park Cemetery, and cemeteries first established by the city during the year 1983 and thereafter. 
Committee means the cemetery committee as selected under the terms of this division. 
Rules means the rules and regulations as may be from time to time adopted by the city council. 
Trust means the trust created by this division. 
Trustees means the trustees as selected in accordance with the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 83-7, § 1, 10-1-1990; Ord. No. 83-7, Amend. 5, § 1, 9-3-2014; Ord. No. 83-7, Amend. 10, 4-3-2017) 
Sec. 10-20. - Cemetery divisions. 
Memorial Park Cemetery shall be divided into two sections defined as follows: 
(1)  Section 1: All lots in the cemetery, wherever located, sold by the former owner prior to the date stated in section 10-19. 
(2)  Section 2: All lots in the cemetery, wherever located, which are sold on or after the date stated in section 10-19. 
(Ord. No. 83-7, § 2, 10-1-1990) 
Sec. 10-21. - Vaults required. 
Vaults shall be required as to all graves in Memorial Park Cemetery. 
(Ord. No. 83-7, § 4, 10-1-1990; Ord. No. 83-7, Amend. 1, 5-2-1988) 
Sec. 10-22. - City council rules to govern all cemetery lots. 
All cemetery lots in the cemetery shall be governed by the rules in force as adopted by the city council, and shall not be affected by these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 83-7, § 6, 10-1-1990) 
Sec. 10-23. - Regulation of lot price and burial fee. 
The price of the lots in Memorial Park Cemetery shall be determined and fixed by the city council and the charges or fees to be paid to the sexton for opening or digging graves shall be regulated by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 83-7, § 9, 10-1-1990) 
Sec. 10-24. - Cemetery committee established; composition; duties; powers advisory only. 
(a)  There is hereby established a cemetery committee to consist of five members to be appointed by the city council to serve at the pleasure of the city council without pay. 
(b)  Such committee shall devise plans, suggest rules and regulations and perform such other duties as the city council may from time to time request, but such committee shall have advisory powers only. 
(Ord. No. 83-7, § 10, 10-1-1990) 
Sec. 10-25. - Sexton to have police power. 
The sexton of the cemetery shall have police power in the cemetery area. However, a sexton shall not be required by the terms of this division. In the alternative, the county sheriff and his duly appointed deputies may serve as sexton of the cemetery as to police powers stated in this section. All other administrative powers in the absence of appointment of a sexton shall be performed by the city manager or his delegated agent. 
(Ord. No. 83-7, § 11, 10-1-1990) 
Sec. 10-26. - Burial or exhuming, permit required. 
No person shall dig any grave, or bury, or attempt to bury, exhume or remove any corpse in the cemeteries or burial places of the city, without notice to, and permission of, the sexton or city manager. 
(Ord. No. 83-7, § 12, 10-1-1990) 
Sec. 10-27. - Opening graves, persons permitted to open. 
No grave shall be opened for the purpose of interments or disinterments except by the sexton of the cemetery or employees working under the sexton. 
(Ord. No. 83-7, § 13, 10-1-1990) 
Sec. 10-28. - Prohibited acts. 
The following acts are positively forbidden in the cemeteries of the city: 
(1)  Fast or disorderly riding or driving; 
(2)  Discharging firearms; 
(3)  Turning hogs or cattle into the cemeteries; 
(4)  Opening the gates and leaving them open after passage through them; 
(5)  Injuring or defacing in any way the trees, flowers, shrubbery, graves, tombstones or monuments, seats, buildings or structures of any kind in the cemeteries; 
(6)  Committing a nuisance or depositing trash or refuse matter in the cemeteries. 
(Ord. No. 83-7, § 14, 10-1-1990) 
Sec. 10-29. - Animals at large to be impounded. 
Any horses, cattle, hogs, or other animals found running at large within either of the cemeteries of the city shall be impounded by the sexton or police, subject to the charges and penalties imposed when same are found at large in the streets of the city. 
(Ord. No. 83-7, § 15, 10-1-1990) 
Sec. 10-30. - Burials, location restricted. 
It shall be unlawful to bury any dead body except in a public or private cemetery. 
(Ord. No. 83-7, § 16, 10-1-1990) 
Sec. 10-31. - "Lot" or "plot" defined. 
The term "cemetery lot or plot" means and consists of enough land in which persons may be buried in single grave spaces, as defined in the plat of the cemetery and as described in the deed of burial rights to the owner thereof. 
(Ord. No. 83-7, § 17, 10-1-1990) 
Sec. 10-32. - Cemetery lots or burial space subject to restrictions, covenants, rules and regulations. 
All cemetery plots, lots or burial space owned and purchased within the public cemeteries of the city, and all such plots, lot or spaces sold, shall be subject to the following restrictions, covenants, rules and regulations, and subject to such other rules, regulations amendments or alterations and ordinances as shall be adopted and regularly passed by the city from time to time, and the reference to these rules and regulations in the deed or certificate of ownership shall have the same force and effect as if fully set forth therein. 
(Ord. No. 83-7, § 18, 10-1-1990) 
Sec. 10-33. - Burial rights in public cemeteries, supervision of sale and conveyances, execution, form and conditions of deed. 
The city manager shall generally supervise the sale and conveyance of burial rights purchased in the public cemeteries of the city. The city manager shall execute to the purchaser of the burial rights a cemetery deed made in substantially the following form: 
CEMETERY LOT DEED 
CITY OF DAHLONEGA, LUMPKIN COUNTY, GEORGIA: 
THIS INDENTURE, Made this ____________ day of ____________ / ____________ / ____________ in the Year of Our Lord, two thousand and ____________ / ____________ / ____________ between the City of Dahlonega, Lumpkin County, Georgia, of the first part, and ____________ / ____________ / ____________ of the second part. 
WITNESSETH: That the party of the first part, for and in consideration of the sum of ____________ Dollars, to it in hand paid by the said party of the second part, the receipt whereof is hereby acknowledged, has granted, bargained, sold and conveyed, and by these presents doth grant, bargain and sell, remise and convey unto said party of the second part, ____________ , heirs and assigns, the exclusive rights of interment in and to a certain burial place in ____________ Cemetery, in said city which is known and distinguished in the plan of said cemetery as ____________ the number and description of said lot being made with reference to the surveys and plat of record in Deed Book Page ____________ Lumpkin County Records, which the parties to this conveyance acknowledge themselves bound; to have and to hold said exclusive privilege to the said party of the second part and ____________ heirs forever, subject to all the requirements of any ordinance of the council of the City of Dahlonega now in force or hereafter ordained, regulating said cemetery upon these express conditions, nevertheless, that no sale or transfer of the rights of burial and interment in said burial lot shall at any time made by party of the second part or by any future owner be valid without the permission and approval of the City of Dahlonega, and an entry of which shall be made on the books of the City of Dahlonega, and upon the payment of the required transfer fee. And, provided that the party of the second part or any future owner of the burial and interment rights in said burial lot shall not at any time or times whereafter demand or receive any compensation for an interment in said burial lot and provided also that the rights and premises granted hereby shall be subject to the restrictions, covenants, rules and regulations made and to be made hereafter by said City of Dahlonega for the government of its cemeteries, lot holders, visitors to the cemetery and burial of the dead. 

 
  
Ord. No. 83-7, § 19, 10-1-1990) 
Sec. 10-34. - Ownership construed, use and division, reversion to city. 
Ownership of a lot consists only in the right of interment. The lot can be used for no other purpose and cannot be divided into smaller portions than originally laid down in the plot. Should a lot holder die without a devise of or any known kindred, title to such lot shall revert to the city, for the protection of those who may be interred therein. 
(Ord. No. 83-7, § 20, 10-1-1990) 
Sec. 10-35. - Issuance of deed. 
A deed or certificate of ownership shall be issued to each lot holder on full payment of the purchase money of such lot. 
(Ord. No. 83-7, § 21, 10-1-1990) 
Sec. 10-36. - Purchased right of purchaser, taking for debt or selling for secular use. 
When a right has once been purchased within the enclosure of a public cemetery for burial purposes, it becomes for all time the property of the purchaser and his transferees and cannot be taken for debt or sold for secular uses. 
(Ord. No. 83-7, § 22, 10-1-1990) 
Sec. 10-37. - Owner's change of address, duty to notify city, sufficient and proper legal notification described. 
It shall be the duty of the plot, lot or burial space owner to notify the city of any change in his post office address. Notice sent to a plot, lot or burial space owner at the last address on file in the office of the secretary of the city committee shall be considered sufficient and proper legal notification. 
(Ord. No. 83-7, § 23, 10-1-1990) 
Sec. 10-38. - Certain rights and privileges reserved by city. 
The following rights and privileges are hereby expressly reserved by the city in its conveyance of any cemetery lot, plot or space: At any time and from time to time to resurvey, enlarge, diminish, replat, alter in shape or size or otherwise change all or any part, portion or subdivision of the property mapped and platted, and to file amended maps or plats thereof, and to use the same for the erection of buildings, or for any purposes or uses connected with, incident to, or convenient for the care, preservation or preparation, for the disposal of interment of dead human bodies, or other cemetery purposes, together with easements, and rights-of-way over and through such premises for and privilege of, installing, maintaining and operating pipe lines, conduits or drains for sprinklers, drainage, electric or communication lines, or for any other like purposes. 
(Ord. No. 83-7, § 24, 10-1-1990) 
Sec. 10-39. - Easements or rights of interment in roads, drives, alleys or walks. 
No easement or right of interment is granted by the city to any plot, lot or burial space owner in any road, drive, alley or walk within the cemetery, but such road, drive, alley or walk may be used as a means of access to the cemetery or buildings as long as the city devotes it to that purpose. 
(Ord. No. 83-7, § 25, 10-1-1990) 
Sec. 10-40. - Transfer of assignment, prerequisite to validity. 
No transfer or assignment of any cemetery lot, space or plot, or interest therein, shall be valid until the consent of the city has been endorsed thereon and the same has been recorded on the books of the city. 
(Ord. No. 83-7, § 26, 10-1-1990) 
Sec. 10-41. - Charge for transfer of ownership. 
The city may fix a charge for all transfers of ownership of lots, spaces and plots. No transfer of ownership shall be complete or effective until all charges are paid. 
(Ord. No. 83-7, § 27, 10-1-1990) 
Sec. 10-42. - Subdivision of plots, interment of persons with no interest in plot. 
The subdivision of plots, lots or spaces is not allowed by anyone except the city and no one not having an interest therein shall be interred in any plot, lot or space except by written consent of all parties interested in such plot, lot or space and the city; provided, however, a relative of any record owner may be buried in such lot, space or plot as provided in this division or by the laws of the state. 
(Ord. No. 83-7, § 28, 10-1-1990) 
Sec. 10-43. - Family plot—Inalienable, reversion to city. 
Whenever an interment of the remains of a member or of a relative of a member of the family of the record owner, or of the remains of the record owner, is made in a plot transferred by deed or certificate of ownership to an individual owner and the owner dies without making disposition of the plot either in his will by a specific devise, or by a written declaration filed and recorded in the office of the city, the plot thereby becomes inalienable and shall be held as the family plot of the owner with title to the same reverting to the city for protection of those who may be interred therein. 
(Ord. No. 83-7, § 29, 10-1-1990) 
Sec. 10-44. - Same—Right to burial within same without consent. 
In a family plot, one grave, niche or crypt may be used for the owner's interment; one for the owner's surviving spouse, if any, who by law has a right of interment in it; and in those remaining, if any, the parents and children of the deceased owner, in order of death, may be interred without the consent of any person claiming any interest in the plot. 
(Ord. No. 83-7, § 30, 10-1-1990) 
Sec. 10-45. - Same—Interment right waived in favor of other relative. 
If no parent or child survives, the right of interment goes in the order of death, first, to the spouse of any child of the record owner, and second, in the order of death, to the next heir at law of the owner or the spouse of any heir at law. 
(Ord. No. 83-7, § 31, 10-1-1990) 
Sec. 10-46. - Same—Interment right waived in favor of other relative. 
Any surviving spouse, parent, child or heir who has a right of interment in a family plot may waive such right in favor of any other relative, or spouse of a relative, of either the deceased owner or of his spouse, and upon such waiver, the remains of the person in whose favor the waiver is made may be interred in the plot. 
(Ord. No. 83-7, § 32, 10-1-1990) 
Sec. 10-47. - Right of spouse of owner. 
The spouse of any owner of any plot which contains more than one interment space has a vested right of interment of his remains in the plot, lot or space and any person thereafter becoming the spouse of the owner has a vested right of interment of his remains in the plot if more than one interment space is unoccupied at the time the person becomes the spouse of the owner. 
(Ord. No. 83-7, § 33, 10-1-1990) 
Sec. 10-48. - Vested right of spouse, joinder prerequisite to divesting. 
No conveyance or other action of the owner, without the written consent or joinder of the spouse of the owner, divests the spouse of a vested right of interment, except that a final decree of divorce between them terminates the vested right of interment unless otherwise provided in the decree. 
(Ord. No. 83-7, § 34, 10-1-1990) 
Sec. 10-49. - Plots having several owners, representation by designated owner. 
When there are several owners of the rights of interment in a plot, lot or space, they may designate one or more persons to represent the plot, lot or space and file written notice of designation with the city. In the absence of such notice or of written objection to its so doing, the city is not liable to any owner for interring or permitting an interment or refusing an interment in the plot, lot or space upon the request or direction of any co-owners of the lot, space, or plot. 
(Ord. No. 83-7, § 35, 10-1-1990) 
Sec. 10-50. - Vested right—Waiving. 
A vested right of interment may be waived, and is so waived and terminated upon the interment elsewhere of the remains of the person in whom vested. 
(Ord. No. 83-7, § 36, 10-1-1990) 
Sec. 10-51. - Same—Scope. 
No vested right of interment gives to any person the right to have his remains interred in any interment space in which the remains of any deceased having a prior vested right of interment have been interred, nor does it give any person the right to have the remains of more than one deceased person interred in a single interment space. 
(Ord. No. 83-7, § 37, 10-1-1990) 
Sec. 10-52. - Authorization to open plot. 
The city may inter or open a plot for any purpose on proper written authorization by any plot owner of record made out on forms approved by the city and duly filed in the office of the city clerk unless there are written instructions to the contrary on file in such office. 
(Ord. No. 83-7, § 38, 10-1-1990) 
Sec. 10-53. - Owners permitting interments for remuneration. 
Cemetery owners shall not allow any interments to be made in their lots for a remuneration. 
(Ord. No. 83-7, § 39, 10-1-1990) 
Sec. 10-54. - Monument restrictions in cemetery. 
Monuments or stones of any kind, or enclosures, walls or coping, shall not be permitted on any graves and plots. Only individual bronze memorial tablets or markers and bronze family name markers shall be allowed, and they must be set level with the ground within the family plot. They must be set subject to the approval and inspection of the city. 
(Ord. No. 83-7, § 40, 10-1-1990) 
Sec. 10-55. - Offensive, improper or injurious monuments, removal. 
If any monument or other structure, or any inscription, is placed in or upon any lot or grave, which shall be determined by the sexton to be offensive, improper or injurious to the appearance of the surrounding lots or grounds or the cemetery generally, he shall have the right and it shall be his duty to enter upon such lot and cause the removal of such offensive or improper object. 
(Ord. No. 83-7, § 41, 10-1-1990) 
Sec. 10-56. - Surface of lot or graves raising or depressing prohibited. 
The proprietors of cemetery lots are prohibited from raising or depressing the surface of the lot or graves above or below the surrounding ground. 
(Ord. No. 83-7, § 41A, 10-1-1990) 
Sec. 10-57. - Authority for grading, landscaping, improvements, plantings, interments, disinterments and removals. 
All grading, landscape work and improvements of any kind and all care on plots shall be done, and all trees, shrubs, and herbage of any kind shall be planted, trimmed, cut or removed and all openings and closing of plots and all interments, disinterments, and removals shall be made only by the authority of the city. 
(Ord. No. 83-7, § 42, 10-1-1990) 
Sec. 10-58. - Improvements or alterations of individual property, direction and approval of city, removal of unsightly improvements or alterations. 
All improvements or alterations of individual property in the cemetery shall be under the direction of and subject to the consent, satisfaction and approval of the city; and, should they be made without its written consent, the city shall have the right to remove, alter or change such improvements or alterations at the expense of the plot, lot or space owner, or in any event at any time when, in its judgment, they become unsightly to the eye. 
(Ord. No. 83-7, § 43, 10-1-1990) 
Sec. 10-59. - Detrimental trees and shrubs, right to move. 
If any tree or shrub, situated in any lot, shall by means of its roots or branches become detrimental in any way to the adjoining lot, avenue or walk, it shall be the duty and privilege of the city, and it hereby reserves the right, to enter upon the lot and remove the trees or shrubs, or any part thereof. But no tree growing in any lot or border shall be pruned or removed without the consent of the city. 
(Ord. No. 83-7, § 44, 10-1-1990) 
Sec. 10-60. - Flowers, trees, shrubs and herbage—Right to prevent removal. 
The city reserves the right to prevent the removal of any flowers, floral designs, trees, shrubs or plants or herbage of any kind from any cemetery. 
(Ord. No. 83-7, § 45, 10-1-1990) 
Sec. 10-61. - Same—Authority to remove, liability for frames or baskets. 
The city shall have authority to remove all floral designs, flowers, weeds, trees, shrubs, plants or herbage of any kind from the cemetery, when, in the judgment of the sexton, they become unsightly, dangerous, detrimental, or diseased. The city shall not be liable for damage to floral pieces, baskets or frames in which or to which such floral pieces are attached. 
(Ord. No. 83-7, § 46, 10-1-1990) 
Sec. 10-62. - Gathering or breaking flowers, trees or shrubbery, gathering or breaking same; birds or animals, feeding or disturbing. 
All persons are prohibited from gathering flowers, either wild or cultivated, or breaking trees, shrubbery or plants or feeding or disturbing the birds or other animal life in the cemeteries of the city. 
(Ord. No. 83-7, § 47, 10-1-1990) 
Sec. 10-63. - Floral frames, disposal. 
Floral frames, when not removed from the plot, unless called for within ten days by those lawfully entitled to them, shall be disposed of by the city. 
(Ord. No. 83-7, § 48, 10-1-1990) 
Sec. 10-64. - Signs, notices or advertisements prohibited. 
No signs, notices or advertisements of any kind shall be allowed in any cemetery, except by the city. 
(Ord. No. 83-7, § 49, 10-1-1990) 
Sec. 10-65. - Responsibility for damage. 
The city disclaims all responsibility for loss or damage from causes beyond its reasonable control, and especially from damage caused by the elements, an act of God, common enemy, thieves, vandals, strikers, malicious mischief makers, explosions, unavoidable accidents, invasions, insurrections, riots or order of any military or civil authority, whether the damage is direct or collateral. 
(Ord. No. 83-7, § 50, 10-1-1990) 
Sec. 10-66. - Time, manner and charges for interments, disinterments and removals. 
All interments, disinterments and removals must be made at the time and in the manner and subject to the payment of such charges as fixed by the city. 
(Ord. No. 83-7, § 51, 10-1-1990) 
Sec. 10-67. - Charges for opening graves, interment and disinterment. 
The charges for opening graves, interment and disinterment in the public cemeteries shall be as set out in the fee schedule book of the city, as provided. 
(Ord. No. 83-7, § 52, 10-1-1990) 
Sec. 10-68. - Right to refuse immediate interment after specified hour. 
The city may refuse to make an interment until a more expedient time if the remains arrive at the cemetery after 5:00 p.m., or if too many funerals arrive at the same hour. 
(Ord. No. 83-7, § 53, 10-1-1990) 
Sec. 10-69. - Charges for funerals arriving after specified hour. 
All funerals arriving at the public cemeteries for the purpose of an interment or disinterment after 5:00 p.m. shall be required to pay an additional charge as set forth in the fee schedule book of the city, as provided. This may be waived by the sexton in cases of unavoidable circumstances only. 
(Ord. No. 83-7, § 54, 10-1-1990) 
Sec. 10-70. - Funerals, interments or disinterments prohibited on specified holidays. 
There shall be no funerals, interments, or disinterments on the Fourth of July or Christmas Day, except in cases of extreme hardship as provided elsewhere in this division. 
(Ord. No. 83-7, § 55, 10-1-1990) 
Sec. 10-71. - Delay of interment, liability and right of city. 
The city shall be in no way liable for any delay in the interment of a body where a protest to the interment has been made, or where these rules and regulations have not been complied with and, further, the city reserves the right, under such circumstances, to place the body in a funeral home or a receiving vault until the full rights have been determined. The city may require any protest to be in writing and to be filed in the office of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 83-7, § 56, 10-1-1990) 
Sec. 10-72. - Reservation of right to require specified notice before interment. 
The right is reserved by the city to insist upon at least 18 hours' notice before any interment. 
(Ord. No. 83-7, § 57, 10-1-1990) 
Sec. 10-73. - Liability for interment permit and identity of person sought to be interred or cremated. 
The city shall not be liable in damages for an error in the interment permit nor for the mistake or error in the identity of the person sought to be interred or cremated. 
(Ord. No. 83-7, § 58, 10-1-1990) 
Sec. 10-74. - Responsibility for telephone orders or mistakes by vague instructions. 
The city shall not be held responsible for any order given by telephone, or for any mistake occurring from the want of precise and proper instructions as to the particular space, size and location in a plot where interment is desired. 
(Ord. No. 83-7, § 59, 10-1-1990) 
Sec. 10-75. - Procedure when instructions from plot owner not available. 
When instructions from the plot owner regarding the location of an interment space in a plot cannot be obtained, or are indefinite, or when for any reason the interment space cannot be opened when specified, the city may, in its discretion, open it in such location in the plot as it deems best and proper so as not to delay the funeral; and the city shall not be liable for damages for any error so made. 
(Ord. No. 83-7, § 60, 10-1-1990) 
Sec. 10-76. - Errors in interment. 
In the event an error shall be committed in the interment of the remains of any person, the city reserves and shall have the right to remove and reinter the remains in such other property of equal value and similar location as may be substituted and conveyed in lieu of the mistaken property. 
(Ord. No. 83-7, § 61, 10-1-1990) 
Sec. 10-77. - Disinterment—Permission prerequisite. 
No disinterment from any lot shall be made except on express permission of the city manager first being obtained. The city manager may insist that an order from a proper court of law first be secured by those seeking the disinterment. 
(Ord. No. 83-7, § 62, 10-1-1990) 
Sec. 10-78. - Same—Liability of city. 
The city shall exercise due care in making a disinterment and removal, but it shall assume no liability for damage to any casket, burial case, vault or urn incurred in making the disinterment or removal. 
(Ord. No. 83-7, § 63, 10-1-1990) 
Sec. 10-79. - Removal of body repugnant to sense of decency. 
Removal of a body, or cremated remains, by the heirs of the deceased so that the plot, lot or space may he sold for profit to themselves, or removal contrary to the expressed or implied wish of the original plot owner or if repugnant to the ordinary sense of decency, is absolutely forbidden. 
(Ord. No. 83-7, § 64, 10-1-1990) 
Sec. 10-80. - Limitation on number of bodies interred in same grave, vault, crypt or niche. 
Not more than one body, or the remains of more than one body, shall be interred in any one grave, vault, crypt or niche. 
(Ord. No. 83-7, § 65, 10-1-1990) 
Sec. 10-81. - Permit required for firearms within cemeteries. 
No firearms shall be permitted within any cemetery except with special permit from the city or other duly constituted authorities. 
(Ord. No. 83-7, § 66, 10-1-1990) 
Sec. 10-82. - Refreshments prohibited within cemeteries; exception. 
No person shall be permitted to have refreshments within any cemetery except as authorized by the sexton. 
(Ord. No. 83-7, § 67, 10-1-1990) 
Sec. 10-83. - Persons within grounds to use only avenues, walks, alleys and roads; liability for injuries. 
Persons within the cemetery grounds shall use only the avenues, walks, alleys and roads and shall not walk, drive or ride upon the lots, plots and spaces. 
(Ord. No. 83-7, § 68, 10-1-1990) 
Sec. 10-84. - Automobiles regulated. 
Automobiles shall not be driven through the grounds at a greater speed than 15 miles per hour, and must always be kept on the right-hand side of the cemetery roadway. Automobiles are not allowed to park or to come to a full stop in front of an open grave unless such automobiles are in attendance at the funeral. 
(Ord. No. 83-7, § 69, 10-1-1990) 
Sec. 10-85. - Interpretation, application and enforcement of provisions. 
These rules and regulations shall be interpreted, applied and enforced by the cemetery committee. In cases of hardship, necessity or unreasonableness in the application or enforcement of any of these rules and regulations, the majority of the cemetery committee shall have the right to alter the application and enforcement of these rules and regulations so as to relieve the hardship or unreasonableness, and the same shall not constitute forfeiture nor shall it have the effect of changing or abridging the rule, covenant or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 83-7, § 70, 10-1-1990) 
Sec. 10-86. - Violation of provisions. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to do any act forbidden by this division, and it shall be unlawful for any person to fail to perform any act required by this division. Any person performing any act forbidden by this division or failing to perform any act required by this division shall have breached this division, and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in section 1-7. 
(Ord. No. 83-7, § 71, 10-1-1990) 
Sec. 10-87. - Rates and charges. 
The cemetery lot rates for the Memorial Park Cemetery and the open close rates for the Memorial Park Cemetery and the Mount Hope Cemetery are as established by the city. 
(Ord. No. 83-7, Amend. 9, 1-15-2015) 
Secs. 10-88—10-117. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MOUNT HOPE CEMETERY 

Sec. 10-118. - Restricted hours of visitation. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to visit, loiter, wander, stroll, or otherwise be on or within the grounds of Mount Hope Cemetery between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. from April 1, until October 31, and between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. from November 1, until March 31, except as permitted by formal written permission of the city. 
(b)  Any business or individual seeking an exception from this section may do so by seeking approval from the city council for such exception. On approval of such exception, such business or individual may be permitted to visit the Mount Hope Cemetery on hours outside of those specified in this section for certain indicated times specified by the city council. 
(c)  Each offense under this section shall be punishable as a misdemeanor via citation to the municipal court. 
(Ord. No. 2015-8, §§ 1—3, 8-20-2015) 
Chapter 20 - MUNICIPAL COURT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal courts, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-1 et seq. 

Sec. 20-1. - Solicitor general. 
(a)  The office of the solicitor general shall be established for the purpose of providing representation for the interests of the citizens of the city in matters pertaining to violations of city ordinances and state offenses enforceable within municipal court. 
(b)  The duly appointed city attorney shall hold the office of solicitor general. The compensation of the solicitor general shall be fixed by the city council. No person shall be qualified or eligible to serve as the solicitor general unless he shall have attained the age of 21 years and shall be a member of the State Bar of Georgia. 
(c)  Pursuant to section 4.13 of the city Charter, the solicitor's office shall share the jurisdiction and powers vested therein as well as any powers granted by the laws of the state. 
(d)  The staff of the office shall include the positions of assistant solicitor, investigator and support positions as needed. The staff of the solicitor's office shall be appointed by the solicitor general and approved by the city council as needed. 
(Ord. No. 99-9, §§ 1—4, 10-4-1999) 
Sec. 20-2. - Appearance before the court of persons served with charges; failure to appear; penalty. 
(a)  In any case where any person is charged with the violation of any of the provisions of this Code or any other ordinances and a copy of charges or other citations is delivered to the person requiring an appearance before the municipal court of the city at a specified time and place, it shall be the duty of that person to appear at the time and place set out in the charges or citations. 
(b)  Any person failing to appear at the time and place set out in the charges or citations shall be guilty of contempt of court. 
(c)  The fine for contempt of court for failure to appear shall be $125.00. 
(Ord. No. 2015-1, § 1, 4-6-2015) 
Sec. 20-3. - Information technology fee. 
(a)  Added to fine. An information technology fee shall be added to any fine imposed by the municipal court for any conviction of any state law or local ordinance within the court's jurisdiction. 
(b)  Multiple citations and convictions. In the event of multiple violations, the fee shall be charged per violation of any of the laws or ordinances of the city or any laws of the state. 
(c)  Amount of fee. The fee shall be as established by the city. Mandatory state add-ons shall be calculated based on the sum of the underlying fine in addition to the information technology fee. 
(d)  Deposits and use. The information technology fee shall be deposited in the city's general fund, but shall be tracked and only be used for expenditures related to technology needs in the municipal court, and any ancillary financial technology needs of the municipal court. Funds collected pursuant to this section shall be accounted for by the city and shall be used only for the purposes authorized in this section at the direction of the city manager. 
(e)  Exceptions. The technology fee shall not be added to any fine in which state law prohibits any additional fees to be added to such fine. Examples of such violations are failure to wear a safety belt pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 40-8-76.1(e)(2) and failure to not properly restrain a child passenger in an automobile pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 40-8-76(b)(2). 
(Ord. No. 2015-3, §§ 1—5, 4-6-2015) 
Chapter 22 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 22-1. - Discharge of firearms. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Firearm means any handgun, rifle, or shotgun. 
Sport shooting range means an area designed and operated by a person or entity for the sport shooting of firearms, target practice, trapshooting, skeet shooting, or shooting sporting clays and not available for such use by the general public without payment of a fee, membership contribution, or dues or without the invitation of an authorized person, or any area so designed and operated by a unit of government, regardless of the terms of admission thereto. 
(b)  Except as provided in this section, it shall be unlawful for any person, without legal justification, to discharge a firearm within the city or from roadways. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to a discharge of a firearm which occurs at: 
(1)  An indoor or outdoor sport shooting range; 
(2)  Facilities used for firearm or hunting safety courses sponsored by a unit of government, nonprofit corporation, or commercial enterprise; or 
(3)  The business location of any person, firm, retail dealer, wholesale dealer, pawnbroker, or corporation operating as a lawful firearms dealer. 
(d)  Any person who violates subsection (b) of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed $250.00. 
(Ord. No. 2014-11, §§ 1—4, 11-3-2014) 
State Law reference— Local regulation of firearms, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-173. 
Sec. 22-2. - Intoxication. 
A person who shall be and appear in an intoxicated condition in any public place or within the curtilage of any private residence not his own other than by invitation of the owner or lawful occupant, which condition is made manifest by any of the following is guilty of a misdemeanor: 
(1)  Boisterous conduct; 
(2)  Indecent condition; 
(3)  Indecent action; 
(4)  Vulgar, profane, or loud speech; 
(5)  Partial or complete loss of consciousness; or 
(6)  Inability to state coherently his identity. 
(Ord. No. 82-2, 9-8-1982) 
State Law reference— Public drunkenness, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-41. 
Sec. 22-3. - Marijuana possession. 
(a)  The municipal court shall have jurisdiction, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-32-6, to try and dispose of cases where a person is charged with the possession of one ounce or less of marijuana if the offense occurred within the corporate limits of the city. The jurisdiction of such court shall be concurrent with the jurisdiction of any other courts within the county to try and dispose of such cases. 
(b)  Penalties for violation of this section shall not exceed 60 days in jail and a $500.00 fine per offense. 
(c)  Any defendant charged with possession of an ounce or less of marijuana in the municipal court shall be entitled, on request, to have the case against him transferred to the superior court of the county. 
(Ord. No. 83-2, 9-6-1983) 
Sec. 22-4. - Disorderly conduct. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to commit an act of disorderly conduct in the city. 
(b)  A person commits disorderly conduct when he knowingly: 
(1)  Acts in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another whereby any person is placed in fear of safety of his life, limb or health; 
(2)  Acts in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another whereby the property of any person is placed in danger of being destroyed or damaged; 
(3)  Without provocation, uses to or of another in his presence, opprobrious or abusive words which, by their very utterance, tend to incite to an immediate breach of the peace; that is to say, words which as a matter of common knowledge and under ordinary circumstances will, when used to or of another person in his presence, naturally tend to provoke violent resentment, that is, words commonly called "fighting words"; 
(4)  Without provocation, uses obscene and vulgar or profane language in the presence of any person, or by telephone to any person; 
(5)  Communicates to any person by writing or printing any obscene or vulgar language or improper proposals; 
(6)  Engages in indecent or disorderly conduct in the presence of any person in any public place; 
(7)  Telephones another repeatedly, whether or not conversation ensues, for the purpose of annoying, harassing or molesting another or his family, or uses over the telephone language threatening bodily harm, or telephones and intentionally fails to hang up or disengage the connection, or knowingly permits any telephone under his control to be used for any purpose prohibited by this section; 
(8)  Uses violent and forceful behavior at any time in or near a public place, such that there is a clear and present danger that free movement of other persons will be arrested or restrained, or other persons will be incapacitated in the lawful exercise of business or amusement; 
(9)  Causes, provokes or engages in any fight, brawl, or riotous conduct so as to endanger the life, limb, health or property of another; 
(10)  Assembles or congregates with another or others for the purpose of causing, provoking or engaging in any fight or brawl; 
(11)  Disturbs the peace of others by violent, indecent, offensive or boisterous conduct or language which conduct or language was calculated to cause anguish or injury to another; 
(12)  Crowds or pushes any person in any public place; 
(13)  Throws any stone or other missile upon or at any person, vehicle, building, tree, sign or other public or private property; 
(14)  Throws any stone or missile from any vehicle, either moving, stopped, or parked, upon or at any person, building, vehicle, tree, sign or other public or private property; 
(15)  By acts of violence, interferes with another's pursuit of a lawful occupation; 
(16)  Prowls or wanders upon the private property of another, peeks in the door or window of any inhabited building or structure located thereon without visible or lawful business with the owner or occupant thereof; 
(17)  Interrupts the speaker of any lawful assembly or impairs the lawful rights of others to participate effectively in such assembly or meeting when such conduct is calculated to provoke or tends to cause turmoil or disturbance; 
(18)  Frequents any public place with intent to obtain money from other persons by illegal and fraudulent schemes, tricks, artifices or devices; 
(19)  Assembles for the purpose of engaging in any fraudulent scheme, device or trick to obtain any valuable thing in any place or from any person in the city, or who shall aid and abet therein; 
(20)  Displays any deadly weapon in a public place in a manner which is calculated to alarm or frighten other persons present; or 
(21)  Collects in bodies or in crowds for unlawful purposes as defined by any current ordinance of the city. 
(c)  Any person who shall violate any subsection of this section may be charged with the offense of disorderly conduct, and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in section 1-7. 
(Ord. No. 81-5, Amend. 2, 4-3-2017) 
State Law reference— Disorderly conduct generally, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-39. 
Sec. 22-5. - Noise pollution. 
(a)  Purpose. The ordinance from which this section is derived is enacted to protect, preserve and promote the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city through the control of noise. It is the intent of this section to establish standards that will reduce excessive community noises, which are harmful and otherwise detrimental to individuals and to the community in the enjoyment of life and property and in the conduct of business. 
(b)  Sound measurement standards for law enforcement personnel. For the purposes of this section, the term "plainly audible" means any sound emanating from the specific sound-producing sources set forth in this section which can be heard from the distances set forth in this section, using the following sound measurement standards: Measurement shall be by the auditory senses of a person standing at a distance no less than the required minimum distance from the source of the sound. For music and other noise, words and phrases need not be discernable. For music and other noise, bass reverberations are included. 
(c)  Prohibited conduct. 
(1)  Restrictions of 200 feet for 7:00 a.m. through 11:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday and 7:00 a.m. through 12:00 midnight on Friday and Saturday. 
a.  Mechanical sound-making devices. It is unlawful for any person to play, use, operate, or permit to be played, used, or operated any radio receiving device, television, stereo, musical instrument, phonograph sound amplifier or other machines or devices for the producing, reproducing or amplifying of sound and/or noise at such a volume and in such a manner so as to create, or cause to be created, any noises or sounds which are plainly audible at a distance of 200 feet or more from the building, structure or vehicle, or, in the case of real property, beyond the property limits, in which it is located, whichever is farthest, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday and between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight on Friday and Saturday. 
b.  Human-produced sounds. It is unlawful for any person to yell, shout, hoot, whistle, or sing on the public streets or sidewalks or on private property so as to create, or cause to be created, any noises or sounds which are plainly audible at a distance of 200 feet or more from the place, building, structure, or, in the case of real property, beyond the property limits, in which the person is located, whichever is farthest, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday and between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight on Friday and Saturday. 
c.  Commercial advertising. It is unlawful for any person to use, operate, or permit to be used or operated any radio receiving device, musical instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier or other machine or device for the production or reproduction of sound which is cast upon the public streets or other public property for the purpose of commercial advertising or which serves to attract the attention of the public to any building, structure or vehicle in such a manner so as to create, or cause to be created, any noises or sounds which are plainly audible at a distance of 200 feet or more from the source of the sound cast upon the public streets or other public property or from the building, structure, or, in the case of real property, beyond the property limits, in which it is located, whichever is farthest, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday and between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight on Friday and Saturday. 
d.  Party noise. It is unlawful for any person in charge of a party or other social event that occurs on any private property to allow that party or social event to produce noise in such a manner so that such noise is plainly audible at a distance of 200 feet or more from the building or structure from which the noise is emanating, or, in the case of real property, beyond the property limits, on which the party or social event is located, whichever is farthest, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday and between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight on Friday and Saturday. For the purposes of this subsection, the term "person in charge of a party or other social event" means any adult person who resides in or on the premises involved in such party or social event and is present at such party or social event. For the purposes of this subsection, the term "noise" shall mean the same sounds, or any combination thereof, as described in subsections (c)(1)a or b of this section. 
(2)  Restrictions of 100 feet for 11:00 p.m. through 7:00 a.m. Sunday through Thursday and 12:00 midnight through 7:00 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday. 
a.  Mechanical sound-making devices. It is unlawful for any person to play, use, operate, or permit to be played, used, or operated any radio receiving device, television, stereo, musical instrument, phonograph sound amplifier or other machines or devices for the producing, reproducing or amplifying of sound and/or noise at such a volume and in such a manner so as to create, or cause to be created, any noises or sounds which are plainly audible at a distance of 100 feet or more from the building, structure, or motor vehicle or, in the case of real property, beyond the property limits, in which it is located, whichever is farthest, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Sunday through Thursday and between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday. 
b.  Human-produced sound. It is unlawful for any person to yell, shout, hoot, whistle, or sing on the public streets or sidewalks or on private property so as to create, or cause to be created, any noises or sounds which are plainly audible at a distance of 100 feet or more from the place on public streets and sidewalks, or, in the case of private real property, beyond the property limits, on which the person is located, whichever is farthest, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Sunday through Thursday and between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday. 
c.  Commercial advertising. It is unlawful for any person to use, operate, or permit to be used or operated any radio receiving device, musical instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier or other machine or device for the production or reproduction of sound which is cast upon the public streets or other public property for the purpose of commercial advertising or which serves to attract the attention of the public to any building, structure or vehicle in such a manner so as to create, or cause to be created, any noises or sounds which are plainly audible at a distance of 100 feet or more from the source of the sound cast upon the public streets or other public property or from the building, structure, or, in the case of real property, beyond the property limits in which it is located, whichever is farthest, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Sunday through Thursday and between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday. 
d.  Party noise. It is unlawful for any person in charge of a party or other social event that occurs on any private property to allow that party or event to produce noise in such a manner so that such noise is plainly audible at a distance of 100 feet or more from the building or structure from which the party noise is emanating or, in the case of real property, beyond the property limits, on which the party or social event is located, whichever is farthest, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Sunday through Thursday and between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday. For the purposes of this subsection, the term "person in charge of a party or other social event" shall mean any adult person who resides in or on the premises involved in such party or social event and is present at such party or social event. For the purposes of this subsection, the term "noise" means the same sounds, or any combination thereof, as described in subsections (c)(2)a or b of this section. 
(3)  Restrictions for areas within apartments, condominiums, townhouses, duplexes, or other such residential dwelling units. 
a.  Except for persons within commercial enterprises that have an adjoining property line or boundary with a residential dwelling unit, it is unlawful for any person to make, continue, or cause to be made or continued any noise in such a manner as to be plainly audible to any other person a distance of five feet beyond the adjoining property line wall or boundary of any apartment, condominium, townhouse, duplex, or other such residential dwelling units with adjoining points of contact. 
b.  For the purposes of this subsection (c)(3): 
Noise means human-produced sounds of yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, singing, or mechanically-produced sounds made by radio-receiving device, television, stereo, musical instrument, phonograph sound amplifier or other machines or devices for the producing, reproducing, or amplifying of sound, or any combination thereof. 
Property line or boundary means an imaginary line drawn through the points of contact of adjoining apartments, condominiums, townhouses, duplexes or other such residential dwelling units with adjoining points owned, rented, or leased by different persons; or adjoining common areas or adjoining exterior walls. Said property line or boundary includes all points of a plane formed by projecting the property line or boundary including the ceiling, the floor, and the walls. 
(4)  Exclusions. The prohibitions of this section shall not apply to the following: 
a.  Noises and/or sounds caused to be made by manufacturing, governmental, or commercial entities in the normal course of their business. 
b.  Noises and/or sounds emanating from any official University of North Georgia event on University of North Georgia property. 
c.  Noises and/or sounds emanating from any official county board of education event on county board of education property. 
d.  Noises and/or sounds that are permitted by a special event permit pursuant to other city ordinances. 
e.  Noises or sounds made by wireless telecommunication facilities. 
f.  Noises or sounds caused by industrial uses in the industrial (I) zones established in the zoning code. 
g.  Sound volumes produced by radio, tape player, or other mechanical sound making device or instrument from within a motor vehicle on a street or highway, which sound is controlled by O.C.G.A. § 40-6-14. 
h.  Noises or sounds made by law enforcement and other public safety officials performing their public functions. 
i.  Consumer fireworks, as defined under state law, can be used or ignited on any day beginning at 10:00 a.m. and ending at 9:00 p.m. (O.C.G.A. § 25-10-2(b)(3)(B)(i)) . However, consumer fireworks may not be ignited on any day after 9:00 p.m. and before 10:00 a.m. except as permitted in subsection (c)(4)j of this section. 
j.  Consumer fireworks, as defined under state law, ignited on July 3, July 4, and December 31 after 9:00 p.m. and up to 11:59 p.m. and on January 1 after 9:00 p.m. and up to 1:00 a.m. (O.C.G.A. § 25-10-2(b)(3)(B)(iii) and (iv)). 
k.  Consumer fireworks may be ignited under the provisions of a special event permit that designates the additional time and location (O.C.G.A. § 25-10-2(b)(3)(B)(ii) and (b)(3)(D)). 
(5)  Time restrictions on use of landscape maintenance motorized devices such as leaf blowers, lawn mowers, or chainsaws. It is unlawful for any person to use or operate any noise-generating, motorized landscape maintenance devices, including, but not limited to, leaf blowers, lawn mowers, or chainsaws, within any residential zoning district or in areas within 200 feet of any residential zoning district from 8:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m. 
(6)  Animal noises. Between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., it is unlawful for any person to allow noises or sounds made by domestic animals to emanate from their property and to be plainly audible at a distance of 100 feet or more from the building or structure from which the noise is emanating or, in the case of real property, beyond the property limits, on which the animal is located, whichever is farthest. Unlawful sounds include, but are not limited to, loud, persistent, habitual barking, howling, growling, yelping or whining. No person shall be charged with violating this subsection unless written warning has previously been issued within 90 days of the charged violation. 
(7)  Construction noise. 
a.  Between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., construction noise of any type, including, but not limited to, noise caused by the erection (including excavation), demolition, alteration, or repair of any building, as well as the operation of any earth-moving equipment, crane, saw, drill, pile driver, steam shovel, pneumatic hammer, hoist, automatic nailer or stapler, or any similar equipment, shall not be plainly audible within any residential zoning district more than 100 feet beyond the property boundary of the property from which the noise emanates. 
b.  A variance from the above-referenced hours of operation for construction noise may be requested, in writing, at least 48 hours prior to the proposed construction operation, for consideration by the building official. Such a request shall state: 
1.  The reasons that support a claim of urgent need based on specific loss or inconvenience for such a variation from the allowable work hours; 
2.  The impact that the denial of this request would have on the applicant's project and the surrounding properties; 
3.  The steps which have been taken by the applicant to communicate those needs and impacts to owners of surrounding and nearby properties; 
4.  The steps that have or will be taken to limit the impact of the proposed activity upon surrounding and nearby properties; and 
5.  The possible risks to public health and safety. 
If the building official finds that the application adequately demonstrates the urgent need for a variance from the above allowable work hours, adequately provides for mitigation of the impact upon surrounding and nearby properties, and poses no additional risk to public health and safety, then permission shall be granted for a variance to alter the allowable work hours during one ten-day period. The prohibitions of this subsection (7) shall not apply to government road, water, sewer, stormwater construction or maintenance projects or to utility company construction or maintenance projects. 
(8)  Commercial entities near single-family residential zoning districts. 
a.  Notwithstanding any provisions of this section concerning noises and/or sounds caused to be made by commercial entities in the normal course of their business, the provisions and prohibitions of subsections (c)(1)a through c of this section shall apply to noises and/or sounds generated by a commercial entity that are plainly audible within any single-family residential zoning district more than 100 feet beyond the property boundary of the property from which the noises and/or sounds emanate. 
b.  Notwithstanding any provisions of this section concerning noises and/or sounds caused to be made by commercial entities in the normal course of their business, the provisions and prohibitions of subsections (c)(2)a through c of this section shall apply to noises and/or sounds generated by a commercial entity that are plainly audible within any single-family residential zoning district more than 75 feet beyond the property boundary of the property from which the noises and/or sounds emanate. 
(d)  Penalties. Any violation of this section is an infraction and shall be treated as a misdemeanor. The minimum fines for violation shall be $100.00 for a first offense and $200.00 for a second offense. Violations shall be heard in the municipal court. 
(Ord. No. 2002-7, Amend. 1, 12-5-2016) 
Sec. 22-6. - Placement, abandonment, leaving, keeping, or storage of junk and salvage materials. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any owner or resident of any property in the city, other than a person who is a licensed junk dealer, to permit the accumulation on such property of any junk, debris or trash. The term "junk, debris or trash" shall be defined as including any discarded, dismantled, wrecked, scrapped, ruined or junked personal property, including, but not limited to, motor vehicles, wheels, discarded furniture, mattresses, clothing, appliances, machinery, equipment and/or parts thereof. For purposes of this section, a motor vehicle shall be deemed to be discarded, dismantled, wrecked, scrapped, ruined or junked personal property if it is not operational or exhibits any of the following characteristics: flat tires, no tires or wheels, parts missing from the body of the vehicle, or no current tag. 
(b)  Whenever it shall appear to the code enforcement officer or any other authorized member or representative of the city government that subsection (a) of this section is being violated, the officer shall, in writing, notify the owner, occupant or tenant in possession of the land on which the violation exists to abate such violation by removing the material to a conforming location, or into an enclosed garage or other storage building within 15 days of the mailing of the notice. 
(1)  Residential garbage and refuse shall be placed in plastic bags with the tops securely tied and stored in garbage cans or containers approved by the public works director or his designee. 
(2)  Garbage and refuse placed in containers not bagged in plastic will not be collected and the customer will be notified of noncompliance with this section. Persons in the corporate limits of the city shall be provided sanitary containers in which trash, garbage or refuse shall be kept prior to collection by the public works department. 
(c)  If the tenant or owner of the premises on which the violation exists fails to abate the violation within the required time after notice, then the code enforcement officer, by and through agents of the enforcement division, shall abate the violation, charge the cost thereof to the legal owner of the premises, and the legal owner of the premises shall be required, by law, to pay the cost of such abatement to the city. 
(1)  Each day such violation exists 30 days after receipt of notice of initial violation shall be considered a separate offense of violation of this section. 
(2)  Daily inspections of the premises in question will begin within 15 days of the mailing of the notice. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, deposit or otherwise leave trash in dumpsters that are leased and paid for private use, except by the permission of the owner. This prohibition includes dumpsters on government, private, and public property. Only dumpsters marked "For Public Use" shall be used and it shall be unlawful to import household trash to these dumpsters. It shall be unlawful for any person to scavenge or remove solid waste from dumpsters. Trash in these dumpsters is the property of the company providing the service. Each dumpster shall display one sign which shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Notice that the unauthorized use of the dumpster is unlawful. 
(2)  Warning that violators will be prosecuted. 
(e)  Systematic, routine and random inspections of each and every premises within the city will be conducted year round by the code enforcement officer. Any premises found to be in violation of this section shall require abatement pursuant to subsection (c) of this section. 
(f)  Penalties. A violation of this section is an infraction, and shall be treated as a misdemeanor. The minimum fines for the first offense shall be no less than $250.00 and no more than $500.00 for the second offense. Violations shall be heard in the municipal court. 
(Ord. No. 72-2, Amend. 1, §§ 1—6, 2-24-2003) 
Sec. 22-7. - Public urination or defecation. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Public place means any street, alley, public highway or public building, public meeting hall, school, playground, park, restaurant, store, professional office (and waiting rooms used in conjunction therewith), filling station, and public conveyances of all kinds and any other places of like or similar nature which are open to and generally used by the public with the consent, expressed or implied, of the owner of the place or premises. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to urinate or defecate in an undesignated public place as prohibited by this section. 
(c)  A person shall be guilty of urinating or defecating in a public place if he intentionally urinates or defecates in a public place, other than a washroom or toilet room, under circumstances where such act is or could be observed by any member of the public situated in or near a public place. 
(d)  Urinating or defecating in public shall be a misdemeanor and may be enforced by civil citation or by criminal citation. Any person not in compliance with this section shall, upon conviction or admission of guilt, be subject to a fine of $500.00. Each violation shall be considered a separate offense which can be prosecuted separately. 
(Ord. No. 2008-2, 5-5-2008; Ord. No. 2008-2, Amend. 1, 4-3-2017) 
Secs. 22-8—22-31. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ALCOHOL AND DRUGS IN PUBLIC PLACES 

Sec. 22-32. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alcoholic beverage means alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and every liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer, and which contains one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for beverage purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed, or combined with other substances. 
Open container means a bottle, can or other receptacle which has been opened, or a seal broken or the contents partially removed. 
Premises from which alcoholic beverages are sold for off-site consumption means the premises of a retail package off-sale alcoholic beverage licensee licensed under chapter 4. 
(Ord. No. 89-1, § 6.0, 12-4-1989) 
Sec. 22-33. - Consumption or possession of open containers in public places. 
No person may drink any alcoholic beverage or possess an open container of any alcoholic beverage: 
(1)  Upon any public street, alley, sidewalk, parking lot, park or other public property, or within a vehicle (a driver allowing a passenger to possess an open container is guilty of an infraction); 
(2)  On any public school property; 
(3)  In the entrance way to any building, which entrance way is open to view from the public street, unless an exception exists under section 22-37. 
(Ord. No. 89-1, § 1.0, 12-4-1989) 
Sec. 22-34. - Consumption or possession of open container on privately-owned parking lot. 
No person may drink any alcoholic beverage or possess an open container of any alcoholic beverage while upon a privately-owned automobile parking lot to which the public is invited and permitted and open to view from the public street unless an exception exists under section 22-37. 
(Ord. No. 89-1, § 2.0, 12-4-1989) 
Sec. 22-35. - Consumption or possession of open container near premises from which alcoholic beverages are sold. 
(a)  Prohibited activity. No person possessing an open container of any alcoholic beverage may enter, be or remain on premises from which alcoholic beverages are sold for off-site consumption or on the sidewalk or parking lot adjacent to it. This section applies only if notice is posted at the premises as provided in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  Posting. The operator of premises from which alcoholic beverages are sold for off-site consumption shall post clearly visible notices indicating to customers and to other persons using the adjacent parking lot and sidewalk that possessing an open container of alcoholic beverages is prohibited. Each notice shall read substantially as follows: 
"Possession of open container of alcoholic beverage is prohibited. 
Ordinance 89-1, City of Dahlonega." 
The operator shall obtain the approval of the county sheriff's department regarding the size, form, location and number of notices. 
(c)  Exception. This section does not apply to a private residential parking lot which is immediately adjacent to the premises from which alcoholic beverages are sold. 
(Ord. No. 89-1, § 3.0, 12-4-1989) 
Sec. 22-36. - Persons under the influence of liquor or drugs in public prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person under the influence of intoxicating liquor and any drug to willfully appear, remain or be in or on any private premises or in any private house, other than the offender's own residence, to the annoyance of any other person. 
(Ord. No. 89-1, § 4.0, 12-4-1989) 
Sec. 22-37. - Exceptions. 
Sections 22-33 and 22-34 do not apply to a group which has planned an organized event at which alcoholic beverages will be served, provided the group has first applied to and received written consent from the county sheriff. 
(Ord. No. 89-1, § 5.0, 12-4-1989) 
Sec. 22-38. - Violation an infraction. 
A violation of this article is an infraction, and shall be treated as a misdemeanor. The minimum fines for violation shall be $50.00 for a first offense and $100.00 for a second offense. In addition, any offender under age 21 shall be required to perform community service work in the discretion of the municipal court judge. 
(Ord. No. 89-1, § 7.0, 12-4-1989) 
Secs. 22-39—22-66. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLY, DISTURBING THE PEACE AND RELATED OFFENSES 

Sec. 22-67. - Unlawful assembly; failure to disperse. 
It shall be unlawful for any two or more persons, after having assembled on private property of any other person, firm or corporation within the corporate limits of the city in the absence of, and without first having obtained the permission of, the owner, tenant in possession, or person in charge of such private property to assemble thereon, to fail to disperse and cease such assembly upon being directed to do so by any deputy of the county. 
(Ord. No. 94-5, Amend. 1, § 100, 9-6-1994) 
Sec. 22-68. - Disturbing the peace. 
It shall be unlawful for any two or more persons to assemble at any place within the corporate limits of the city and by loud discourse, boisterous conduct, the sounding of one or more motor vehicle horns, or the operation of any other noise-making device disturb the public peace. 
(Ord. No. 94-5, Amend. 1, § 101, 9-6-1994) 
Sec. 22-69. - Miscellaneous disorderly conduct. 
(a)  Vulgar, indecent or profane language as disorderly conduct. Any person who shall use any vulgar, indecent or profane language on any street, road, lane or alley or at any public place within the city, or who shall use any abusive, insulting, offensive, obscene, opprobrious or threatening language to anyone or otherwise act in any disorderly manner within the corporate limits of the city or who shall do any act or use any language or words within the corporate limits of the city which tend to disturb the peace or endanger the morals, safety or health of the citizens of the city, shall be guilty of the offense of disorderly conduct. 
(b)  Acts against the public safety, morality or decency as disorderly conduct. Any person who shall, within the corporate limits of the city, commit an act against the public safety, the public morality or the public decency shall be guilty of the offense of disorderly conduct. 
(c)  Appearance in an intoxicated condition as disorderly conduct. Any person who shall be and appear in an intoxicated condition on any public street, lane or alley, or highway, or within the curtilage of any private residence not in the exclusive possession of the person so intoxicated, or upon any exclusive possession of the person so intoxicated, or upon any public conveyance, or on any fair grounds, ball grounds, show ground or any other place of public gathering or assembly which said drunkenness is caused by the excessive use of intoxicating wines, beers, homebrew, liquors, or any other intoxicating beverage or drugs, shall be guilty of the offense of disorderly conduct. 
(d)  Drunken or intoxicated condition as disorderly conduct. Any person who shall be in a drunken or intoxicated condition within the curtilage of his own home and who shall act in such a disorderly, loud or violent manner as to disturb other citizens of the city, or in such manner as to disturb the good order, peace and welfare of the city, shall be guilty of the offense of disorderly conduct. 
(e)  Unauthorized placing of beer cans, liquor bottles, or containers in public places as disorderly conduct. Any person who shall throw or place any beer cans, liquor bottles, glass bottles or containers, cans, or trash or debris in any public street or highway in the city, or in a city park, shall be guilty of the offense of disorderly conduct. 
(f)  Unauthorized placement of alcoholic beverage containers on private property as disorderly conduct. Any person who shall throw or place any beer cans, liquor bottles or containers, cans or trash or debris on any premises in the city not in the possession of such person or without the consent of the owner and person in possession of same shall be guilty of the offense of disorderly conduct. 
(Ord. No. 94-5, Amend. 1, § 103, 9-6-1994) 
State Law reference— Disorderly conduct, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-39. 
Sec. 22-70. - Disorderly conduct in parking areas; prohibited acts enumerated. 
(a)  Spinning or skidding of wheels in motor vehicles in parking areas and other defined areas located on private property. It shall be unlawful for any person, while on the parking area or lot, or any other part of the premises, of any shopping center or other business establishment providing parking for its patrons, to race the motor of any motor vehicle; to cause the wheels of any motor vehicle to spin; to stop any motor vehicle in such manner as to cause its tires to slide or skid on the surface of such parking area or lot, or other part of said premises; or to cause to be made any loud or unseemly noise which disturbs the peace and tranquility of the city. 
(b)  Use of alcoholic beverages in parking areas. It shall be unlawful for any person to drink beer, wine, intoxicating liquor, or any other alcoholic beverage while on the parking area or lot of any shopping center or other business establishment providing parking for its patrons. 
(c)  Loitering, cruising on premises of shopping centers and business establishments. It shall be unlawful for a group of three or more persons to congregate and linger at any location on the parking area, or lot, or approaches thereto, or on any other part of the premises, of any shopping center or other business establishment providing parking for its patrons. No person shall cruise in a motor vehicle in, or drive a motor vehicle on, onto, or from, the parking area or lot, or any other part of the premises, of any shopping center or other business establishment providing parking for patrons during the hours when the businesses located in such shopping center are closed, during the hours when such other business establishment is closed, for doing business with their patrons, provided that this prohibition shall not apply to owners and employees of such businesses while going to or leaving from work, or otherwise performing duties connected with such businesses. 
(d)  Leaving vehicle unoccupied. It shall be unlawful for any person to park, or cause to be parked, and leave unoccupied any motor vehicle on any parking area or lot, or any other part of the premises, of any shopping center or other business establishment providing parking for its patrons, except with the knowledge and consent of the operators of the business whose patrons are served by the area where such motor vehicle is so parked and left unoccupied, or with the knowledge and consent of the person in charge of the area where such vehicle is so parked and left unoccupied. 
(e)  Duty to erect warning signs. The owner or lessee of the parking area or lot of every shopping center, and of every other business establishment providing a parking area for its patrons of sufficient size to encourage loitering or cruising in motor vehicles in such area, shall post within 30 days of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived on or immediately adjacent to such parking lot or area, and in a conspicuous location, one or more signs bearing the following legend: 
Customer parking only. 
Loitering in this area is prohibited by city ordinance 94-5. 
(Ord. No. 94-5, Amend. 1, § 104, 9-6-1994) 
State Law reference— Disorderly conduct, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-39. 
Sec. 22-71. - Definition of offense; fines and penalties. 
(a)  Failure to obey is an offense. When any person causes or commits any of the conditions enumerated in this article, any county law enforcement officer shall order that person to stop causing or committing such conditions and to move on or disperse. Any person who fails or refuses to obey such orders shall be guilty of a violation of this article. 
(b)  Fines and penalties. Any person or corporation who violates any provision of this article shall be subject to a fine not exceeding $250.00 or by imprisonment not exceeding 30 days, or both. Any such violation shall constitute a separate offense on each successive day continued. 
(Ord. No. 94-5, Amend. 1, § 105, 9-6-1994) 
Chapter 24 - PARKS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— General authority relative to parks, O.C.G.A. §§ 36-37-6, 36-37-6.1, 36-34-3. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 24-1—24-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PUBLIC CONDUCT IN PARKS 

Sec. 24-19. - Hancock Park, City Park and Anthony Park curfew. 
The city council has determined that there will be a curfew set for Hancock Park, City Park and Anthony Park to prevent violence and crime by persons utilizing the park within the evening hours. 
(Ord. No. 2004-05, Amend. 1, § 1, 2-2-2015) 
Sec. 24-20. - Conduct prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter, wander, stroll, or otherwise be on or within the grounds of Hancock Park, City Park and Anthony Park between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. from April 1, until October 31, and between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. from November 1, until March 31, except as permitted by formal written permission of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2004-05, Amend. 1, § 2, 2-2-2015) 
Sec. 24-21. - Penalty for violation. 
Each offense under this article shall be punishable as a misdemeanor via citation to the municipal court of the city, and each offense shall incur a fine of $100.00. 
(Ord. No. 2004-05, Amend. 1, § 3, 2-2-2015) 
Sec. 24-22. - Other park policies and fees. 
Other park policies and fees shall be as established by the city and on file with the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 2004-05, Amend. 1, § 4, 2-2-2015) 
Chapter 26 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.; local and regional solid waste plans, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-31.1; hazardous waste disposal, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-60 et seq.; littering, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-42 et seq.; transporting garbage or waste across state or county boundaries pursuant to contract, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-16; Resource Recovery Development Authorities Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-63-1 et seq.; securing loads on vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-248.1; littering highways, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-249. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 26-1—26-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL GENERALLY 

Sec. 26-19. - Definitions of refuse, garbage, and household waste. 
For the purpose of this article, the word "refuse," the word "garbage," and the phrase "household waste" shall include all items of solid waste which are not newspapers, newsprint, limbs, leaves, trees, brush, and other vegetative matter. 
(Ord. No. 94-7, 8-1-1994) 
Sec. 26-20. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to regulate the placement and separation of solid waste in such a manner as to make collection timely and cost effective. 
(Ord. No. 94-7, 8-1-1994) 
Sec. 26-21. - Conditions for collection. 
The following conditions for collection shall apply: 
(1)  Refuse will be picked up only at the curbside. 
(2)  All newspaper/newsprint will be bundled separately and placed next to the household waste (refuse or garbage) on the curb. The city will attempt to recycle newspapers and newsprint in order to reduce the cost of waste collection, save trees, and save space in the landfill. 
(3)  The customer may maintain his own containers and shall have on his premises not more than three containers each having a capacity of not more than 30 gallons. 
(4)  The customer who generates more than 180 gallons of total refuse per week shall use a city-owned rear-loading container. 
(5)  No business or business owner within the historic or business districts of the city is allowed to place any refuse or garbage in any receptacle facing a city street, unless said garbage is placed in a city-owned, rear-loading container. 
(6)  The city shall charge customers under the schedule of rates established by the city. 
Sec. 26-22. - Penalties for non-payment. 
A penalty of ten percent will be added each month to any delinquent bill that has not been paid by the tenth of each month. 
(Ord. No. 94-7, Amend. 11, exh. A, 10-6-2008; Ord. No. 94-7, Amend. 12, exh. A, 1-5-2015; Ord. No. 94-7, Amend. 13, 2016; Ord. No. 94-7, Amend. 14, 4-3-2017) 
Sec. 26-23. - Penalty. 
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed $100.00. 
(Ord. No. 94-7, 8-1-1994) 
Secs. 26-24—26-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - YARD MAINTENANCE, GRASS HEIGHT AND YARD TRIMMING DISPOSAL 

Sec. 26-50. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commercial solid waste means all types of solid waste generated by stores, offices, restaurants, warehouses and other non-manufacturing activities, excluding residential and industrial wastes. 
Composting means the controlled biological decomposition of organic matter into a stable, odor-free humus. 
Deleterious unhealthful growth means any invasive species of plant, whether indigenous or nonindigenous which, due to its natural growth, spreads easily onto adjacent properties and cannot be easily controlled. 
Improved lot means any lot or parcel of land upon which a residential or commercial structure is located. 
Municipal solid waste means any solid waste derived from households, including garbage, trash and sanitary waste in septic tanks and includes solid waste from single-family and multi-family residences, hotels, motels, bunkhouses, campgrounds, picnic grounds, and day use recreation areas. The term "municipal solid waste" includes yard trimmings and commercial solid waste, but does not include solid waste from mining, agricultural or silvacultural operations or industrial processes or operations. 
Municipal solid waste disposal facility means any facility or location where the final deposition of any amount of municipal solid waste occurs, whether or not mixed with commercial or industrial solid waste, including, but not limited to, municipal solid waste landfills. 
Municipal solid waste landfill means a disposal facility where any amount of municipal solid waste, whether or not mixed with commercial waste, industrial waste, non-hazardous sludges or small quantity generator hazardous waste, is disposed of by means of placing an approved cover thereon. 
Undergrowth means low-growing plants, saplings, shrubs or vegetation of any kind which grow beneath trees in a wooded or partially-wooded area of any parcel or tract of land. 
Untrimmed grass means grass that exceeds 12 inches in height on any property with improvements located thereon; or exceeding 18 inches in height on any unimproved vacant lot or parcel of land; or exceeding 18 inches in height for any other property which does not fall into either of the two categories specifically addressed in this definition. 
Weeds means jimson, burdock, ragweed, thistle cocklebur, dandelion or other unsightly growths of a like kind. 
Wooded areas means those tracts or parcels of land or portions of improved lots which consist of a dense growth of trees which exceed three inches in diameter. 
Yard trimmings means leaves, brush, grass clippings, shrub and tree pruning, discarded Christmas trees, nursery and greenhouse vegetative residuals, and vegetative matter resulting from landscaping development and maintenance, other than mining, agricultural and silvacultural operations. 
(Ord. No. 96-4, Amend. 1, § 1, 12-2-2013) 
Sec. 26-51. - Yard maintenance and grass height. 
(a)  From and after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, it shall be unlawful for the owner of any lot, parcel, or area of land within the city, or the agent of such owner, or tenant of an owner, or other occupant of the premises, to permit on such lot, parcel or area of land, to have, place or allow to be placed any of the following on such premises, including the front, side or rear yard, sidewalk or right-of-way: 
(1)  Any accumulation of offensive matter or odor, including, but not limited to, overgrown or dead or decayed trees, dead organic matter, rubbish, garbage, animal intestinal waste and urine, and toxic or otherwise hazardous liquids and substances and material. 
(2)  Dead plant material piled such that it emits objectionable and foul odors or presents a haven for rodents, snakes, rats, mice or other vermin. 
(3)  Any condition that would create or provide a harborage for mice, rats, snakes, rodents or other vermin. 
(4)  Dead trees, shrubs or other plant materials which if they should fall, would present a safety hazard to adjacent public or private property. 
(5)  Any vegetation which, because of its characteristics of growth, spreads onto adjacent property and cannot be controlled. 
(6)  Grass, weeds or undergrowth that exceed 12 inches or more in height on any tract, lot or parcel of land upon which a residential or commercial structure is built. 
(7)  Grass, weeds or undergrowth that exceed 18 inches in height on any unimproved vacant tract, lot or parcel of land. 
(8)  Grass, weeds or undergrowth that exceed 18 inches in height on any tract, lot or parcel of land other than those described in this section. 
(9)  A swimming pool, pond, stream, or other body of water which is abandoned, unattended, unfiltered, stagnant, or not otherwise maintained, resulting in the water becoming polluted. 
(b)  All clotheslines and other outdoor clothes-drying equipment shall be placed and maintained in only the rear yard of a residence or other residential property. In no instance shall clothes, sheets, towels or other household materials be hung from any object other than a clothesline or other outdoor drying equipment. The placement or hanging of clothes, sheets, towels or other household materials on fences, cars, hand railings, decks, porches, playgrounds or other similar objects shall be considered a violation of this article. 
(c)  Except as set forth in section 26-52, it is unlawful to clean or maintain private property located in the city by blowing, raking or otherwise moving objects, debris, yard waste or other items onto adjoining property, the right-of-way or the street. 
(d)  Both the occupant and the owner of the premises shall be liable for compliance with the provisions of this article, and shall be responsible for violations thereof. Lease of property of an owner which purports to transfer responsibility for this provision shall be ineffective in shielding the owner for responsibility under this provision, and such owner shall remain liable along with the occupant of the leased premises. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing, for the purposes of this section, wooded areas shall be exempt from the requirements of subsections (a)(6) through (8) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 96-4, Amend. 1, § 2, 12-2-2013) 
Sec. 26-52. - Placement and disposal of yard trimmings; weeds, untrimmed grass, deleterious growths prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to place or mix yard trimmings with municipal solid waste within the city. 
(b)  Yard trimmings shall not be disposed at any solid waste disposal facility within the city. 
(c)  No owner or tenant of any lot, parcel or area of land within the city limits shall permit on such tract, lot, parcel or area of land, or upon any sidewalk abutting the same, any weeds, untrimmed grass, deleterious or unhealthful growths or other debris of any kind which may impair the visibility of persons using the public streets or which may constitute an impediment on or overhanging the sidewalks along any of the streets of the city. 
(d)  Yard trimmings shall be sorted and stored in the following manner: 
(1)  Residential brush and tree limbs shall be limited to one collection per week per address. 
(2)  Residential brush and tree limbs will be collected at the curbside by the city and chipped into mulch. The city will only collect brush and tree limbs created by the property owner or tenant of the property. The city will not collect brush or tree limbs from commercial properties, institutional properties or trimmings created by professional lawn or tree services. 
(3)  Tree limbs shall be limited to no larger than six inches in diameter and no longer than four feet in length. No brush pile shall exceed an area of 24 square feet. Grass clippings and other material too small for chipping must be composted by the property owner or tenant thereof and properly disposed. 
(4)  Leaves will be collected at the curbside or street side by the city and disposed of by the city. 
(Ord. No. 96-4, Amend. 1, § 3, 12-2-2013) 
Sec. 26-53. - Penalties. 
(a)  Violation of any of the provisions of this article shall be punishable as a misdemeanor in the municipal court and each day of noncompliance shall constitute a separate violation. 
(b)  A violation of this article is an infraction, and shall be treated as a misdemeanor. The minimum fine for each offense shall be no less than $250.00 and no more than $500.00 and/or jail time not to exceed 30 days for each subsequent offense. 
(Ord. No. 96-4, Amend. 1, § 4, 12-2-2013) 
Chapter 28 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal street systems, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-90 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 28-1. - Sidewalk displays or events. 
(a)  Sidewalk displays or events may occur only as approved by the city as a part of the official calendar. Sidewalk displays may include those activities that take place on an approved closed street. 
(b)  Sidewalk display applications can be obtained from the office of the city manager, but must be returned to the city manager's office consistent with the terms of the application as to time limit for return specified therein. 
(c)  Public safety and pedestrian movement shall be maintained at all times during such displays or events. At no time shall the occurrence of such activities reduce that portion of any sidewalk customarily used by pedestrians to less than five feet in width. 
(d)  No business licensed to operate in the city may display items for sale, or place advertising signs on the sidewalks and/or public rights-of-way within the downtown area unless the selling or the sign is approved and is a part of the official calendar. 
(e)  Sidewalk displays are permitted on a temporary basis only and may not continue for longer than the period of time approved as a part of the application to be included on the official calendar. 
(f)  Any sidewalk display involving the sale of products or services conducted by any person or organization not having a current business license from the city must first secure a peddler's license from the city manager's office before being approved on the official calendar. 
(Ord. No. 77-1, Amend. 4, § 10, 7-5-1988) 
Secs. 28-2—28-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CURBS, SIDEWALKS, AND DRIVEWAYS 

Sec. 28-21. - Permits. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to construct, reconstruct, alter, remove and/or replace any curb, curb and gutter, sidewalk, or driveway on public property within the city without first having obtained a permit from the building inspector. All such construction, reconstruction, alteration, removal or replacement shall be under supervision of the city engineer and in accordance with the specifications hereinafter provided. 
(1)  Plan; application. Before a permit shall be issued, the abutting property owner or his duly authorized agent shall submit an application showing the location, design and layout of the proposed improvement. 
(2)  Issuance of permit. When such written application and plan has been duly submitted and the fee hereinafter is paid, the building inspector shall issue a permit for such improvement, provided the plan showing the location, design, layout and specification shall conform with the basic standards, specification, details and designs hereinafter made and provided; and, provided further, that said application has been approved by the city engineer. 
(3)  Fee. A fee as established by the city shall be charged by the building inspector at the time any application for a permit as herein required is made, and such sum shall be paid into the general fund of the city. Provided, however, where the general contractor constructs and pours his own drives or sidewalks provided for herein, there shall be no necessity for a separate permit fee for such purposes; provided further, however, the actual pouring for such drives or sidewalks shall be done at a time when the building inspector is making his regular inspection of the improvements being erected thereon. 
(4)  Inner curbing. Whenever the term "inner curbing" is used in this article, it shall mean only that portion of the curbing required herein along driveways and sidewalks and not constituting the curb which borders and marks the margin of the street designated and constructed for vehicular traffic. 
(Ord. No. 85-5, § A, 8-5-1985) 
Sec. 28-22. - Use of term "city engineer." 
At all times within the body of this article where the term "city engineer" is used, that term shall apply to such individual as may be designated by the city manager to act as city engineer. This individual may be the building inspector in some circumstances or such other person as may be so designated in the discretion of the city manager for the particular work envisioned. 
(Ord. No. 85-5, § D, 8-5-1985) 
Secs. 28-23—28-47. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FARMERS MARKET 

Sec. 28-48. - Short title. 
This article shall be referred to as the "Farmers Market Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 2001-7, § 1, 7-2-2001) 
Sec. 28-49. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
City council or council means the governing authority of the City of Dahlonega, Georgia. 
City park means the city park located on Warwick Street. 
Locally grown goods or locally produced goods means such goods or products as shall be grown in Lumpkin County, or in any county contiguous to Lumpkin County, which goods are sold at the farmers market by those persons or any member of the family of those persons who are substantially responsible for growing or producing said goods or products. In no event shall any goods which have been previously purchased from another source be permitted to be sold at the Dahlonega-Lumpkin County Farmers Market. 
Market or farmers market means the Dahlonega-Lumpkin County Farmers Market as operated and where located as provided herein. 
Vendor means any person who participates in the farmers market by the selling of goods or products therein. 
(Ord. No. 2001-7, § 2, 7-2-2001) 
Sec. 28-50. - Hours and days of operation. 
The farmers market hours and days of operation shall be specified at the administrative level by city staff, with the city council being notified of any changes. 
(Ord. No. 2001-7, § 3, 7-2-2001; Ord. No. 2001-7, Amend. 1, 5-6-2002; Ord. No. 2001-7, Amend. 2, 5-6-2002; Ord. No. 2001-7, Amend. 3, 2-16-2012) 
Sec. 28-51. - Location; non-liability of city. 
The farmers market shall operate at the location specified at the administrative level by city staff, with the city council being notified of any changes. The city shall have no liability for any injury to the person or property of any vendor, member of a vendor's family, customer, or any other person, arising from the operation of the farmer's market. The place of operation for the farmers market may be relocated at any time by subsequent decision of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2001-7, § 4, 7-2-2001) 
Sec. 28-52. - Vendor space. 
Vendors with the farmers market shall be allotted approximately ten feet by ten feet, with truck sales only by special arrangement with city staff. Farmers will be responsible for leaving their allotted space clean and free of debris. 
(Ord. No. 2001-7, § 5, 7-2-2001; Ord. No. 2001-7, Amend. 3, 2-16-2012) 
Sec. 28-53. - Permit. 
Each vendor shall be required to obtain a permit issued by a member of the city staff at a cost as established by the city for each 30-day permit issued. Each vendor shall be required to display his permit in a prominent position at his assigned market space while such vendor is doing business at the farmers market. 
(Ord. No. 2001-7, § 6, 7-2-2001; Ord. No. 2001-7, Amend. 3, 2-16-2012) 
Sec. 28-54. - Compliance with state requirements. 
Nonexempt locally produced products sold at the farmers market are subject to compliance with the state department of agriculture food processing safety guidelines. 
(Ord. No. 2001-7, Amend. 3, 2-16-2012) 
Sec. 28-55. - Assignment and maintenance of vendor spaces. 
Market spaces will be assigned to vendors on a "first come, first serve" basis. Each vendor shall be responsible for maintaining his assigned market space in a clean and orderly manner and shall leave the assigned space clean and free of debris during sale hours and prior to departing after sale hours. Failure to properly maintain a market space may result in suspension of such vendor's permit to do business in the farmers market. 
(Ord. No. 2001-7, § 7, 7-2-2001) 
Sec. 28-56. - Goods for sale to be locally grown or locally produced; vendor affidavit. 
The goods and products sold at the farmers market must be locally grown or locally produced goods or products of high quality. Each participating vendor, upon making application for a vendor's license, shall sign a statement affirming that all goods or products which such vendor intends to sell are locally grown or locally produced goods as defined in section 28-49. 
(Ord. No. 2001-7, § 8, 7-2-2001) 
Sec. 28-57. - Dispute process. 
All questions, problems or disputes concerning the interpretation or enforcement of this article shall be directed to the city council to be heard at the next regular meeting of the council following receipt of written notice by the individual requesting clarification and/or a final decision or interpretation. 
(Ord. No. 2001-7, § 9, 7-2-2001) 
Secs. 28-58—28-87. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SPECIAL EVENTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 28-88—28-117. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PICKETING 

Sec. 28-118. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Picket or picketing means to make a public display or demonstration of sentiment for or against a person or cause, including protesting, which may include the distribution of leaflets or handbills, the display of signs and any oral communication or speech, which may involve an effort to persuade or influence, including all expressive and symbolic conduct, whether active or passive. 
Sidewalk means that portion of the street right-of-way which is designated for the use of pedestrians and may be paved or unpaved and shall include easements and rights-of-ways. 
Street means the entire width between property or right-of-way lines of every way or place of whatever nature, when any part thereof is open to the use of the public as a matter or right, for the purposes of vehicular traffic, including that portion that is known as the shoulder of the roadway and the curb. The terms "highway" and "street" and their cognates are synonymous as used herein. 
(Ord. No. 2009-9, art. I, 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 28-119. - Notice of intent to picket. 
(a)  Notification required. The organizer of a picket that the organizer knows, or should reasonably know, that will be by a group of 20 or more individuals shall give notice of intent to picket to the county sheriff and the city manager or their designees at least 48 hours before the beginning of the picket. The notice of intent to picket shall include the following information: 
(1)  The name, address and contact telephone number for the organizer of the picket; 
(2)  The name, address and contact telephone number of the person giving notice of intent to picket if different from the organizer; 
(3)  The name of the organization or group sponsoring the picket; 
(4)  The location where the picket is to take place; 
(5)  The date and time the picket will begin and end; and 
(6)  The anticipated number of participants, and the basis of which this estimate is made. 
(b)  Receipt of notification. Upon notice of intent to picket given in accordance with subsection (a) of this section, the city manager or his designee shall immediately issue a receipt of notice. The receipt shall contain all information stated in the notice. The organizer of a picket shall be responsible for maintaining the receipt, and shall present it when so requested by a law enforcement officer or other city official. 
(c)  Violation. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2009-9, art. I, 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 28-120. - Picketing regulations. 
(a)  Picketing may be conducted on public sidewalks or other city-owned property normally used or reserved for pedestrian movement and shall not be conducted on the portion of the public roadway used primarily for vehicular traffic. 
(b)  Notwithstanding subsection (a) of this section, picketing may not be conducted: 
(1)  At a city-controlled park or on other property during a festival that has been permitted at that particular property or when that property has been otherwise reserved for private use; 
(2)  On a median strip; or 
(3)  Within 200 feet of a dwelling or building which is the focus or target of a protest or gathering. 
(c)  Picketing shall not disrupt, block, obstruct or interfere with pedestrian or vehicular traffic or the free passage of pedestrian or vehicular traffic into any driveway, pedestrian entrance, or other access to buildings, which abut the public sidewalks. 
(d)  Written or printed placards or signs, flags, or banners carried by individuals engaged in picketing and/or carried on the sidewalks or other city-owned areas shall not exceed three square feet as to allow safe and unobstructed passage of pedestrian or vehicular traffic. The staff or pole on which a sign, flag, or banner may be carried shall be made of corrugated material, plastic, or wood, and shall not exceed 40 inches in length and shall not be made of metal or metal alloy. If made of wood, the staff or pole shall be no greater than three-fourths inch in diameter at any point. A staff or pole must be blunt at both ends. 
(e)  If more than one group of picketers desire to picket at the same time at or near the same location, law enforcement officers may, without regard to the purpose or content of the message, assign each group a place to picket in order to preserve the public peace. Members of a group shall not enter an area assigned to another group. Priority of location shall be based upon which group of picketers arrived first. 
(f)  Spectators of pickets shall not physically interfere with individuals engaged in picketing. Picketers and spectators of pickets shall not speak fighting words or threats that would tend to provoke a reasonable person to a breach of the peace. 
(g)  Picketers and picketing shall be subject to all applicable local, state and federal laws. 
(h)  Nothing in this section prohibits a law enforcement officer from issuing a command to disperse in the event of a riot or disorderly conduct, or otherwise enforce local and state law. 
(i)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2009-9, art. I, 11-2-2009) 
Secs. 28-121—28-138. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PUBLIC ASSEMBLIES AND PARADES 

Sec. 28-139. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Appeals official means the city manager, or his designee. 
Demonstration means a public display of sentiment for or against a person or cause, including protesting. 
Festival means a concert, fair, exhibit, promotion, community event, block party, or similar event. 
Parade means an athletic event, march, ceremony, pageant, procession or other similar activity consisting of persons, animals, vehicles or things, or any combination thereof, that disrupts the normal flow of traffic upon any public street. A funeral procession is not a parade. 
Permit official means the person designated by the city manager as being responsible for issuing permits under this division. The city manager may designate different persons as the permit official for different categories of permitted events and for different facilities or locations. 
Public assembly means: 
(1)  A festival or demonstration which is reasonably anticipated to obstruct the normal flow of traffic upon any public street and that is collected together in one place; and 
(2)  A festival on any city-controlled park. 
(Ord. No. 2009-9, art. II, 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 28-140. - Public assembly and parade permits. 
(a)  Permit required. No public assembly or parade is permitted unless a permit allowing such activity has been obtained pursuant to this section. 
(b)  Permit application. An application for a public assembly or parade permit shall be made in writing on a form prescribed by the permit official at least 30 days before the commencement of the event. Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, the permit official shall consider an application that is filed less than 30 days before the commencement of the proposed event where the purpose of such event is a spontaneous response to a current event, or where other good and compelling causes are shown. The permit official shall rule on the application within four business days from its receipt. If the permit official fails to issue such a ruling, the application is deemed granted. 
(c)  The application must contain the following: 
(1)  The name, address, and telephone number for the person in charge of the proposed event and the name of the organization with which that person is affiliated or on whose behalf the person is applying (collectively applicant); 
(2)  The name, address, and telephone number for an individual who shall be designated as the responsible planner and on-site manager for the event; 
(3)  The date, time, place, and route of the proposed event, including the location and time that the event will begin to assemble and disband, and any requested street closings; 
(4)  The anticipated number of persons and vehicles, and the basis on which this estimate is made; 
(5)  A list of the number and type of animals that will be at the event and all necessary health certificates for such animals; 
(6)  Such other information, attachments, and submissions that are requested on the application form; and 
(7)  Payment of a nonrefundable application fee. 
(d)  Permitting criteria. To the extent permitted by law, an application may be denied if the applicant or the person on whose behalf the application for permit was made has, on prior occasions, made material misrepresentations regarding the nature or scope of an event or activity previously permitted or has violated the terms of prior permits issued to or on behalf of the applicant. An application for permit may also be denied for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  The application for permit (including any required attachments and submissions) is not fully completed and executed; 
(2)  The applicant has not tendered the required application fee or has not tendered other required user fees, indemnification agreements, insurance certificates, or security deposits within times prescribed; 
(3)  The application contains a material falsehood or misrepresentation; 
(4)  The applicant is legally incompetent to contract or to sue and be sued; 
(5)  The applicant has on prior occasions made material misrepresentations regarding the nature or scope of an event; 
(6)  The applicant has previously violated the terms of a public assembly or parade permit issued to or on behalf of the applicant; 
(7)  The applicant has on prior occasions damaged city property and has not paid in full for such damage or has other outstanding and unpaid debts to the city; 
(8)  A fully executed prior application for the same time and place has been received, and a permit has been or will be granted to a prior applicant authorizing uses or activities which do not reasonably permit multiple simultaneous events; 
(9)  The proposed event would conflict with previously planned programs organized, conducted, or sponsored by the city and previously scheduled at or near the same time and place; 
(10)  The proposed event would present an unreasonable danger to the public health or safety; 
(11)  The proposed event would substantially or unnecessarily interfere with traffic; 
(12)  The event would likely interfere with the movement of emergency equipment and police protection in areas contiguous or in the vicinity of the event; 
(13)  There would not, at the time of the event, be sufficient law enforcement and traffic control officers to adequately protect participants and non-participants from traffic-related hazards in light of the other demands for police protection at the time of the proposed event; 
(14)  The applicant has not complied or cannot comply with applicable licensure requirements, ordinances or regulations concerning the sale or offering for sale of any goods or services; 
(15)  The use or activity intended by the applicant is prohibited by law; 
(16)  For non-First Amendment protected public assemblies or parades, the following criteria shall also apply: 
a.  The cultural and/or educational significance of the event; 
b.  The extent to which the event contributes to the economic revitalization and business development of the city; 
c.  The impact and/or cost of the event to the city support service; 
d.  The impact of the event to the public health, safety and welfare; 
e.  The impact of the event on business and resident populations within or adjacent to the proposed event site; 
f.  The evaluation of any previous event produced by the event organizer with regard to planning, quality, public safety, and payment of invoices; and 
g.  The frequency and timing of the event or similar events. 
Unless subject to subsection (c)(16) of this section, nothing in this section shall authorize the permit official to deny a permit based upon political, social, or religious grounds or reasons, or based upon the content of the views expressed. The permit official may attach reasonable conditions to any permit approval. 
(e)  Costs and fees. 
(1)  The applicant shall be responsible for hiring and paying off-duty law enforcement officers, or reimbursing the city for the costs of providing on-duty law enforcement officers, to appropriately police street closures. For festivals, the applicant shall be additionally responsible for hiring and paying off-duty law enforcement officers, or reimbursing the city for the costs of providing on-duty law enforcement officers, to provide internal festival security and for hiring and paying necessary emergency medical technicians. 
(2)  The permit official, in consultation with the county sheriff's office, shall determine the number of officers needed to appropriately police street closures and for internal security, and the number of emergency medical technicians needed, and the time when such services shall commence and end, taking into consideration the following: 
a.  The proposed location for the special event or route of the parade; 
b.  The time of day that the public assembly or parade is to take place; 
c.  The date and day of the week proposed; 
d.  The general traffic conditions in the area requested, both vehicular and pedestrian. Special attention is given to the rerouting of the vehicles or pedestrians normally using the requested area; 
e.  The number of marked and unmarked intersections along the route requested, together with the traffic control devices present; 
f.  If traffic must be completely rerouted from the area, then the number of marked and unmarked intersections and the traffic control devices are to be taken into consideration; 
g.  The estimated number of participants; 
h.  The estimated number of viewers; 
i.  The nature, composition, format, and configuration of the special event or parade; 
j.  The anticipated weather conditions; 
k.  The estimated time for the special event or parade; 
l.  For festivals, whether alcohol will be served, live music offered, or retail sales stations provided, and the number and location of the alcohol service stands, music stages, and retail stands. 
(3)  In addition, the applicant shall reimburse the city for the costs of providing street and sidewalk cleaning, trash receptacle placement, trash removal, and trash disposal. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provisions of this section or to violate any term or condition of a permit issued pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. No. 2009-9, art. II, 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 28-141. - Public assembly and parade regulations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to unreasonably hamper, obstruct, impede, or interfere with a public assembly or parade, or with any person, vehicle, or animal participating or used in the public assembly or parade. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the operator of a motor vehicle to drive between vehicles or persons comprising a parade when such vehicles or persons are in motion and are conspicuously designated as a parade. 
(c)  Spectators of a public assembly or parade and persons attending or participating in a public assembly or parade picketing shall be subject to all applicable local, state and federal laws. 
(d)  Nothing in this section prohibits a law enforcement officer from issuing a command to disperse in the event of a riot or disorderly conduct or otherwise enforce the local and state laws. 
(Ord. No. 2009-9, art. II, 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 28-142. - Ancillary permits. 
During the time in which municipally permitted festivals, events, and parades are being conducted within the city, an ancillary permit fee shall be charged in the amount established by the city to certain persons or entities seeking to operate booths or exhibits out of doors or outside the permit area reserved for the person or entity which the permit under this division is issued. An ancillary permit shall be charged to any such person other than: 
(1)  A merchant, entity or individual who is supervised and approved by a permittee under the terms of a validly issued city permit issued under this division; or 
(2)  A merchant, entity or individual operating under and in conformity with a regular validly issued city occupation tax license at the location identified on said license and in compliance with all zoning codes and regulations of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2009-9, art. II, 11-2-2009) 
Secs. 28-143—28-167. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FILM PERMITS 

Sec. 28-168. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Applicant means the individual applying for a permit, who is legally authorized to bind the producer. 
Application means the document created by the North Georgia Film Office (NGFO) that must be completed and submitted to the NGFO by a producer or the producer's authorized representative, in order to request a permit. 
Change request means the document created by the NGFO that must be completed and submitted to the NGFO by a producer or the producer's authorized representative in order to request a material change to a permit. 
Department of purview means the city department that decides or recommends to the NGFO whether to allow an aspect of filming that is within the department's operational responsibilities. 
Director means the director of the North Georgia Film Office, who shall be appointed by the city manager. 
Element means an activity that is listed in section 28-173. 
Entertainment industry work means the production of motion pictures, television series, commercials, music videos, interactive games and animation, where the final product is intended to be commercially released and/or commercially distributed. 
Filming means creating motion picture images on public property, including the on-site/on-location pre-production activities associated therewith, where the final product is intended to be commercially released and/or commercially distributed. The term "filming" does not include activities performed as part of: 
(1)  Documenting current affairs; or 
(2)  Producing newscasts. 
In addition, the term "filming" does not include location scouting. 
NGFO means the North Georgia Film Office. 
Permit means a permit validly issued by the NGFO director that authorizes filming and the elements contained therein, if any. 
Producer means an individual, organization, corporation or any other entity that is ultimately responsible for the filming that is the subject of the application and the permit (where applicable). 
Public property means real property owned by the city or for which the city is a lessee, including, without limitation, parks, streets, sidewalks, other rights-of-way, and buildings. Public property shall not include real property which is being leased by the city to a lessee. 
Traffic control plan means a drawing that is submitted with a request for a sidewalk, lane and or street closure that details the location of the closures, the alternative routes that will be utilized for the detoured vehicular and/or pedestrian traffic, and the mechanisms (including without limitation barricades and signage and the locations thereof) for implementing the closures and alternatives. 
(Ord. No. 2016-1, Amend. 1, § I, 6-6-2016) 
Sec. 28-169. - Purpose and intent. 
The intent of the city in adopting the ordinance from which this article is derived is to facilitate entertainment industry work performed in the city while safeguarding the interests of the city's residents and businesses. This article creates the city's North Georgia Film Office which will be dedicated to responding to the needs and issues pertaining to entertainment industry work. The article simplifies the permitting requirements associated with filming by enabling entertainment industry professionals to obtain required city approvals through the NGFO rather than through numerous individual departments. It strengthens the city's ability to anticipate and provide adequate services for the multiple filming projects throughout the city. It also enhances the city's ability to accommodate unanticipated circumstances and requested changes. The NGFO similarly will respond to the needs of the city's neighborhoods regarding entertainment industry work and will promote community awareness of the entertainment industry's impact upon the city's economic development. This article furthers the city's commitment to being a best-in-class location to work and to live. 
(Ord. No. 2016-1, Amend. 1, § II, 6-6-2016) 
Sec. 28-170. - Office of entertainment as resource and liaison. 
The North Georgia Film Office will serve as a resource for the city's residents and businesses, providing information upon request about current or scheduled filming, helping to resolve problems that arise from entertainment industry work, and acting as a liaison between residents, businesses and the entertainment industry to address inconvenience experienced generally and with regard to a specific project. The NGFO will also serve as an ambassador to the entertainment industry, providing information, answering questions, helping to resolve challenges and facilitating the industry's work in the city and nearby jurisdictions. The NGFO will offer a "hotline" to receive and respond to complaints and concerns after normal business hours; the hotline will be available to the city's residents and businesses and to the industry. The office will implement other mechanisms that enhance the experience of all people performing and affected by entertainment industry work, which may include an informational webpage and online permitting. While permits are required for entertainment industry work that occurs on public property only, the North Georgia Film Office will be a resource and liaison for all entertainment industry work, including work that occurs on private property. 
(Ord. No. 2016-1, Amend. 1, § III, 6-6-2016) 
Sec. 28-171. - Permits for filming. 
(a)  Any producer that wishes to perform filming must first obtain a filming permit. No filming permit is required unless the entertainment industry work is performed on public property. 
(b)  Filming permits shall be issued by the NGFO director. Permits shall be issued to the producer. 
(c)  A permit will specify the filming that may occur at a particular location at a particular time. The permit will authorize elements to be performed as part of the filming, provided that the elements have been approved by the department of purview. After receiving a permit, a producer may request modifications to the permit as described in section 28-175(a). 
(d)  Where the filming application includes a request to close a city street, lane and/or sidewalk, the request shall be evaluated under and the closure must comply with section 28-179 and with all other sections and subsections of this Code that are applicable to the filming at issue. 
(e)  A producer that receives a permit is responsible for knowing and complying with all other laws, including other ordinances and regulations, that establish prerequisites, authorizations and other required permissions applicable to the filming. 
(f)  Where permitted filming includes advertising signs or other displays of commercial speech, the signs and/or displays must be removed upon the expiration of the permit. 
(g)  Notwithstanding any other part of this Code, any producer that performs filming without receiving a permit violates the material terms of a permit, or is otherwise in violation of this article shall be subject to the provisions of section 28-178. 
(h)  While it is the intent of the city to honor each permit, the issuance of such permit shall not grant the producer a constitutionally protected property interest. 
(Ord. No. 2016-1, Amend. 1, § IV, 6-6-2016) 
Sec. 28-172. - Exemption from filming permit requirement. 
The following types of filming are exempt from the permitting requirement of section 28-171(a). This provision does not exempt a producer from complying with other applicable Code provisions, laws, ordinances or regulations that require elements or other activities included in the filming to be permitted or approved by the appropriate governmental entity. 
(1)  Filming associated with any permitted or unpermitted rally, protest or demonstration, except when the same is staged for the sole purpose of being included in the filming's final product. 
(2)  Filming associated with an outdoor event that is authorized by a city-issued outdoor event permit, except when the same is staged for the sole purpose of being included in the filming's final product. 
(Ord. No. 2016-1, Amend. 1, § V, 6-6-2016) 
Sec. 28-173. - Filming elements. 
An applicant shall indicate on the application each of the elements listed in this section that will be included in the filming. The final decision of whether to allow the element shall be made by the department of purview after consultation with the NGFO, and communicated to the applicant by the NGFO. Prior to denying permission to perform an element, representatives of the department of purview and NGFO shall consult with the producer in an attempt to find alternative ways to accommodate the producer's filming needs. This section applies to the activities listed in this section only when they occur on public property. Where the element requires approval from an additional governmental jurisdiction, the producer must obtain that approval as well. The elements are as follows: 
(1)  Night-time filming with the use of outdoor lighting where a residence exists within 150 feet from the location of an outdoor light; 
(2)  Filming in buildings that are owned by the city and not leased to a third party, or in buildings of which the city is a lessee; 
(3)  Use of public property, including on-street and surface parking, that is owned or maintained by the city; 
(4)  Use of a temporary structure that requires permitting by the city's building department and/or the county fire department; 
(5)  Use of intellectual property belonging to the city; 
(6)  Closure of a street, lane and/or sidewalk; 
(7)  Use of pyrotechnics or other explosives; 
(8)  Smoke effects, water effects, or flame effects; 
(9)  Display of real or artificial firearms, grenades, or other weapons that would cause the public to fear violence; 
(10)  Vehicle chases and/or vehicle crashes; 
(11)  Dangerous stunts that have a reasonable likelihood of causing substantial personal injury; 
(12)  Use of large or any other equipment that has a reasonable likelihood of causing damage to public property; 
(13)  Filming in a city park; and 
(14)  Use of wild animals controlled under federal, state, or county law and/or ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2016-1, Amend. 1, § VI, 6-6-2016) 
Sec. 28-174. - Processing of permit applications. 
A producer that wishes to perform filming must submit to the NGFO a completed application and the application fees set forth in section 28-178. Where the producer is an organization, corporation or other entity, the application must be signed and submitted by an individual authorized to bind the producer. The NGFO will process the applications and the director will make permit determinations in accordance with this section. 
(1)  The application shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
a.  The filming project name; 
b.  The name and contact information of the applicant, including postal address, email address, and telephone number; 
c.  A photocopy of a valid photo identification of the applicant; 
d.  The name and contact information of the producer (if the applicant is not the producer); 
e.  The dates, times and locations of the filming for which a permit is being requested, and a general description of the filming activity that will occur at each location; 
f.  A description of any elements that may be performed during the filming, including the dates, times and locations of each; 
g.  A description of any aspects of the filming, other than the elements, that may require city services; 
h.  A description of any assistance the producer may need from the NGFO, and/or concerns that the producer wants the NGFO to be aware of; 
i.  Where the producer is a student, an official letter or document from his school confirming that he is currently enrolled there. In addition, the student must appear in person at the NGFO and present his current student identification card and a valid driver's license. Where the student does not have a driver's license, he may present a different form of identification that includes his photo; and 
j.  A certificate of insurance naming the city as additional insured and demonstrating proof of coverage of no less than $1,000,000.00 property and general liability insurance in force. Certain elements or activities may require greater coverage to be determined by the city. 
(2)  When more than one application is received for filming at substantially the same place and time, and the director reasonably determines that the filming cannot logistically and/or safely occur together, the earlier or earliest of the applications that is received by the NGFO in a substantially completed form, which includes submission of the requisite application fee, shall be given priority as to the time and place requested. The NGFO shall make reasonable efforts to consult with the other applicant in an attempt to find alternative times and/or locations that are acceptable. 
(3)  There is no deadline by which a filming permit application must be submitted to the NGFO; however, where a filming permit application includes a request for limiting public access to public parking or a street closure, this portion of the application will not be approved unless it is received at least five business days prior to the closure. 
(4)  The NGFO and the departments of purview shall compile and maintain rules and guidelines applicable to the use of public property for filming, including the elements that are part of the filming, and shall apply those rules and guidelines equally regardless of the subject matter of the filming and/or the content of the speech therein. 
(5)  In the event that permission to perform an element is denied, the NGFO will process the remainder of the permit and grant all other aspects of the filming for which the requirements have been met. 
(6)  The NGFO may deny an application only if the director reasonably determines that one or more of the below-listed conditions exists. Prior to denial, the NGFO shall make reasonable efforts to consult with the producer in an attempt to resolve issues of concern and/or find alternative ways to accommodate the producer's filming needs, as described in subsections (7), (8), (9) and (10) of this section. 
a.  The filming poses an unreasonable risk of personal injury or property damage to people or property not associated with the filming; 
b.  The filming poses an unreasonable risk of damage to public property that could not be quickly and/or fully remediated; 
c.  The date and time requested for a particular filming location conflicts with previously-issued permits or permissions for filming, outdoor events, or other activities; 
d.  Use of the filming location, or use of the location during the date or time requested, would unreasonably interfere with the operation of city functions; 
e.  Use of the filming location or the proposed activity at the location would violate a law, ordinance, statute or regulation, regardless of whether the illegal activity is part of the message or content of the filming. A permit shall not be denied based upon simulation of an illegal activity where the actual illegal activity is not being performed; 
f.  The producer owes an outstanding debt to the city; 
g.  The producer previously caused significant damage to public property and failed to adequately repair the damage or pay in full within 30 days the city's invoice for damage repair and restoration services; 
h.  The producer previously violated this article, including without limitation by violating a material condition and/or restriction of a permit; 
i.  The producer's prior entertainment industry work in the city violated a city ordinance or other applicable law; and 
j.  The applicant made a material misrepresentation or gave incorrect material information on the application. 
(7)  Prior to denying an application, if the NGFO determines that the requested filming includes one or more of the conditions described in subsection (6) of this section, the NGFO shall employ reasonable efforts to identify alternative filming locations, times and/or dates that eliminate the unacceptable condition and that are mutually acceptable to the producer and the city. The producer shall modify the application to incorporate any agreed-upon alternatives. 
(8)  Prior to denying an application, if the NGFO determines that the requested filming or related activity creates a violation as described in subsection (6) of this section, the NGFO shall allow the producer to revise the application so that the filming activities comply with applicable law. 
(9)  Prior to denying an application pursuant to subsection (6) of this section, the NGFO shall notify the producer of the potential denial and allow him to remedy the conditions described in said subsections. The NGFO shall process the application after such repair, restoration or payment is complete, and may require the producer to obtain a refundable sanitation bond for the filming permit in an amount equivalent to the cost of the repair, restoration or debt. 
(10)  Prior to denying an application pursuant to subsections (7), (8), (9) and/or (10) of this section, the NGFO shall provide the applicant an opportunity to present documents or other evidence that refutes the director's finding of previous permit violations, of previous violations of the law, or of misrepresentation or misinformation on the application, as applicable. 
(11)  Where the director has complied with subsections (7), (8), (9) and/or (10) of this section and reasonably determines that one or more of the conditions set forth in subsection (6) of this section continues to exist and that the application should therefore be denied, the director shall issue a written communication to the applicant that includes a detailed explanation for the denial. Nothing in this subsection shall preclude the director from also notifying the applicant orally. 
(12)  If the director denies an application, the applicant shall have the right to appeal the decision to the city manager or his designee, provided that a written request for such appeal is made to the city manager within three business days after the applicant's receipt of the director's determination. The person considering the appeal must be impartial, and must have had no involvement in the director's decision. The appeal shall be heard or considered within three business days after the city receives the applicant's request, and shall be decided de novo. The person considering the appeal shall evaluate the application and the director's decision in accordance with the criteria of this article. 
(13)  The person considering the appeal may issue his decision verbally, and shall issue a written decision within three business days of receiving written evidence from the applicant and/or meeting with the applicant, whichever is later. The written decision shall be the final decision of the city regarding the application. The applicant or producer may appeal the decision by writ of certiorari to the superior court of the county pursuant to the procedures set forth by state law. 
(Ord. No. 2016-1, Amend. 1, § VII, 6-6-2016) 
Sec. 28-175. - Modification, suspension or cancellation of a permit. 
(a)  After receiving a permit, the producer may request a material modification of the permit at any time by submitting to the NGFO a change request and change fee as set forth in this article. The NGFO's ability to process the change request shall be determined pursuant to the provisions established for processing applications as set forth in section 28-174(2) and (3). The director's decision of whether to grant or deny the modification request shall be determined as set forth above. Submission of a change request will not impact the validity of the permit already issued, except upon written request of the producer. 
(b)  Where a producer has obtained a permit and abides by the material requirements thereof, the permit shall prevent the city's stoppage of activities that are authorized by the permit, except as otherwise set forth in subsection (c) of this section or as a result of applicable law. 
(c)  In the event that the county sheriff's office, county fire department and/or other city department of purview identifies a substantial public health or safety risk arising from or caused by the filming, and the producer is in material compliance with the permit, the following shall occur: 
(1)  Where the substantial risk is identified prior to the commencement of the filming, the director and applicable department of purview shall employ reasonable efforts to consult with the producer and identify permit changes that are mutually acceptable to the producer and the city, and that remedy the health/safety issue. Where such efforts are unsuccessful, the director shall modify the permit in a manner that minimizes disruption of the filming as determined at the director's reasonable discretion, and that eliminates the substantial risk as reasonably determined by the department of purview. 
(2)  Where the substantial risk is not imminent and is identified after the commencement of the filming, the director and applicable department of purview shall employ reasonable efforts to consult with the producer and identify permit changes that are mutually acceptable to the producer and the city, and that remedy the health/safety issue. Where such efforts are unsuccessful, the director shall modify the permit in a manner that minimizes disruption of the filming as determined at the director's reasonable discretion, and that eliminates the substantial risk as reasonably determined by the department of purview. 
(3)  Where the substantial risk is imminent as reasonably determined by the department of purview and is identified after the commencement of filming, said department may place a stop work order on the filming if it finds that the order will likely alleviate the substantial risk. The stop work order may be issued without advance notice where the department of purview deems that a delay of the order will jeopardize public health and safety, and shall be lifted as quickly as possible after the risk is eliminated. The department of purview shall notify the director of the stop work order within two hours of its issuance. The director and applicable department of purview shall employ reasonable efforts to consult with the producer and identify permit changes that are mutually acceptable to the producer and the city, that will minimize the length and impact of the stop work order as decided by the producer, and that remedy the health/safety issue as determined by the department of purview. 
(4)  Changes made to the permit pursuant to this subsection (c) shall not require payment of a change fee. 
(d)  Where the director, or a department of purview in consultation with the director, determines that the producer is violating a material term of the permit, the director shall decide the appropriate remedial actions after consulting with the department of purview and the producer. If the director and/or department of purview finds that a substantial public health or safety risk is arising from or caused by the material violation, the department of purview in consultation with the director may place an immediate stop work order on the filming without prior notice to the producer, and consultation with the producer shall occur after the work stoppage. The consultation between the director, department of purview and producer shall evaluate the nature and severity of the violation, whether the violation was intentional, whether permit modifications should be made, whether the stop work order should be lifted (where applicable), and what other actions should be taken (if any). Where the violation creates a substantial public health and/or safety risk, the remedial actions decided by the director will not be deemed final until the department of purview reviews the remedial actions and confirms that they will eliminate the health and safety risks. 
(Ord. No. 2016-1, Amend. 1, § VIII, 6-6-2016) 
Sec. 28-176. - Responsibilities of a producer once a permit is obtained. 
(a)  A producer or producer's designee must have the permit on site at the time and location of the filming, and must also have on site any other permits required for that location by the NGFO or any other governmental agency. 
(b)  A producer must confine filming to the locations, times, guidelines and conditions specified in the permit and must abide by all other material terms of the permit. 
(c)  Permits are not transferable. 
(d)  A producer must clean and repair the filming location, and restore it to the condition it was in immediately prior to the filming. The NGFO will inspect the filming location after the filming is completed to ascertain whether this requirement has been met. Where a producer fails to fulfill this requirement, the director will bill the producer for the cleaning, repair and/or restoration costs borne by the city, and the producer must pay the invoice in full within 30 days of receipt. 
(e)  Permits shall require the producer to notify the NGFO within one hour or sooner of learning of any emergency event regarding or arising from the filming that involves the media, the police or fire departments or emergency medical services. 
(f)  A producer is responsible for: 
(1)  Knowing and complying with all city ordinances and other laws applicable to the filming and to the other activities arising from the producer's permit; and 
(2)  Requiring and using commercially reasonable efforts to enforce the requirement that any person working for or at the direction of the producer (including, without limitation, contractors) complies with all city ordinances and other laws applicable to the filming and to the other activities arising from the permit. Applicable city ordinances include, without limitation, the city noise ordinance set forth in section 22-5. 
(g)  The requirements of subsection (f) of this section shall include, without limitation, that the producer is responsible for obtaining any and all permissions, licenses or other required authorizations for use of intellectual property, including intellectual property which is on public property but is not owned by the city. 
(h)  Permits must prohibit a producer from acting as a representative or agent of the city, and from indicating city endorsement of the filming, except as otherwise agreed to in writing by the director. This provision shall not prohibit the producer's use of the city logo in the filming credits. 
(i)  The NGFO shall require that written notification be given to residents and businesses within a three-block radius of a location for which a filming permit has been issued. The applicant must directly contact affected business and property owners and obtain their permission to use surrounding property. The notification must state that a filming permit has been issued, and must include the date, time, location and activities that are authorized by the permit. Compensation may be necessary if business and home environments are disrupted. Applicants are required to obtain the property owner's permission, consent and/or lease for use of property not owned or controlled by the city. 
(j)  Emergency vehicle access shall be maintained at all times. 
(Ord. No. 2016-1, Amend. 1, § IX, 6-6-2016) 
Sec. 28-177. - Other permit requirements. 
After a permit has been approved by the director, it will be issued once the following have occurred: 
(1)  The applicant indemnifies the city and its officials and employees from all claims, losses and expenses, including reasonable attorney's fees and costs, that may arise from the permit and any of the activities performed pursuant to the permit by, on behalf of, or at the direction of the producer, except to the extent that those claims, losses and/or expenses are caused by the negligence or intentional misconduct of the city, its officials and/or employees; 
(2)  The applicant agrees to comply with all applicable environmental laws, including an agreement not to allow legally-prohibited contaminants from entering the sewage and stormwater drainage systems serving the area where the filming will occur and hereby indemnifies the city and its officials and employees from all claims, losses, fines, cleanup costs and expenses, including reasonable attorney's fees and costs, that may arise as a result of environmental breaches; and 
(3)  The applicant pays the permit fee and any other applicable fees set forth in section 28-178. 
(Ord. No. 2016-1, Amend. 1, § X, 6-6-2016) 
Sec. 28-178. - Fee schedule. 
The NGFO shall collect all applicable fees arising pursuant to this article. These fees are set forth below in this section, and in other sections of this Code pertaining to the cost of services or goods provided by other city departments. Where the NGFO receives funds that are attributable to services performed by another city department, such funds shall be paid to the department providing those services where prescribed by this Code. 
(1)  Nonrefundable application fee. A filming permit application must be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee in the amount as established by the city. A filming permit application shall not be deemed complete until the application fee is received by the NGFO. 
(2)  Filming permit fee. A filming permit authorizes all filming for a particular filming project during a calendar month, regardless of the number of filming locations. A filming permit is valid through the last day of the calendar month and may be renewed for additional calendar months. 
a.  Standard permit fee. Standard permit fees, as established by the city, apply when the completed filming permit application is submitted to the NGFO more than three business days prior to the effective date of the permit. 
b.  Rush permit fee. Where a completed filming permit application is submitted to the NGFO three or fewer business days prior to the effective date of the permit, the producer must pay the standard permit fee plus the rush fee as established by the city. Additionally, where a producer submits an application more than three business days prior to the effective date of the permit, the producer voluntarily may pay the standard permit fee plus the rush fee in order to have the application processed within three or fewer business days. 
c.  Material changes to filming permit. 
1.  There is no charge for modifying a filming permit where the director reasonably determines that the modification is not material. For purposes of this article, the term "material" means that processing the requested change will require an expenditure of city staff time or services that is more than de minimus. 
2.  There is no charge for a material change to a filming permit where a completed change request is submitted to the NGFO more than three business days prior to the effective date of the permit. Where a material change is requested after the permit has taken effect, there will be no charge if the completed change request is submitted to the NGFO more than three business days prior to the implementation of the requested change. 
3.  Where a change request for a material change is submitted to the NGFO three or fewer business days prior to the effective date of the permit or the implementation date of the change as described in subsection (2)c.2 of this section, the producer must pay the rush change fee set forth in this subsection. Additionally, where a producer submits a change request more than three business days prior to the implementation of the requested change, the producer voluntarily may pay the rush fee in order to have the change request processed within three or fewer business days. 
d.  Cancellation fee. 
1.  Except as set forth in subsections (2) d.2 and (2)d.3 of this section, a filming permit fee is nonrefundable. 
2.  Where the producer submits a change request to the NGFO and the change results in cancellation of a filming permit for a particular calendar month, the producer may utilize the filming permit fee for the cancelled month to purchase a new filming permit for the same project for a different calendar month. Regardless of whether a new filming permit fee is owed, the NGFO shall determine whether a rush fee is applicable based upon the timing of the change request and the standards set forth in subsection (2)c.3 of this section. 
3.  A filming permit fee is refundable if cancellation is required because of extraordinary circumstances for which the producer is not responsible and which are not within the producer's control. Inclement weather, except for declared states of emergency, and common illness shall not be deemed extraordinary circumstances. 
(3)  On-site services fee. An on-site services fee is assessed for each public property location where filming occurs, as authorized by the filming permit, for each day that filming occurs at that site. Where a producer films at more than three locations in a day for the same filming project, he shall be charged an on-site services fee only for the first three locations. 
a.  Standard on-site services fee. An on-site services fee as established by the city applies when the completed filming application or change request seeking authorization to film at the site is submitted to the NGFO more than three business days prior to the day of filming. 
b.  Rush on-site service fee. When a completed filming application or change request seeking authorization to film at the site is submitted to the NGFO three or fewer business days prior to the requested day of filming, the producer must pay the standard on-site services fee plus the rush fee as established by the city. There is no daily maximum regarding this rush fee. 
c.  Cancellation fee. 
1.  Except as set forth in subsections (3)c.2. and 3 of this section, an on-site services fee is nonrefundable. 
2.  Where the producer submits a change request to the NGFO that results in cancellation of requested on-site services for a particular day, the producer may utilize the on-site services fee for the cancelled day to pay for on-site services for the same project for a day that is within three calendar days of the cancelled day. If the change request is submitted three or fewer business days prior to the filming day requested in the original application or the filming day requested in the change request, whichever is earlier, a rush on-site service fee shall be owed. 
3.  An on-site services fee is refundable if cancellation is required because of extraordinary circumstances for which the producer is not responsible and which are not within the producer's control. Inclement weather, except for declared states of emergency, and common illness shall not be deemed extraordinary circumstances. 
(4)  Scholarship program. The NGFO may establish a scholarship program that encourages development of local talent in the filming industry. If and when established, this program will be operated by the NGFO. The NGFO is authorized to award scholarships that waive some or all of the filming and on-site services fees associated with a filming project, contingent upon the following: 
a.  The producer is a student; 
b.  The producer has not previously performed a filming project for commercial release; 
c.  The producer resides within the corporate limits of the city; 
d.  The filming is performed entirely in the county with at least 50 percent of the filming occurring within the corporate limits of the city; 
e.  The filming project budget is less than $200,000.00; and 
f.  At least 50 percent of the total filming project crew are city residents. 
(Ord. No. 2016-1, Amend. 1, § XI, 6-6-2016) 
Sec. 28-179. - Traffic control plan and street closures. 
Entertainment industry work performed at certain locations or when rerouting or closures are requested will require a traffic control plan. 
(1)  A full street closure will not be permitted unless the application or change request is submitted at least five business days prior to the closure. Rush fees may not be utilized for full street closure requests. In the event of street closures, the applicant will be subject to an inconvenience fee as established by the city. 
(2)  If streets are to be blocked or traffic disrupted in any manner, off-duty deputies must be scheduled through the county sheriff's office. 
(3)  The applicant should be prepared to submit the traffic control plan to the county sheriff's office and the city engineer for approval of filming in certain locations that require rerouting of traffic and/or road closures. The applicant must adjust the plan as needed to meet the requirements of the two reviewing departments. 
(4)  Applicants shall furnish and install advance warning signs as requested by the NGFO and in conformance with the state department of transportation. All appropriate safety precautions must be taken. 
(Ord. No. 2016-1, Amend. 1, § XII, 6-6-2016) 
Sec. 28-180. - Location credit. 
The North Georgia Film Office requests acknowledgement in location credits as North Georgia Film, where applicable. 
(Ord. No. 2016-1, Amend. 1, § XIII, 6-6-2016) 
Secs. 28-181—28-198. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - RIGHT-OF-WAY PERMITS 

Sec. 28-199. - Declaration of findings and purpose, scope, definitions. 
(a)  Intent and purpose. The city is vitally concerned with the use, construction within, and occupancy of all rights-of-way in the city as such rights-of-way are a valuable and limited resource which must be utilized to promote the public health, safety, welfare, economic development of the city and to protect public work infrastructure. Therefore, the city, under the authority of the laws and constitution of the state, including, but not limited to, article IX, section I, paragraphs II and III of the Georgia Constitution, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20 and O.C.G.A. § 32-4-42(6), has adopted the ordinance from which this article is derived for the purpose of regulating public and private entities which use the city rights-of-way. 
(b)  Scope. The provisions of this article shall apply to all utilities and facilities occupying the rights-of-way as provided herein. 
(c)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Construct means, but shall not be limited to, dig, bore, tunnel, trench, excavate, obstruct, install or remove signs or facilities, other than landscaping or ornamental plantings, in, on, above, within, over, below, under, or through any part of the rights-of-way. The term construct shall also include the act of opening and/or cutting into the surface of any paved or improved surface that is any part of the right-of-way. 
Construction means, but shall not be limited to, the act or process of digging, boring, tunneling, trenching, excavating, obstructing, installing or removing signs or facilities, other than landscaping or ornamental plantings, in, on, above, within, over, below, under, or through any part of the rights-of-way. The term "construction" shall also include the act of opening, boring and/or cutting into the surface of any part of the right-of-way. 
Department means the city public works department. 
Director means the city engineer or his designee. 
Emergency means a condition that poses a clear and immediate danger to life, health, or safety of a person, or of significant damage or loss of real or personal property. 
Facilities representative means the specifically identified agent/employee of a utility who are authorized to direct field activities of that utility and serve as official notice agent for facilities related information. A utility shall be required to make sure at least one of its facilities representatives is available at all times to receive notice of, and immediately direct response to, facilities-related emergencies or situations. 
Facility or facilities means any tangible thing, including, but not limited to, pipes, mains, conduits, cables, wires, poles, towers, traffic and other signals, and other equipment, appurtenances, appliances and future technology of any utility in, on, along, over, or under any part of the rights-of-way within the city. 
FCC means the Federal Communications Commission or any successor thereto. 
Permit means an authorization which grants permission to conduct specific regulated activities on, in, over, under or within any public right-of-way, and which may be subject to conditions specified in a written agreement with the city. 
Right-of-way means the surface and space in, on, above, within, over, below, under or through any real property in which the city has an interest in law or equity, whether held in fee, or other estate or interest, or as a trustee for the public, including, but not limited to, any public street, boulevard, road, highway, freeway, lane, alley, court, sidewalk, parkway, or any other place, area, or real property owned by or under the legal or equitable control of the city, now or hereafter, that, consistent with the purposes for which it was dedicated, may be used for the purposes of constructing, operating, repairing or replacing facilities. 
Service means the offering of any service by a utility for a fee directly to the public, or to such classes of users as to be effectively available directly to the public, or, alternatively, the provision of any service by a utility between two or more points for a proprietary purpose to a class of users other than the general public. 
Service agreement means a valid license agreement, service agreement, franchise agreement, or operating agreement issued by the city or state pursuant to law and accepted by a utility or entered into by and between the city and a utility, which allows such utility to operate or provide service within the geographic limits of the city. 
Streets means the surface of, as well as the spaces above and below, any and of all the streets, alleys, avenues, roads, bridges, tunnels and public places of the city within the corporate limits of the city, as the same now exist or may be hereafter extended or altered, and any location thereon, thereover or thereunder, and any portion thereof. 
Transfer means the disposal by the utility, directly or indirectly, by gift, assignment, sale, merger, consolidation, or otherwise, of more than 50 percent at one time of the ownership or controlling interest in the facilities, or of more than 50 percent cumulatively over the term of a written approval of registration of such interests to a corporation, partnership, limited partnership, trust, or association, or person or group of persons acting in concert. 
Unused facilities means facilities located in the rights-of-way which have remained unused for 12 months and for which the utility is unable to provide the city with a plan detailing the procedure by which the utility intends to begin actively using such facilities within the next 12 months, or that it has a potential purchaser or user of the facilities who will be actively using the facilities within the next 12 months, or, that the availability of such facilities is required by the utility to adequately and efficiently operate its facilities. 
Utility or utilities means all privately, publicly, or cooperatively owned systems for producing, transmitting, or distributing communication, data, information, telecommunication, cable television, video services, power, electricity, light, heat, gas, oil, crude products, water/sewer, steam, fire and police signals, traffic control devices, and street lighting systems, and housing or conduit for any of the foregoing, which directly or indirectly serve the public or any part thereof. The term "utility" may also be used to refer to the owner, operator, utility, service, contractor or subcontractor, or any agent thereof, of any above-described utility or utility facility. 
(Ord. No. 2015-14, § 1, art. 1, 12-17-2015) 
Sec. 28-200. - Utility registration. 
(a)  Registration required. Each utility who occupies, uses or has facilities in the rights-of-way at the time of passage of this article the ordinance from which this article is derived , including by lease, sublease or assignment, to operate facilities located in the rights-of-way, unless specifically exempted by state or federal law or this article, shall file a registration statement with the department within 90 days of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(b)  Registration procedure. The registration information provided to the city shall be on a form approved by the city and include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  The name, legal status (i.e., partnership, corporation, etc.), street address, email address, and telephone and facsimile numbers of the utility filing the registration statement (the "registrant"). If the registrant is not the owner of the facility in the right-of-way, the registration shall include the name, street address, email address, if applicable, and telephone and facsimile numbers of the owner. 
(2)  The name, street address, email address, if applicable, and telephone and facsimile numbers of one or more facilities representative. Current information regarding how to contact the facilities representative in an emergency shall be provided at the time of filing a registration and shall be updated as necessary to ensure accurate contact information is available to the city at all times. 
(3)  A copy, if requested, of the utility's certificate of authority (or other acceptable evidence of authority to operate) from the state public service commission and/or the FCC and any other similar approvals, permits, or agreements. 
(4)  A copy, if requested, of the service agreement, if applicable, or other legal instrument that authorizes the utility to use or occupy the right-of-way for the purpose described in the registration. 
(c)  Incomplete registration. If a registration is incomplete, the director shall notify the registrant and shall provide a reasonable period of time in which to complete the registration. If a registration is complete, the director shall so notify the utility in writing. 
(d)  Acceptance of the registration shall not convey title in the rights-of-way. Acceptance of the registration is only the nonexclusive, limited right to occupy rights-of-way in the city for the limited purposes stated in the acceptance. Acceptance of the registration does not excuse a utility from obtaining permits required by city ordinances nor from obtaining appropriate access or pole attachment agreements before using the facilities of others, including the city. Acceptance of the registration does not excuse a utility from notifying the city of construction as required herein. 
(e)  Facilities in place without registration. Beginning one year after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, any facilities or part of a facility found in a right-of-way for which registration is required but has not been obtained unless specifically exempted by law, and for which no valid service agreement exists with the city, may be deemed to be a nuisance and an unauthorized use of the rights-of-way. The city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity, including, but not limited to, abating the nuisance; taking possession of the facilities, evicting the utility from the right-of-way; prosecuting the violator; and/or any other remedy provided by city ordinance or otherwise allowed in law or in equity. 
(Ord. No. 2015-14, § 1, art. 2, 12-17-2015) 
Sec. 28-201. - Construction permits. 
(a)  Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any utility to excavate or to construct, install, maintain, renew, remove or relocate facilities in, on, along, over or under the public roads of the city without a utility permit from the city in accordance with the terms of this article. 
(b)  Permit procedure. Utility permits shall be obtained from the director (or such other person as the city manager may designate) upon application made on forms prescribed by the city. The written application shall include the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the utility; 
(2)  The nature, extent, and location of any work proposed to be done, along with satisfactory plans as attachments showing in detail the location of the proposed facility or operations as described in the permit application. The plans shall show the size or capacity of facilities to be installed; their relationship to street features such as right-of-way lines, pavement edge, structures, etc., horizontal and vertical clearance to critical elements of the roadway and any other information necessary to evaluate the impact on the street and its operation; 
(3)  The name and address of the person or firm who is to do such work; 
(4)  The name, street address, email address, if applicable, and telephone and facsimile numbers of one or more facilities representative; 
(5)  The projected dates for the work to be started and finished; 
(6)  An indemnity bond or other acceptable security in an amount to be set by the city to pay any damages to any part of the city road system or other city property or to any city employee or member of the public caused by activity or work of the utility performed under authority of the permit issued; 
(7)  A copy, if requested, of the registrant's certificate of authority (or other acceptable evidence of authority to operate) from the state public service commission and/or the FCC and any other similar approvals, permits, or agreements; and 
(8)  A copy, if requested, of the service agreement, if applicable or other legal instrument that authorizes the utility to use or occupy the right-of-way for the purpose described in the application. 
(c)  Permit fees. Fees shall be determined by the director, subject to the approval by resolution of the city council. A fee schedule shall be available at the offices of the director and the city clerk and open for public inspection. 
(d)  Issuance of permit. If the director determines the applicant has satisfied the following requirements, the director may issue a permit. 
(1)  Whether issuing of the approval will be consistent with this article; 
(2)  Whether the applicant has submitted a complete application and has secured all certificates and other authorizations required by law, if applicable, in order to construct facilities in the manner proposed by the applicant; and 
(3)  The impact on safety, visual quality of the streets, traffic flow, and other users of the right-of-way and the difficulty and length of time of the project, construction or maintenance. 
(e)  Emergency situations. 
(1)  Each utility shall, as soon as reasonably practicable, notify the director of any event regarding its facilities which it considers to be an emergency. The utility may proceed to take whatever actions are necessary in order to respond to the emergency. A utility who engages in an emergency excavation shall take all reasonable precautions to avoid or minimize damage to any existing facilities. 
(2)  In the event that the city becomes aware of an emergency regarding utility facilities, the city may attempt to contact the affected utility or facilities representative. The city may take whatever action it deems necessary in order to respond to the emergency, including cut or move any of the wires, cables, amplifiers, appliances, or other parts of the facilities. The city shall not incur any liability to the utility, for such emergency actions, and the cost of such shall be paid by each utility affected by the emergency. 
(f)  Effective period of permit. 
(1)  Each permit shall have a set commencement and expiration date based on information provided in the applicant's permit application. 
(2)  The permit shall remain in place until its expiration date unless the utility is in default. The director may give written notice of default to a utility if it is determined that a utility has: 
a.  Violated any provision or requirement of the issuance or acceptance of a permit application or any law of the city, state, or federal government; 
b.  Attempted to evade any provision or requirement of this article; 
c.  Practiced any fraud or deceit upon the city; or 
d.  Made a material misrepresentation or omission of fact in its permit application. 
(g)  Cancellation for cause. If a utility fails to cure a default within 20 working days after such notice is provided to the utility by the city, then such default shall be a material breach and city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity to terminate the permit. If the director decides there is cause or reason to terminate, the following procedure shall be followed: 
(1)  The city shall serve a utility with a written notice of the reason or cause for proposed termination and shall allow a utility a minimum of 15 calendar days to cure its breach. 
(2)  If the utility fails to cure within 15 calendar days, the city may declare the permit terminated. 
(h)  Expiration of permit. If work is not begun within six months of the date of issuance, the permit will automatically expire. 
(Ord. No. 2015-14, § 1, art. 3, 12-17-2015) 
Sec. 28-202. - Required minimum standards. 
(a)  Utility accommodation manual adopted. The 2009 Utility Accommodation Policy and Standards manual, including all references contained therein to codes, rules, regulations, schedules, forms and appendix items, except appendix B (permit forms and supporting documents), promulgated by the state department of transportation, as may be amended from time to time, is hereby adopted by reference and incorporated in the article as if fully set forth herein, subject to the amendments and modification contained in this article. A copy of the manual shall be maintained at the offices of the director or his designee and open for public inspection. Any conflicts between the provisions of this article and the manual shall be resolved in favor of the manual. References to state personnel, agencies, and fees shall be interpreted, where required, as meaning the city municipal equivalents. 
(b)  Protection of traffic and roadway. Unless specifically in the permit, no utility may occupy the city rights-of-way unless sufficient space is available so that the free flow and safety of traffic and other capacity considerations are not unduly impaired and the installation does not prevent the department from reasonably maintaining the streets, structures, traffic control devices and other appurtenant facilities, and further provided that maintenance and operations of the facilities do not jeopardize the traffic, street structure, other users of the right-of-way or the right-of-way itself. 
(c)  Grading. If the grades or lines of any street within the city right-of-way are changed at any time by the city during the term of the permit and this change involves an area in which the utility's facilities are located, then the utility shall, at its own cost and expense and upon the request of the city upon reasonable notice, protect or promptly alter or relocate the facilities, or any part thereof, so as to conform with such new grades or lines. In the event the utility refuses or neglects to so protect, alter, or relocate all or part of the facilities, the city shall have the right to break through, remove, alter, or relocate all or any part of the facilities without any liability to the utility and the utility shall pay to the city the costs incurred in connection with such breaking through, removal, alteration, or relocation. 
(d)  Notice required before blasting and excavating. As provided in O.C.G.A. § 25-9-6 (the Georgia Utility Facility Protection Act) and other applicable state law currently in place or as amended, no utility shall commence, perform, or engage in blasting or in excavating with mechanized excavating facilities unless and until the utility planning the blasting or excavating has given 48 hours' notice by submitting a locate request to the utility protection center, beginning the next working day after such notice is provided, excluding hours during days other than working days. 
(e)  Installation of poles and other wireholding structures and relocation. Unless otherwise provided in a valid service agreement, no placement of any pole or wireholding structure of the utility is to be considered a vested interest in the right-of-way, and such poles or structures are to be removed, relocated underground, or modified by the utility at its own expense whenever the city determines that the public convenience would be enhanced thereby. The facilities shall be so located and installed as to cause minimum interference with the rights and convenience of property owners. 
(Ord. No. 2015-14, § 1, art. 4, 12-17-2015) 
Sec. 28-203. - Restoration of property. 
(a)  Each utility shall be responsible for the cost of repairing any facilities in the rights-of-way and adjoining property or other facilities which it or its facilities damage. 
(b)  A utility shall be liable, at its own cost and expense, to replace, restore or repair any street, facilities or property or structure thereon, thereunder, thereover or adjacent thereto that may become disturbed or damaged as a result of the construction or installation, operation, upgrade, repair or removal of facilities to a condition as good as or better than its condition before the work performed by the utility that caused such disturbance or damage. If the utility does not commence such replacement or repair after 20 working days following written notice from the city, the city or the owner of the affected structure or property may make such replacement or repair and the utility shall pay the reasonable and actual cost of the same. 
(Ord. No. 2015-14, § 1, art. 5, 12-17-2015) 
Sec. 28-204. - Inspection. 
(a)  The utility shall make the construction site available to the director and to all others as authorized by law for inspection at all reasonable times during the execution and upon completion of the construction. 
(b)  At any time, including the time of inspection, the director may order the immediate cessation of any work which poses a serious threat to the health, safety, or welfare of the public, violates any law, or which violates the terms and conditions of the permit and/or this article or issue an order to correct work which does not conform to the permit and/or applicable standards, conditions or codes. 
(c)  When the construction under any permit is completed, the utility shall notify the department. 
(Ord. No. 2015-14, § 1, art. 6, 12-17-2015) 
Sec. 28-205. - Other approvals, permits and agreements. 
The utility shall obtain all construction, building or other permits or approvals as according to city ordinance, state or federal law. In addition, a permittee shall comply with all requirements of laws, shall complete work in a way as to not cause any unnecessary or unauthorized obstructions of sidewalks, streets, waterways or railways, and is responsible for all work done in the right-of-way regardless of who performs the work. No rights-of-way obstruction or excavation may be performed when seasonally prohibited or when conditions are unreasonable for such work, except in the case of an emergency as outlined in section 28-201(e). 
(Ord. No. 2015-14, § 1, art. 7, 12-17-2015) 
Sec. 28-206. - Penalties. 
Every utility convicted of a violation of any provision of this article shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00 per violation. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to the penalty prescribed in this section, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
(Ord. No. 2015-14, § 1, art. 8, 12-17-2015) 
Sec. 28-207. - Other provisions. 
(a)  Reservation of regulatory and police powers. The city, by issuing a written approval of registration under this article, does not surrender or to any extent lose, waive, impair, or lessen the lawful powers and rights, which it has now or may be hereafter vested in the city under the Constitution and Laws of the United States, the State of Georgia and the city Charter, and under the provisions of this article. The utility, by applying for and being issued a written permit, is deemed to acknowledge that all lawful powers and rights, regulatory power, or police power, or otherwise as are or the same may be from time to time vested in or reserved to the city, shall be in full force and effect and subject to the exercise thereof by the city at any time. A utility is deemed to acknowledge that its interests are subject to the regulatory and police powers of the city to adopt and enforce general ordinances necessary to the safety and welfare of the public and is deemed to agree to comply with all applicable general laws enacted by the city pursuant to such powers. In particular, all utilities shall comply with city zoning and other land use requirements pertaining to the placement and specifications of facilities. 
(b)  Compliance. No person shall be relieved of its obligation to comply with any of the provisions of this article by reason of any failure of city to enforce compliance. 
(c)  Appeal of administrative decisions. All appeals provided for by this article and any notification to the city required by this article shall be in writing and sent via certified mail to the director as specified in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2015-14, § 1, art. 9, 12-17-2015) 
Chapter 30 - TAXATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 30-1. - Business license tax on financial institutions. 
(a)  Levied. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93, there is hereby levied, for the year 1984 and for each year thereafter, an annual business license tax upon all depository financial institutions, including, but not limited to, state and national banking associations, federal savings and loan associations, state buildings and loan associations, federal savings banks, state savings and loan associations, and savings banks (excluding credit unions). A business license tax is set at the rate of 0.25 percent of the gross receipts of said institutions as defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(d). Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, the minimum amount of business license tax due from any depository financial institution pursuant to this section shall be $1,000.00 per year. 
(b)  Due date: filing of return. 
(1)  Each depository financial institution within the city shall file a return of its gross receipts with the city on March 1 of the year following the year in which such gross receipts were measured. Said returns shall be in the manner and in the form prescribed by the commissioner of the department of revenue and/or the department of banking and shall be based upon the allocation method set forth in of O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(d). The tax levied pursuant to this section shall be assessed and collected based upon the information provided in said return. 
(2)  The due date of taxes levied by this section shall be April 1 of each year. 
(Ord. No. 83-6, Amend. 1, §§ 3, 4, 10-3-1983) 
Sec. 30-2. - Insurance license fees and taxes. 
(a)  License fee levied. There is hereby levied for the year 2012, and for each year thereafter, an annual license fee upon each insurer doing business within the city in the amount of $50.00. For each separate business location in excess of one not covered by subsection (b) of this section, which is operating on behalf of such insurers within the city, there is hereby levied a license fee in the amount of $50.00. For the purposes of this section, the term "insurer" means a company which is authorized to transact business in any of the classes of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5. 
(b)  License fees for insurers insuring certain risks at additional business locations. For each separate business location, not otherwise subject to a license fee hereunder, operated and maintained by a business organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing and in connection with such loans or sales offers, solicits or takes application for insurance through a licensed agent of an insurer for insurance, said insurer shall pay an additional license fee of $17.50 per location for the year 2012 and for each year thereafter. 
(c)  Gross premiums tax imposed on life insurers. There is hereby levied for the year 2012, and for each year thereafter, an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer writing life, accident and sickness insurance within the state in an amount equal to one percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1. The term "gross direct premiums," as used in this subsection, means gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this subsection is in addition to the license fees imposed by subsection (a) of this section. 
(d)  Gross premiums tax, all other insurers. There is hereby levied for the year 2012, and for each year thereafter, an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer, other than an insurer transacting business in the class of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5(1), doing business within the state in an amount equal to 2.5 percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 3-8-8.2. The term "gross direct premiums," as used in this subsection, means gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 3-8-4. The premium tax levied by this subsection is in addition to the license fees imposed by subsection (a) of this section. 
(e)  Due date for license fees. License fees imposed in subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall be due and payable on January 1. 
(Ord. No. 94-10, Amend 1, §§ 1—5, 12-5-2011) 
Secs. 30-3—30-23. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - HOTEL-MOTEL EXCISE TAX[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Hotel excise tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50 et seq. 

Sec. 30-24. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
City means the City of Dahlonega and, variously, the incorporated territory of Dahlonega, wherein the city government is empowered to impose this tax by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50 et seq. 
City clerk means the duly appointed city clerk of the city or his designee. 
Due date means the 20th day after the close of the monthly period for which the tax is to be computed. 
Estimated tax liability means the lodging provider's prospective tax liability based upon the average monthly tax remittance in the prior fiscal year, as adjusted for change in tax rate or substantial change in circumstances due to damage to the hotel. 
Folio means primary documentation produced by a hotel that demonstrates interaction between the lodging provider and the occupant, and which, at a minimum, reflects the name and address given by the occupant, the date of occupancy, the amount of rent charged for each date together with the amounts of applicable excise tax, and the method of payment. 
Guest room means a room occupied, or intended, arranged, or designed for transient occupancy, by one or more occupants for the purpose of living quarters or residential use. 
Hotel means any structure or any portion of a structure, including any lodginghouse, roominghouse, dormitory, Turkish bath, bachelor hotel, studio hotel, motel, motor hotel, auto court, truck stop, tourist cabin, lodge, inn, time-share or other condominium, apartment community, public club or private club, containing guest rooms and which is occupied, or is intended or designed for occupancy, by paying guests, whether rent is paid in money, goods, labor, or otherwise. The term "hotel" does not include any hospital, asylum, sanitarium, orphanage, jail, prison, or other buildings in which human beings are housed and detained under legal restraint. 
Lodging provider means any person operating a hotel in the city, including, but not limited to, the owner or proprietor of such premises, lessee, sublessee, lender in possession, licensee or any other person operating such hotel; and who is subject to the taxation imposed for furnishing for value to the public any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations. 
Monthly period means the calendar months of any year. 
Occupancy means the use or possession or the right to the use or possession of any guest room or apartment in a hotel or the right to the use or possession of the furnishings or to the services and accommodations accompanying the use and possession of the room. 
Occupant means any person who, for a consideration, uses, possesses, or has the right to use or possess any guest room in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license to use or other agreement, or otherwise. 
Permanent resident means any occupant who, as of a given date, has or shall have occupied or has or shall have the right of occupancy of any guest room in a hotel, any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations for not less than 30 continuous days next preceding such date. 
Person means any individual, firm, partnership, joint adventure, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, cooperative, estate, trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, the plural as well as the singular number; excepting the United States, the state and any instrumentality of either thereof upon which the city is without power to impose the tax. 
Rent means the consideration received for occupancy valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits, and property or services of any kind or nature, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the lodging provider to the occupant, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
Tax means the tax on occupants imposed by this article, as provided for by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 85-2, Amend. 4, § 1, 4-5-2004) 
Sec. 30-25. - Tax rate. 
There shall be paid for every occupancy of a guest room in a hotel in the city a tax at the rate of eight percent of the amount of rent unless an exemption is provided under section 30-27. 
(Ord. No. 85-2, Amend. 4, § 2, 4-5-2004) 
Sec. 30-26. - Collection of tax by lodging provider. 
Every lodging provider renting guest rooms in the city shall collect a tax of five percent on the amount of rent from the occupant unless an exemption is provided under section 30-27. The lodging provider shall provide a receipt to each occupant, which receipt shall reflect both the amount of rent and the amounts of this and other tax applicable. This tax shall be due from the occupant, and shall be collected by the lodging provider at the same time that the rent is collected. The lodging provider shall be liable for any amount of tax that he fails to collect appropriately; and must remit to the city any amount of tax collected in excess of that which should have been collected. 
(Ord. No. 85-2, Amend. 4, § 3, 4-5-2004) 
Sec. 30-27. - Exemptions. 
No tax shall be collected from an occupant after becoming a permanent resident; or from an occupant who certifies in writing that he is staying in such accommodations as a result of his residence having been destroyed by fire or other casually; or from the United States and the state or any instrumentality of either thereof; or from any official or employee of the state, its units of local government or any other instrumentality of the state, when traveling on official business and presenting written substantiation thereof or paying by state or local government credit or debit card. Occupancy provided without charge in money or otherwise is exempt from this tax. 
(Ord. No. 85-2, Amend. 4, § 4, 4-5-2004; Ord. No. 85-2, Amend. 6, § 1, 7-7-2014; Ord. No. 85-2, Amend. 5, 4-3-2017) 
Sec. 30-28. - Registration of lodging provider; form and contents; execution; certificate of authority. 
Every person engaging or about to engage in business as a lodging provider in the city shall immediately register with the city clerk on a form provided by said official. Persons engaged in such business must so register not later than 30 days after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. Such registration shall set forth the name under which such person transacts business or intends to transact business, the location of his place of business and such other information which would facilitate the administration of the tax as prescribed by the city clerk. The registration shall be signed by the owner if a natural person; in case of ownership by an association or partnership, by a member or partner; in case of ownership by a corporation, by an officer. The city clerk shall, after such registration, issue without charge a certificate of authority to each lodging provider to collect the tax from the occupant. A separate registration shall be required for each place of business of a lodging provider. Each certificate shall state the name and location of the business to which it is applicable. 
(Ord. No. 85-2, Amend. 4, § 5, 4-5-2004) 
Sec. 30-29. - Determination generally; returns; payments. 
(a)  Due date of taxes. All amounts of such tax shall be due and payable to the city clerk monthly on or before the 20th day of the month next succeeding the respective monthly period. The tax shall become delinquent for any monthly period after the 20th day of each succeeding month during which it remains unpaid. 
(b)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax by due date. A lodging provider who fails to make any return or to pay the amount of tax as prescribed shall be assessed a specific penalty to be added to the tax in the amount of five percent or $5.00, whichever is greater, if the failure is for 30 days or less, there shall be imposed an additional five percent or $5.00, whichever is greater, for each additional month or fraction thereof in which such failure shall continue; provided, however, that the aggregate penalty for any single violation shall not exceed 25 percent or $25.00, whichever is greater. Delinquent amounts shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, until paid. 
(c)  Acceptance of delinquent return and remittance without imposing penalty and interest; authority; requirements. If the failure to make any return or to pay the amount of tax by the due date results from providential cause shown to the satisfaction of the city council by affidavit attached to the return, and remittance is made within ten days of the due date, such return may be accepted exclusive of penalty and interest. 
(d)  Waiving of penalty and interest; authority. The provisions of O.C.G.A. § 48-2-41, relating to authority to waive interest on unpaid taxes; O.C.G.A. § 48-2-43, relating to authority to waive penalties; and O.C.G.A. § 48-2-49, relating to periods of limitation for assessment of taxes imposed by this article, shall apply to taxes imposed by any local governing authority pursuant to this article, provided that the local governing authority shall stand in lieu of the commissioner, and the county or municipality shall stand in lieu of the state for purposes of this section. 
(e)  Penalty for fraud. In the case of a false or fraudulent return, or of failure to file a return where willful intent exists to defraud the city of any tax due, a penalty of 50 percent shall be assessed. 
(f)  Return; remittance; time affiling; lodging providers required to file; contents. On or before the 20th day of the month succeeding each monthly period, a return for the preceding monthly period together with appropriate remittance shall be filed with the city clerk. The return shall report the gross rent, taxable rent, exempt rent, amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the period, and such other information as may be required by the city clerk. However, if the estimated tax liability for any monthly period shall exceed $2,500.00 for a lodging provider who, in the prior fiscal year remitted tax greater than $2,500.00 in any three consecutive months, such lodging provider shall file an estimated return and remit not less than 50 percent of the estimated tax liability for the monthly period by the 20th day of that same monthly period. The amount of tax so remitted shall be credited against the amount to be due with the regular return for the monthly period to be filed on the 20th day of the succeeding month. 
(g)  Extension of time of filing; authority; requirements; remittance; penalty and interest. The city council may, for good cause, extend the time for making returns for not longer than 30 days. No extension shall be valid unless granted in writing upon written application of the lodging provider. Such grant may not be applicable for a longer period of 12 consecutive months. A lodging provider granted an extension shall remit tax equaling not less than 100 percent of the tax paid for the corresponding period of the prior fiscal year; such remittance to be made on or before the date the tax would otherwise come due without the grant of extension. No penalty or interest shall be charged during the first ten days of the extension period. Thereafter, interest shall be collected on the unpaid balance at the rate of one percent per month. 
(h)  Collection fee allowed lodging providers. Lodging providers collecting the tax shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and paying the amount due, if the amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be three percent of the amount due, but only if the amount due was not delinquent at the time of payment. 
(Ord. No. 85-2, Amend. 4, § 6, 4-5-2004; Ord. No. 85-2, Amend. 5, 4-3-2017) 
Sec. 30-30. - Deficiency determinations. 
(a)  Recomputation of tax; authority to make; basis of recomputation. If the city clerk is not satisfied with the return of the tax or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the city by any lodging provider, he may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information within his possession or that may come into his possession. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one or more monthly periods. 
(b)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax. Penalty and interest shall be assessed upon the amount of any determination, as provided by section 30-29. 
(c)  Notice of determination; service of written notice of determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail, such service shall be addressed to the lodging provider at his address as it appears in the records of the city. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by the addressee, or when made by statutory overnight delivery. 
(d)  Time within which notice of deficiency determination to be mailed. Except in cases of failure to make a return or of fraud, every notice of deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the 20th day of the calendar month following the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined, or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period should last expire. 
(e)  Appeal or protest of deficiency determination. The procedure for contesting a deficiency determination shall be as provided by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-380. 
(Ord. No. 85-2, Amend. 4, § 7, 4-5-2004) 
Sec. 30-31. - Determination if no return made. 
(a)  Estimate of gross receipts. If any lodging provider fails to make a return, the city clerk shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the lodging provider, or, as the case may be, of the amount of total rentals in the city which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period in respect to which the lodging provider failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information which is or may come into the possession of the city clerk. Written notice shall be given in the manner prescribed in section 30-30(c). 
(b)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax. Penalty and interest shall be assessed upon the amount of any determination, as provided by section 30-30. 
(Ord. No. 85-2, Amend. 4, § 8, 4-5-2004) 
Sec. 30-32. - Collection of tax by city. 
(a)  Action for delinquent tax; time for. At any time within three years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and payable, and at any time within three years after the delinquency of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected, the city clerk may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction in the name of the city to collect the amount delinquent together with penalty, interest, court fees, filing fees, attorney's fees and other legal fees incident thereto. 
(b)  Lodging provider selling or quitting business. If any lodging provider liable for any amount under this article sells out his business or quits his business, he shall make a final return and remittance within 15 days after the date of selling or quitting the business. 
(c)  Duty of successors or assignees of lodging provider to withhold tax from purchase money. If any lodging provider liable for any amount of tax, interest or penalty under this article sells out his business or quits the business, his successors or assigns shall withhold sufficiently from the purchase price to cover such amount until the former owner produces from the city clerk either a receipt reflecting full payment or a certificate stating that no amount is due. 
(d)  Liability for failure to withhold. If the purchaser of a business fails to withhold from the purchase price as required, he shall be personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld by him to the extent of the purchase price. 
(e)  Credit for tax, penalty or interest paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected. Whenever the amount of any tax, penalty or interest has been paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city, it may be refunded by the city council. If the lodging provider or person determines that he has overpaid or paid more than once, which fact has not been determined by the city clerk, such person shall have three years from the date of payment to file a claim in writing stating the specific ground upon which the claim is founded. The claimant may request a hearing before the city council at which the claim and any other information available will be considered. The city council shall approve or disapprove the claim, and notify the claimant of its action. 
(Ord. No. 85-2, Amend. 4, § 9, 4-5-2004) 
Sec. 30-33. - Administration of article; recordkeeping. 
(a)  Authority of city clerk. The city clerk shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article for the collection of the tax. 
(b)  Records required from lodging providers, etc.; form. Every lodging provider renting guest rooms in the city shall preserve, for a minimum of three years, all folios, receipts, certificates of exemption and such other documents as the city clerk may prescribe, and in such form as he may require. Said records shall at all times be available for examination within the city. 
(c)  Examination of records; audits. The city clerk or any person authorized in writing by him may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any lodging provider renting guest rooms and any lodging provider liable for the tax, in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or, if no return is made by the lodging provider, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. Such examination shall be conducted at the place of lodging provision, unless the city clerk shall stipulate another place within the city. 
(d)  Authority to require reports; contents. In administration of the provisions of this article, the city clerk may require the filing of reports by any person or class of persons having in their possession or custody information relating to the rental of guest rooms which are subject to the tax. The reports shall be filed with the city clerk when required by said official, and shall set forth the rental charged for each occupancy, the date of occupancy, the basis for exemption, or such other information as the city clerk may prescribe. 
(Ord. No. 85-2, Amend. 4, § 10, 4-5-2004) 
Sec. 30-34. - Violations. 
Any lodging provider who fails, neglects or refuses to collect the tax as provided by section 30-26 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $100.00, or confinement in the city for a term not to exceed three months, or both fine and confinement. Any lodging provider who fails or refuses to make any return as provided by section 30-29, to keep adequate records or to open them for inspection by the city, or to furnish other data reasonably requested by the city council shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $100.00, or confinement for a term not to exceed three months, or both. Any lodging provider who makes a false or fraudulent return with intent to evade the tax shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than $100.00, nor more than $300.00, or confinement for a term not to exceed three months, or both. Each and every day during any portion of which any violation is committed, continued or permitted shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punished accordingly. 
(Ord. No. 85-2, Amend. 4, § 11, 4-5-2004) 
Sec. 30-35. - Proceeds of the tax. 
The proceeds of this tax shall be used in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(a)(3). 
(Ord. No. 85-2, Amend. 4, § 10, 4-5-2004) 
Secs. 30-36—30-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OCCUPATION TAX[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Local occupation tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5 et seq. 

Sec. 30-60. - Required for business dealings within the city. 
For the year 1995 and succeeding years thereafter, each person engaged in any business, trade, profession or occupation in the city, whether with a location in the city, or, in the case of an out-of-state business with no location in the state exerting substantial efforts within the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, shall pay an occupation tax for said business, trade, profession or occupation; which tax and any applicable certificate, except for practitioners of professions and occupations, shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in the place of business, if the taxpayer has a permanent business location in the city. If the taxpayer has no permanent business location in the city, such business tax certificate shall be shown to the city manager or his designee upon his request. 
(Ord. No. 95-6, Amend. 4, § 1, 5-2-2011) 
Sec. 30-61. - Construction of terms; definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Business means any person, corporation, partnership, or other legal entity which exerts substantial efforts within the city, engages in, causes to be engaged in, and/or represents or holds out to the public to be engaged in any occupation or activity with the object of gain or benefit, either directly or indirectly. 
Business location or office means any structure or vehicle where a business, profession, or occupation is conducted, but shall not include a temporary or construction work site which serves a single customer or project or a vehicle used for sales or delivery by a business or practitioner of a profession or occupation which has a location or office. A temporary work site which serves multiple customers is included in this definition. The renter's or lessee's location, which is the site of personal property which is rented or leased from another, does not constitute a location or office for the personal property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor. The site of the real property which is rented or leased to another does not constitute a location or office for the real property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or the lessor, in addition to showing the property to prospective lessees or tenants and performing maintenance or repair of the property, otherwise conducts the business of renting or leasing the real property at such site or otherwise conducts any other business, profession, or occupation at such site. 
Dominant line means the type of business within a multiple line business that the greatest amount of income is derived from. 
Employee. 
(1)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (2) of this definition, the term "employee" means an individual whose work is performed under the direction and supervision of the employer and whose employer withholds FICA, federal income tax, or state income tax from such individual's compensation or whose employer issues to such individual for purposes of documenting compensation a form IRS W-2 but not a form IRS 1099. 
(2)  An individual who performs work under the direction and supervision of one business or practitioner in accordance with the terms of a contract or agreement with another business which recruits such individual is an employee of the business or practitioner which issues to such individual for purposes of documenting compensation a form IRS W-2. 
Engaged in business means doing or performing of any act of selling any goods or services, or soliciting business, or offering any goods or services for sale primarily in an attempt to make a profit, including selling or performing services of the character of a wholesaler or retailer, or being involved in any of the functions performed as a manufacturer; all of the foregoing performed either as an owner, operator or agent of any business, trade, profession, or occupation within the city. 
Manufacturing means a person who, either directly or by contracting with others for the necessary labor or mechanical services, manufactures for sale or commercial use any articles, substances or commodities, including, but not limited to, the following: materials upon which commercial activities have been applied, by hand or machinery, so that as a result thereof, a new substance of trade or commerce is produced; the production or fabrication of special or custom-made articles; the making, fabrication, processing, refining, mixing, slaughtering, packaging, curing, preserving, canning, preparing and freezing of fresh foods, fruits, vegetables and meats. 
Nonprofit organization means an organization which complies with U.S. Internal Revenue Code 501(c). 
Occupation tax means a tax levied for revenue-raising purposes on persons, partnerships, corporations or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession or business. 
Person means sole proprietors, corporations, partnerships or any other form of business organization. 
Practitioner of profession or occupation means one who, by state law, requires state licensure regulating such profession or occupation. The term "practitioners of professions and occupations" shall not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business, if the business pays an occupation tax. 
Regulatory fees means payments, whether designated as license fees, permit fees, or by another name, which are required by a local government as an exercise of its police power and as a part of or as an aid to regulation of an occupation, profession, or business. The amount of the regulatory fee shall approximate the reasonable cost of the actual regulatory activity performed by the city. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee or registration fee. The city is not authorized to require any administrative fee, registration fee, or fee by any other name in connection with a regulatory fee, except an occupation tax. Regulatory fees do not include development impact fees as defined by O.C.G.A. § 36-71-2(8) or other costs or conditions of zoning or land development. 
Retailer means a person who sells to consumers, or any other person for any purpose other than for resale, any tangible personal property. 
Services means the accommodating or performing a duty or work by a person utilizing time or talents for direct or indirect remuneration. 
Wholesaler means a person who sells to jobbers or to persons, other than consumers, any tangible personal property. 
(Ord. No. 95-6, Amend. 4, § 2, 5-2-2011) 
Sec. 30-62. - Tax levied; restrictions. 
(a)  An occupation tax shall be levied upon those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one or more locations or offices within the corporate limits of the city and upon the applicable out-of-state businesses with no location or office in the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-7 and 48-13-10(a)(1) based upon the following criteria: The number of employees of the business or practitioner as computed on a full-time position basis or full-time position equivalent basis, provided that, for the purposes of this computation, an employee who works 40 hours or more weekly shall be considered a full-time employee and that the average weekly hours of employees who work less than 40 hours weekly shall be added, and such sum shall be divided by 40 to produce full-time position equivalents. 
(b)  Certain limitations shall apply as follows: 
(1)  The city shall not require the payment of more than one occupational tax for each location that a business or practitioner shall have. 
(2)  The city shall not require an occupation tax on those employees that were taxed by occupation tax in other localities or states, provided that those businesses were taxed in full compliance with O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-7 and 48-13-14. Upon request by any city official, including, but not limited to, personnel of the city, finance department, and building inspection department, the operator of a business shall be required to provide proof that the business was taxed pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-7 and 48-13-14. In the case of an employee who works for the same business or practitioner in more than one municipal corporation or county, the municipal corporation or county in which the employee works for the longest period of time within the calendar year shall be authorized to count the individual as an employee who is employed within the local government's geographic jurisdiction for purposes of occupation tax. 
(3)  An occupation tax shall not be levied in any other manner except as described in this section. 
(c)  Occupation tax schedule. The occupation tax levied shall be based upon the following tax table: 

 
Ord. No. 95-6, Amend. 4, § 4, 5-2-2011; Ord. No. 95-6, Amend. 5, §4, 4-3-2017) 
State Law reference— Taxation on basis of employees authorized, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-10. 
Sec. 30-63. - Paying occupation tax of business with no location in the state. 
For out-of-state businesses with no location in the state, occupation taxes apply to the employees of the business which are reasonably attributed to sales or services in the state. The assessment of an occupation tax is hereby imposed on those businesses and practitioners of professions with no location or office in the state if the business' largest dollar volume of business in the state is in the city and the business or practitioner has one or more employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within the jurisdiction of the city for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients. 
(Ord. No. 95-6, Amend. 4, § 5, 5-2-2011) 
State Law reference— Taxation when no location in state, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7. 
Sec. 30-64. - Dominant line of business to be identified on business registration. 
The business registration of each business operated in the city shall identify the dominant line of business that the business conducts. Except for practitioners of professions and occupations, no business shall conduct any line of business without first having that line of business registered with the city and that line of business being noted by the city manager or his designee upon the occupation tax certificate form which is to be displayed by the business owner. 
(Ord. No. 95-6, Amend. 4, § 6, 5-2-2011) 
Sec. 30-65. - Number of businesses considered operating in city. 
Where a person conducts business at more than one store or place, each store or place shall be considered a separate business for the purpose of the occupation tax. 
(Ord. No. 95-6, Amend. 4, § 7, 5-2-2011) 
Sec. 30-66. - Professionals. 
Practitioners of professions as described in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1)—(18) shall elect as their entire occupation tax for the year 1995 and subsequent years one of the following: 
(1)  The occupation tax based on number of employees. 
(2)  A fee of $150.00 per-practitioner who is licensed to provide the service, such tax to be paid at the practitioner's office or location. The per practitioner fee shall include all persons in the business who qualify as a practitioner under the state's regulatory guidelines and framework. 
(Ord. No. 95-6, Amend. 4, § 8, 5-2-2011) 
State Law reference— Taxation of professionals, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-10. 
Sec. 30-67. - Practitioners exclusively practicing for the government. 
Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, instrumentalities of the United States, the state or a municipality or county of the state, shall not be required to obtain a license or pay an occupation tax for that practice. 
(Ord. No. 95-6, Amend. 4, § 9, 5-2-2011) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-13(3). 
Sec. 30-68. - Purpose and scope of tax. 
The tax levied herein is for revenue purposes only and is not for regulatory purposes, nor is the payment of the tax made a condition precedent to the practice of any such profession, trade or calling. The occupation tax applies to those businesses and occupations which are covered by the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-5 to 48-13-26. All other applicable businesses and occupations are taxed by the local government pursuant to the pertinent general and/or local law or ordinance. Payment of an occupation tax shall not be required as a precondition for the practice of professions and occupations as set out in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c). 
(Ord. No. 95-6, Amend. 4, § 10, 5-2-2011) 
Sec. 30-69. - When tax due and payable; effect of transacting business when tax delinquent. 
(a)  Each such business or occupation tax shall be for the calendar year 1995 and succeeding calendar years thereafter unless otherwise specifically provided. Except for practitioners of law, said registration and occupation tax shall be payable January 15 of each year and shall be delinquent if not paid by March 15 of each year and shall be subject to penalties for delinquency as prescribed in this article. In the event that any person commences business on any date after January 15, in any year, the tax shall be due and payable 30 days following commencement of the business. 
(b)  Except for practitioners of law, regulatory fees authorized by this article shall be paid before commencing business as a condition precedent for transacting business. 
(c)  Regulatory fees may be paid after commencing business when: 
(1)  The work done or services provided are necessary for the health, comfort, or safety of one or more individuals or protection of property. This subsection shall apply to, but not be limited to, the repair, service, or installation of heating, ventilation, and air conditioning equipment or systems; 
(2)  The work done or services provided have no adverse effect on any other person; 
(3)  Regulatory fees are tendered to the local government within two business days after commencing business practice of a profession or occupation and any and all required inspections are made in order to ensure compliance with applicable codes; 
(4)  The work is commenced or the services are provided within 24 hours of receiving the request for such work or service, and it is not possible for the person conducting the work or providing the service to obtain a permit prior to commencing due to the hours of operation of the local government's offices. 
(d)  The tax certificate herein provided for shall be issued by the city manager or his designee. Except for the practitioners of law, if any person, firm or corporation whose duty it is to obtain a registration shall, after said registration or occupation tax becomes delinquent, transact, or offer to transact, in the city any of the kind of profession, trade or calling in this article specified without having first obtained said registration and certificate, such person shall, in addition to remedies provided herein, be punished as provided in section 30-76. 
(e)  In addition to the above remedies, the city manager or his designee may proceed to collect delinquent business or occupation tax in the same manner as provided by law for tax executions. 
(f)  Occupation tax for practitioner of law. 
(1)  Any occupation tax due by any practitioner of law pursuant to this article shall be due and payable within 30 days of January 15 for the previous calendar year. 
(2)  If a practitioner of law commences business in the city on or after July 1 in any year, the occupation tax for the remaining portion of the year shall be 50 percent of the tax imposed for the entire year and shall be due and payable within 30 days of January 15 for the previous calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 95-6, Amend. 4, § 11, 5-2-2011; Ord. No. 95-6, Amend. 5, § 11, 4-3-2017) 
Sec. 30-70. - Allocation of employees of businesses with multiple intrastate or interstate locations. 
For those businesses who have multiple locations inside and outside of the city where the number of employees can be allocated to each location, the number of employees used to determine the occupational tax assessed will be those employees attributed to each city location. In the case where the number of employees attributed locally cannot be determined in those businesses with multiple locations, the total number of employees will be divided by the total number of locations in the city and elsewhere and allotted to those locations. Upon request, the business or practitioner with a location or office situated in more than one jurisdiction shall provide to the city the following: 
(1)  Information necessary to allocate the number of employees of the business or practitioner; and 
(2)  Information relating to the allocation of the business' or practitioner's number of employees by other local governments. 
(Ord. No. 95-6, Amend. 4, § 12, 5-2-2011) 
Sec. 30-71. - Exemption on grounds that business operated for charitable purpose. 
No business on which a business registration or occupation tax is levied by this article shall be exempt from said registration or tax on the ground that such business is operated for a charitable purpose, unless 80 percent or more of the entire proceeds from said business are devoted to such purpose. 
(Ord. No. 95-6, Amend. 4, § 13, 5-2-2011) 
Sec. 30-72. - Evidence of state registration required if applicable. 
Each person who is licensed under title 43 of the state license examining boards shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before the city registration may be issued. 
(Ord. No. 95-6, Amend. 4, § 14, 5-2-2011) 
Sec. 30-73. - Evidence of qualification required if applicable. 
(a)  Any business required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency or any other regulatory matter shall first, before the issuance of a city business registration, show evidence of such qualification. 
(b)  Any business required to submit an annual application for continuance of that business shall do so before the registration is issued. 
(Ord. No. 95-6, Amend. 4, § 15, 5-2-2011) 
Sec. 30-74. - Liability of officers and agents; registration required; failure to obtain. 
(a)  All persons subject to the occupation taxes provided in this article shall be required to take out the necessary registration and obtain the necessary tax certificate for said business prescribed in this article, and in default thereof the officer or agent soliciting for or representing such persons shall be subject to the same penalty as other persons who fail to obtain a certificate. Except for practitioners of professions and occupations, every person commencing business in the city after January 1 of each year shall likewise obtain the registration and obtain the tax certificate herein provided for before commencing the same; and any person transacting, or offering to transact in the city, any of the kinds of business, trade, profession or occupation without first having so obtained said registration, except for practitioners of professions and occupations, shall be subject to penalties provided herein and, upon conviction, be guilty of an offense. In the case of practitioners of professions and occupations, if any person, firm, or corporation whose duty it is to obtain a registration and an occupation tax certificate shall fail to pay such tax in a timely fashion, such offender shall be subject to penalties provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-21. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the owner, proprietor, manager, executive officer or employee of any business coming within the provisions of this article to make a false registration for such business, or to give or file, or direct the giving or filing, of any false information with respect to the occupation tax due under the provisions of this article or upon which any occupation tax due under the provisions of this article is based. 
(Ord. No. 95-6, Amend. 4, § 16, 5-2-2011) 
Sec. 30-75. - When registration and tax due and payable; effect of transacting business when tax delinquent. 
(a)  Each such registration shall be for the calendar year 1995 and each succeeding calendar year thereafter unless otherwise specifically provided. There is hereby imposed a penalty upon each business which fails to apply for and obtain an appropriate business registration and pay all taxes and fees as provided herein before March 15 of each year. The penalty for failure to comply with this section shall be assessed in the amount of ten percent of the occupational tax determined to be due and owing under the provisions of this article for the first 30 days or fraction thereof of delinquency and an additional 1½ percent of the occupation tax for each additional month or fraction thereof of delinquency. Said penalties shall be in addition to all other civil penalties herein provided; and may be collected by the remedies herein provided for collection of the occupation tax, and shall have the same lien and priority as the occupation tax to which the penalty is applied. 
(b)  The registration certificate herein provided for shall be issued by the city manager or his designee and, except for practitioners of law, if any person, firm or corporation whose duty it is to obtain a registration shall, after said occupation tax becomes delinquent, transact or offer to transact, in the city, any of the kind of business or trade without having first obtained said registration, such offender shall be subject to the penalties provided therefor. 
(c)  In the case of practitioners of law, if any person, firm or corporation whose duty it is to obtain a registration and an occupation certificate, shall fail to pay such tax when due, the penalty for failure to comply with this section shall be assessed in the amount of ten percent of the occupational tax determined to be due and owing under the provisions of this article for the first 30 days or fraction thereof of delinquency and an additional 1½ percent of the occupation tax for each additional month or fraction thereof of delinquency. Said penalties shall be in addition to all other civil penalties herein provided; and may be collected by the remedies herein provided for collection of the occupation tax, and shall have the same lien and priority as the occupation tax to which the penalty is applied. 
(Ord. No. 95-6, Amend. 4, § 17, 5-2-2011) 
Sec. 30-76. - Penalty for violation. 
(a)  In addition to the other remedies available to the city for the collection of special taxes, occupation taxes, and license regulatory fees due the city from persons subject to the tax or fee who fail or refuse to pay the tax or fee, the city may issue executions against the delinquent taxpayers for any or all of the following: the amount of the taxes or fees due when the taxes or fees become due; any penalty imposed by section 30-75; and any interest imposed by section 30-75 and except for practitioners of professions and occupations, the municipal court may impose a civil fine for failure to pay the occupation tax or regulatory fee. Such a civil fine shall not exceed $500.00 and may be enforced by the contempt power of the municipal court. 
(b)  Any person whose qualifications to practice his profession is determined by the general laws of the state and who fails to pay an occupation tax as provided in this article shall only be subject to the provisions of section 30-75. 
(Ord. No. 95-6, Amend. 4, § 18, 5-2-2011) 
Sec. 30-77. - Designation of business inspector; duties. 
The city manager and other duly designated officers and inspectors or his successors shall be classified as business inspectors with full subpoena and arresting powers in conjunction with any violation pertaining to this article for the year 1995 and succeeding years thereafter. The city manager or his designee shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article for the levy, assessment and collection and penalties imposed herein. In carrying out its responsibilities hereunder, the city manager or his designee shall have the following duties: 
(1)  To prepare and provide the necessary forms for registration of a business, and for the submission of required information as may be necessary to properly administer and enforce the provisions of this article; 
(2)  To issue to each person an occupation tax certificate within a reasonable time after the payment of the occupation tax assessed and levied in this article; provided, however, where under other ordinances of the city, permits, certifications, and compliance with the enumerated conditions are required for the operation of the business, the city shall not issue said certificate until the applicant exhibits to the city such obtained permits, certifications and compliances; 
(3)  To audit periodically, and when deemed necessary by the city, the books and records of the businesses subject to the provisions of this article, and to require the submission of such additional information as may be necessary in order to correctly determine the amount of the occupation tax due and to ensure the collection of same; and 
(4)  The city manager or his designee shall have the power and authority to make and publish reasonable rules and regulations not inconsistent with this article or other laws of the city and the state or the state constitution for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article and the collection of the occupation tax and fees hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 95-6, Amend. 4, § 19, 5-2-2011) 
Sec. 30-78. - Businesses not covered by this article. 
The following businesses are not covered by the provisions of this article but may be assessed an occupation tax or other type of tax or fee pursuant to the provisions of other general laws of the state or by act of local law: 
(1)  Those businesses regulated by the state public service commission. 
(2)  Those electrical service businesses organized under O.C.G.A. § 46-3-1 et seq. 
(3)  Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including agribusiness. 
(4)  Cooperative marketing associations governed by O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105. 
(5)  Insurance companies governed by O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8. 
(6)  Motor common carriers governed by O.C.G.A. § 46-7-15. 
(7)  Those businesses governed by O.C.G.A. § 40-1-116. 
(8)  Agricultural products and livestock raised in the state governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356. 
(9)  Disabled veterans and blind persons with proof of exemption under O.C.G.A. § 43-12-1. 
(10)  Depository financial institutions governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 
(11)  Facilities operated by a charitable trust governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-55. 
(12)  Any state or local authority or nonprofit organization. 
(13)  Any person engaging in casual or isolated activity and commercial transactions, where such involve personal assets and are not an occupation for the individual. 
a.  In regard to yard/garage sales, this exemption shall apply to persons or nonprofit organizations conducting such sales at a private residence or at a commercial location with an occupancy permit and with permission of the property owner, not exceeding four events per year. 
b.  In regard to the rental of personally owned residences, this exemption shall apply to persons renting a maximum of five residences within the state. 
The city may require any business claiming not to be covered by the provisions of this article to provide specific and detailed evidence showing such non-coverage. 
(Ord. No. 95-6, Amend. 4, § 20, 5-2-2011) 
State Law reference— Exempt businesses and practitioners, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-6. 
Sec. 30-79. - Occupation tax inapplicable where prohibited by law or provided for pursuant to other existing law. 
This occupation tax is not levied upon any part of a business where such levy is prohibited or exempted by the laws of the state or of the United States. 
(Ord. No. 95-6, Amend. 4, § 21, 5-2-2011) 
Sec. 30-80. - Occupation taxes levied on business to be transacted during calendar year; filing of returns showing number of employees during preceding calendar year. 
(a)  All occupation taxes levied by this article are levied on number of employees during the calendar year. However, for convenience of both the city and the taxpayer, those businesses subject to the occupation tax levied in sections 30-62 and 30-66 shall, on or before the times hereinafter set forth, file with the department of planning and zoning the returns hereinafter specifically provided for, showing the number of full-time equivalent employees of that business during the preceding calendar year. 
(b)  The owner, proprietor, manager or secretary officer of the business subject to said occupation tax for the current calendar year shall, at the end of the preceding year, and on or before March 15 of the current calendar year, file with the department of planning and zoning, on a form furnished by the department of planning and zoning, a signed return setting forth the number of full-time equivalent employees of such business for the preceding calendar year. 
(c)  Where a business subject to the occupation tax for the calendar year has been conducted for only a part of the preceding year, the number of full-time equivalent employees for such part shall be set forth in said return. Said return shall also show a figure putting the full-time equivalent employees for such part of a year on an annual basis, which figure shall bear the same ratio to the number of employees for such part year as the full year bears to such part. Said figure shall be used as the estimate of the number of full-time equivalent employees of the business for the current calendar year. 
(d)  If any person fails to make a return, the city manager or his designee may make an estimate of the number of full-time equivalent employees of the business. The estimate shall be made for the period in respect to which the person failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information which is or may come into the possession of the city. 
(1)  The city manager, or his designee, shall give to the operator written notice of his determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail, such service shall be addressed to the operator at his address as it appears in the records of the city. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by the addressee. 
(2)  The amount of the determination shall bear interest and penalty as required in section 30-75. 
(Ord. No. 95-6, Amend. 4, § 22, 5-2-2011) 
Sec. 30-81. - Payment of occupation tax by newly established businesses. 
(a)  In the case of a business subject to occupation tax for a calendar year, which was not conducted for any period of time in the corporate limits of the city in the preceding year, the owner, proprietor, manager or executive officer of the business liable for the occupation tax shall estimate the number of full-time equivalent employees from commencing date to the end of the calendar year and such tax shall be paid as provided in section 30-69. The estimate shall be, at a minimum, the number of full-time equivalent employees which will be employed when the business begins operation. 
(b)  Businesses beginning operation after July 1 of any calendar year shall pay a prorated business tax of 50 percent of the tax which would be due on an annual basis. The administrative fee shall not be prorated. 
(Ord. No. 95-6, Amend. 4, § 24, 5-2-2011) 
Sec. 30-82. - More than one place of business. 
Where a business is operated at more than one place, the number of employees of each location will be entered on a separate occupation tax return on a form to be furnished by the city. 
(Ord. No. 95-6, Amend. 4, § 25, 5-2-2011) 
Sec. 30-83. - Inspection of books and records. 
In any case the city manager or his designee, through his officers, agents, employees or representatives, may inspect the books of the business for which the returns are made. The city manager and/or the director of the finance department or their designees shall have the right to inspect the books or records for the business of which the return was made in the city, and upon demand of the city manager and/or the director of the finance department or their designees such books or records shall be submitted for inspection by a representative of the city within 30 days. Failure of submission of such books or records within 30 days shall be grounds for revocation of the tax certificate currently existing to do business in the city. In the case of practitioners of professions and occupations, the city shall be sensitive to the issues of client or customer confidentiality. In such cases, the practitioner may redact information claimed to be privileged before disclosing books or records of financial transactions. If such practitioner alleges that redaction provides inadequate protection to the confidences of its clients or customers, such practitioner may petition the superior court of the county for an in-camera inspection, prior to examination by the city manager or his designee and/or the director of the finance department. Except for practitioners of professions and occupations electing to pay a flat fee in lieu of a per employee tax, adequate records shall be kept in the city, for examination by the city manager and/or the director of the finance department or their designees at their discretion. If, after examination of the books or records, it is determined that a deficiency occurs as a result of under reporting, a penalty of ten percent of the deficiency and an additional one percent of the deficiency for each month or fraction thereof that the deficiency was due and unpaid shall be assessed. 
(Ord. No. 95-6, Amend. 4, § 28, 5-2-2011) 
Sec. 30-84. - Tax certificate to be revoked for failure to pay tax, file returns, permit inspection of books. 
Except for a person whose qualifications to practice law are determined by the general laws of the state, the failure of any business to pay said occupation tax or any part thereof before it becomes delinquent or upon failure to permit inspection of its books as provided in section 30-83, any business tax certificate granted by the city under this article permitting the owner of said business to do business in the city for the current year shall be, ipso facto, revoked. No new business tax certificate shall be granted by the city for the operation of a business for which any part of the occupation tax herein provided for is at that time unpaid, or to a person who has failed to submit adequate records as requested by the city manager or his designee in accordance with provisions found in section 30-80. In the case of practitioners of law, if any such person, firm, or corporation whose duty it is to obtain a registration and an occupation tax certificate shall fail to pay such tax in a timely fashion, such offender shall be subject to the penalties provided in section 30-75. 
(Ord. No. 95-6, Amend. 4, § 29, 5-2-2011) 
Sec. 30-85. - Effect of failure to comply with article provisions; continuing in business after tax certificate revocation. 
Any person, his manager, agent or employee, who does business in the city after the certificate for said business has been revoked as provided in section 30-84; any person, his manager, agent or employee, who is hereby required to make returns showing the amount of full-time equivalent employees and who fails to make said returns within the time and in the manner herein provided, or refuses to amend such returns so as to set forth the correct information, or who shall make false returns, and except for practitioners of professions and occupations electing to pay a flat fee in lieu of a per-employee tax, any person, their manager, agent or employee who refuses to permit an inspection of books in his charge when the officer, agent, employee or representative of the city request such inspection, during business hours, for the purpose of determining the accuracy of the returns herein provided for, shall be subject to penalties provided in section 30-76. 
(Ord. No. 95-6, Amend. 4, § 30, 5-2-2011) 
Sec. 30-86. - Execution for delinquent occupation tax. 
In addition to the other remedies herein provided for the collection of the occupation tax herein levied, the city manager or his designee, upon any tax or installment of said tax becoming delinquent and remaining unpaid, may issue execution for the correct amount of said tax against the person liable for said tax, which execution shall bear interest at the rate of 1½ percent per month from the date when such tax or installment becomes delinquent, and the lien shall cover the property of the person liable for said tax, all as provided by the ordinances and Charter of the city and the laws of the state. The lien of said occupation tax shall become fixed on and date from the time when such tax or any installment thereof becomes delinquent. The execution shall be levied by the city manager or his designee upon the property of the person liable for said tax, and sufficient property shall be advertised and sold to pay the amount of said execution, with interest and costs. All other proceedings in relation thereto shall be had as is provided by the ordinances and the Charter of the city and the laws of the state and the defendant in said execution shall have rights of defense, by affidavit of illegality and otherwise, which are provided by the Charter of the city and the laws of the state in regard to tax executions. When a nulla bona entry has been entered by proper authority upon an execution issued by the city manager or his designee against any person defaulting on the occupation tax, except for practitioners of professions and occupations, the person against whom the entry was made shall not be allowed or entitled to have or collect any fees or charges whatsoever for services rendered after the entry of the nulla bona. If, at any time after the entry of nulla bona has been made, the person against whom the execution issued pays the tax in full, together with all interest, penalties and costs accrued on the tax, the person may collect any fees and charges due the person as though the person had never defaulted in the payment of the taxes. 
(Ord. No. 95-6, Amend. 4, § 31, 5-2-2011) 
Sec. 30-87. - Amendment, repeal of provision. 
This article shall be subject to amendment or repeal, in whole or in part, at any time and no such amendment or repeal shall be construed to deny the right of the council to assess and collect any of the taxes or other charges prescribed. Said amendment may increase or lower the amounts and tax rates of any occupation and may change the classification thereof. The payment of any occupation tax provided for shall not be construed as prohibiting the levy or collection by the city of additional occupation taxes upon the same person, property or business. 
(Ord. No. 95-6, Amend. 4, § 32, 5-2-2011) 
Sec. 30-88. - Enforcement of provision. 
It is hereby made the duty of the city manager or his designee, together with designated enforcement personnel, including, but not limited to, the county sheriff's office, to see that the provisions of this article relating to occupation taxes are observed, and to summon all violators of the same to appear before the municipal court. It is hereby made the further duty of the city manager or his designees and assistants to inspect all certificates issued by the city, as often as in their judgment it may seem necessary to determine whether the certificate held is the proper one for the business sought to be transacted thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 95-6, Amend. 4, § 34, 5-2-2011) 
Sec. 30-89. - Requirement of public hearing. 
In any year when revenue from occupation taxes is greater than the preceding year, the city shall hold a public hearing as a part of the process for determining how to use the additional revenue. 
(Ord. No. 95-6, Amend. 4, § 36, 5-2-2011) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-28. 
Sec. 30-90. - Conflicts between specific and general provisions. 
Where there is an apparent conflict in this article between specific and general provisions, it is the intention hereof that the specific shall control. 
(Ord. No. 95-6, Amend. 4, § 38, 5-2-2011) 
Sec. 30-91. - Application requirements. 
All applicants requesting an occupation tax certificate and/or regulatory fee certificate are required to provide with their application a written statement of the following information which will also be provided to the state department of revenue: 
(1)  The legal name of the business; 
(2)  Any associated trade names for the business; 
(3)  The mailing address for the business; 
(4)  The actual physical address of each location of the business, if it is different than the mailing address; 
(5)  The North American Industry Classification System Code (NAICS) applicable to such business; and 
(6)  The sales and use tax identification number assigned to the business by the state department of revenue, if the business is required by law to have such a number. 
The city will notify the state department of revenue of any applicant's failure or refusal to provide the required information. 
(Ord. No. 95-6, Amend. 4, § 39, 5-2-2011) 
Sec. 30-92. - Occupation tax certificate not transferable. 
An occupation tax certificate and/or regulatory fee certificate shall not be transferable and a transfer of ownership shall be considered in the same light as the termination of such business and the establishment of a new business. Therefore, a new certificate shall be required for each new owner of the business. 
(Ord. No. 95-6, Amend. 4, § 40, 5-2-2011) 
Sec. 30-93. - Duty to keep information current. 
Any person required by this article to register his business shall notify the city manager or his designee in writing within 30 days of the following changes: 
(1)  Any change of address of the business, in which case the same occupation tax certificate shall be valid at the new location. 
(2)  Any change of ownership, in which case the transfer shall be treated as the termination of one business and the establishment of a new business for the purposes of this article. 
(3)  The termination of any business. 
(Ord. No. 95-6, Amend. 4, § 41, 5-2-2011) 
Sec. 30-94. - Compliance with other ordinances and laws. 
(a)  All businesses are required to comply with the provisions of all ordinances of the city and other laws and the issuance of a occupation tax receipt to any business pursuant to this article shall not authorize that business to engage in or carry on business or to perform any other activity in violation of state or federal law or regulations and other ordinances of the city, nor shall it relieve that business from obtaining any certificate or permit required by the provision of other laws or ordinances. 
(b)  No certificate shall be issued or renewed until any delinquent property taxes and other debts to the city have been paid. 
(Ord. No. 95-6, Amend. 4, § 42, 5-2-2011) 
Sec. 30-95. - No regulation of practitioners of professions and occupations. 
It being the intention of the mayor and council that no portion of this taxation scheme shall be construed to be, or have the practical effect of, regulation of practitioners of professions and occupations and if any provision hereof shall be construed by a court of competent jurisdiction to be an unlawful regulation of such profession, then such provision shall be considered rescinded by the mayor and council as if such provision had not been adopted, and in such case, the remaining provisions of this article shall be applied to such practitioner. 
(Ord. No. 95-6, Amend. 4, § 43, 5-2-2011) 
Chapter 32 - TRAFFIC[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Rules of the road, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq.; powers of local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 32-1. - Adoption of uniform rules of the road. 
(a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-372 and 40-6-374, the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1 and O.C.G.A. title 40, ch. 6 (O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq.) are adopted by reference. 
(b)  Penalties for violation of such provisions shall not exceed 60 days in jail and a $500.00 fine per offense. 
(Ord. No. 83-1, 9-6-1983) 
Sec. 32-2. - Traffic signs, signals, devices and markings ratified. 
The location and existence of all traffic control signs, signals, devices and markings in place on the adoption date of this Code are ratified and confirmed. 
Sec. 32-3. - Speed zones; use of radar. 
The following speed zones are established based upon a traffic engineering investigation as required by state law. It is unlawful to use radar detection devices on any state route, county road or city street not listed in this section. This section includes any legally posted speed limits before, during or after any construction/work zones on any city street or state route. Any person convicted of a violation of this section can be punished to the maximum as provided by state law. The county sheriff's office may enforce the zones established in this section. The North Georgia College and State University Public Safety Office may enforce any zones established in this section that lie within the jurisdiction of the board of regents of the University System of Georgia or that lie within 500 yards of any property under the jurisdiction of the board of regents of the University System of Georgia within the city. 
ON-SYSTEM 

 
  
OFF-SYSTEM 

 
  
School zone hours are effective: 

 
  
(Ord. No. 2017-09, 12-4-2017) 
State Law reference— Authority to alter speed limits, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-183. 
Sec. 32-4. - One-way streets. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any vehicle, motorized or unmotorized, to be driven or otherwise operated on Warwick Street other than eastbound between Waters Street and Meaders Street. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any vehicle, motorized or unmotorized, to be driven or otherwise operated on Hawkins Street other than westbound between Meaders Street and Walters Street. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any vehicle, motorized or unmotorized, to be driven or otherwise operated along the specified section of Choice Avenue between South Chestatee Street and South Park Street in a westerly direction as noticed on posted signs. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any vehicle, motorized or unmotorized, to be driven or otherwise operated along the specified section of Enota Drive between Boyd Circle and Short Street in an easterly direction as noticed on posted signs. 
(e)  Any person failing to abide by these regulations shall be guilty of a civil offense which shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $150.00 nor more than $250.00 in the municipal court. 
(Ord. No. 2005-6, §§ 1—3, 9-12-2005; Ord. No. 2015-11, § 1, 9-1-2015; Ord. No. 2015-10, 9-15-2015) 
State Law reference— Authority to designate one-way streets, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-47. 
Sec. 32-5. - Vehicles permitted in historic district (B3). 
All vehicles operating within the city historic district (B3), which is defined as the street system appearing within the area labeled B3 on the official zoning map, shall be standard automobile, limousine, tour bus, light delivery truck, van or horse drawn (as permitted by ordinance) vehicles which are compatible with and not damaging to the infrastructure and ambiance of the historic district. Such vehicles shall be no more than 13 feet in height and 45 feet long. Concrete mixer trucks and trucks with dump bodies or trailers are prohibited. However, any vehicle which has valid pickups or deliveries within the B3 district shall be permitted to make said pickups or deliveries. Any violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine not less than $100.00 and not more than $500.00. 
(Ord. No. 2009-4, 6-1-2009) 
Secs. 32-6—32-28. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate or prohibit stopping, standing or parking, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(1); stopping, standing and parking, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-200 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 32-29. - Violations. 
(a)  The municipal court shall be the court of law to hold any and all cases on violations of this article. 
(b)  The penalties for violation of this article for certain specific offenses shall be as follows: 
(1)  Extended parking beyond posted time limit: 
a.  First offense—$25.00. 
b.  Second offense—$30.00. 
c.  Third offense—$40.00. 
d.  Fourth offense—$50.00. 
e.  Fifth offense—$60.00. 
f.  Subsequent citations—$75.00. 
(2)  Unauthorized parking in a loading zone—$25.00. 
(3)  Unauthorized parking in a handicapped zone—$250.00. 
(4)  Parking vehicle on a yellow curb—$35.00. 
(5)  Parking vehicle in a fire lane—$100.00. 
(6)  Parking within prohibited distance from fire hydrant—$65.00. 
(7)  Parking on wrong side of street—$30.00. 
(8)  Parking on sidewalk—$75.00. 
(9)  Double parking—$25.00. 
(10)  Unauthorized parking for display or advertising—$50.00. 
(11)  All other parking offenses—$25.00. 
(c)  Other fines and penalties may be set forth in other provisions herein. Second and third offense violations regarding disabled zones shall be fined as per the penalties provided in the Official Code of Georgia up to the maximum amounts available therein. 
(Ord. No. 77-1, Amend. 4, §§ 1, 2, 7-5-1988; Ord. No. 77-1, Amend. 5, § 2, 6-21-1994; Ord. No. 77-1, Amend. 6, 5-3-2000; Ord. No. 77-1, Amend. 7, 9-3-2016; Ord. No. 2018-16, 9-20-2018 ) 
Sec. 32-30. - Multiple violations in a single day. 
Each violation of the provisions of this article and other ordinances of the city relating to the parking of vehicles committed by the same person during the same day shall constitute a separate punishable offense against this article or other ordinances of the city and may be treated as such, though there may be multiple violations by the same person in the same or different parking spaces during the same day. 
(Ord. No. 77-1, Amend. 4, § 7, 7-5-1988) 
Sec. 32-31. - Removal, storage and redemption of vehicles. 
Whenever any vehicle shall be parked on any street or highway within the city in violation of any provision of this article, and when the city manager or his designee shall determine that such a vehicle is an impediment to traffic, the city shall have the right to impound the vehicle and remove it to some safe place. Any vehicle so removed and impounded shall be released to the owner thereof, or his authorized agent, upon giving a satisfactory cash or surety bond in an amount not less than $25.00 as eventual condemnation money to cover the cost and expense of impoundment and storage. The bond shall be approved by the city manager or an individual authorized by him. The bond shall be subject to final judgment rendered by the judge in such matter and shall be considered as a condemnation money bond. If no bond is tendered as aforesaid, the vehicle shall be impounded and await disposition by final judgment of the court by the judge unless the judge for good reason shown to him may enter an order authorizing the owner, or his duly authorized agent, to retain possession of the vehicle under appropriate conditions fixed by the court. The city shall be responsible for notifying the owner of any vehicle so impounded as appears from the registration plates or other ascertainable evidence. 
(Ord. No. 77-1, Amend. 4, § 8, 7-5-1988) 
Sec. 32-32. - Immobilization of vehicles by use of wheel locks. 
The city manager, or his designee, is hereby authorized to place or direct the placing of wheel locks on any motor vehicle which is parked in violation of any provision of this article relating to parking which has not been disposed of by judgment of the municipal court or by the posting of bond for appearance in the court. Any designated official may release such motor vehicle from wheel locks upon the posting by any person of proper bond for appearance in the court with respect to each violation of this article by the motor vehicle which has not been disposed of as aforesaid. A wheel lock fee, in an amount established by the city, shall be assessed on any motor vehicle for the release of the wheel locks. 
(Ord. No. 77-1, Amend. 4, § 9, 7-5-1988) 
Sec. 32-33. - Removal of certain illegally parked vehicles. 
(a)  Any vehicle parked or left standing in violation of any provisions of this article or any ordinance of the city prohibiting or regulating parking of vehicles upon the streets or other places of the city, or for a period exceeding 24 hours, is hereby declared a public nuisance and a trespasser on the public right-of-way, and an obstruction upon the streets, and a hazard to traffic thereon, and any law enforcement officer upon discovering any such vehicle shall remove such vehicle or cause the same to be removed to any city-owned-or-operated property, where the same shall be kept and detained until the owner of such vehicle, his agent or representative obtains an order from the law enforcement officer authorizing such vehicle to be surrendered, or upon the order from the city manager after a hearing shall be had thereon as herein provided. 
(b)  If such vehicle remains in the custody of the city exceeding a period of 30 days, under any one of the circumstances enumerated in subsection (a) of this section, and after a reasonable effort has been made on the part of the law enforcement officers to locate the owner of such vehicle, then and in that event, the same may be advertised for sale one time in the official county organ and ten days after such advertisement same may be sold at public sale on the property where the vehicle is located. Proceeds of said sale, after expenses, are to be deposited in the general funds of the city. 
(Ord. No. 77-1, art. I, div. 1, § 1, 3-11-1977) 
Sec. 32-34. - Parking not to obstruct traffic. 
No person shall park any vehicle upon a street, other than an alley, in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet of the width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic. 
(Ord. No. 77-1, art. I, div. 1, § 2, 3-11-1977) 
Sec. 32-35. - Parking in alleys. 
No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet of the width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within an alley in such position as to block the driveway entrance to any abutting property. 
(Ord. No. 77-1, art. I, div. 1, § 3, 3-11-1977) 
Sec. 32-36. - Parking for certain purposes prohibited. 
No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway for the principal purpose of: 
(1)  Displaying such vehicle for sale; 
(2)  Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle except repairs necessitated by an emergency. 
(Ord. No. 77-1, art. I, div. 1, § 4, 3-11-1977) 
Sec. 32-37. - Parking adjacent to schools. 
(a)  The city manager is hereby authorized to erect signs indicating no parking upon either or both sides of any street adjacent to any school property when such parking would, in his opinion, interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation. 
(b)  When official signs are erected indicating no parking upon either side of a street adjacent to any school property as authorized in subsection (a) of this section, no person shall park a vehicle in any such designated place. 
(Ord. No. 77-1, art. I, div. 1, § 5, 3-11-1977) 
Sec. 32-38. - Parking prohibited on narrow streets. 
(a)  The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized to erect signs indicating no parking upon any street when the width of the roadway does not exceed 20 feet or upon one side of a street as indicated by such signs when the width of the roadway does not exceed 30 feet. 
(b)  When official signs prohibiting parking are erected upon narrow streets as authorized in subsection (a) of this section, no person shall park a vehicle upon any such street in violation of any such sign. 
(Ord. No. 77-1, art. I, div. 1, § 6, 3-11-1977) 
Sec. 32-39. - Standing or parking on one-way streets. 
The city manager is authorized to erect signs upon the left-hand side of any one-way street to prohibit the standing or parking of vehicles, and when such signs are in place, no person shall stand or park a vehicle upon such left-hand side in violation of any such sign. 
(Ord. No. 77-1, art. I, div. 1, § 7, 3-11-1977) 
Sec. 32-40. - Standing or parking on one-way roadways. 
In the event a highway includes two or more separate roadways and traffic is restricted to one direction upon any such roadway, no person shall stand or park a vehicle upon the left-hand side of such one-way roadway unless signs are erected to permit such standing or parking. The city manager is authorized to determine when standing or parking may be permitted upon the left-hand side of any such one-way roadway and to erect signs giving notice thereof. 
(Ord. No. 77-1, art. I, div. 1, § 8, 3-11-1977) 
Sec. 32-41. - No stopping, standing or parking near hazardous or congested places. 
(a)  The city manager is hereby authorized to determine and designate by proper signs placed not exceeding 100 feet in length in which the stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles would create an especially hazardous condition or would cause unusual delay to traffic. 
(b)  When official signs are erected at hazardous or congested places as authorized in subsection (a) of this section, no person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle in any such designated place. 
(Ord. No. 77-1, art. I, div. 1, § 9, 3-11-1977) 
Secs. 32-42—32-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RESTRICTED OR PROHIBITED ON CERTAIN STREETS 

Sec. 32-71. - Application of division provisions. 
The provisions of this division prohibiting the standing or parking of a vehicle shall apply at all times or at those times herein specified or as indicated on official signs except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a law enforcement officer or official traffic control device. 
(Ord. No. 77-1, art. I, div. 2, § 1, 3-11-1977) 
Sec. 32-72. - Regulations not exclusive. 
The provisions of this division imposing a time limit on parking shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles in specified places or at specified times. 
(Ord. No. 77-1, art. I, div. 2, § 2, 3-11-1977) 
Sec. 32-73. - Parking prohibited at all times on certain streets. 
When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets so posted. 
(Ord. No. 77-1, art. I, div. 2, § 3, 3-11-1977) 
Sec. 32-74. - Parking on restricted sides of streets. 
When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle at any time upon the restricted side of any street. 
(Ord. No. 77-1, art. I, div. 2, § 4, 3-11-1977) 
Sec. 32-75. - Parking signs required. 
Whenever by this or any other ordinance of this city any parking time limit is imposed or parking is prohibited on designated streets, it shall be the duty of the city manager to erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof and no such regulation shall be effective unless said signs are erected and in place at the time of any alleged offense. 
(Ord. No. 77-1, art. I, div. 2, § 5, 3-11-1977) 
Sec. 32-76. - Vehicle vending food, limitation on time for parking or standing. 
(a)  No automobile, truck, wagon, buggy, cart or other vehicles of any kind from which vegetables, fruit, produce or meat or any unsealed article of food of any nature or any other peddler's item is being sold or being offered for sale shall stand or be parked upon the public sidewalks, streets, alleys or other public places in this city on any day except Sundays, Gold Rush and holidays when the other businesses in town are closed. 
(b)  This section would not apply to a designated area of the city where the county has designated this area as a produce sales area for local farmers to sell their produce. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any vehicle, while loading or unloading, to leave available less than ten feet for vehicular traffic. 
(Ord. No. 77-1, art. I, div. 2, § 6, 3-11-1977; Ord. No. 77-1, Amend. 2, 2-3-1981) 
Sec. 32-77. - Parking zones. 
Limited parking zones will be established by the city manager by erecting a sign not less than 100 feet apart with a minimum of at least three signs per block stating what limitations apply to parking in the area. 
(Ord. No. 77-1, art. II, § 1, 3-11-1977 
Sec. 32-78. - Parking prohibited in certain locations, on certain days and hours. 
It is unlawful for the owner or operator of any motor vehicle or other vehicle to park the vehicle in any of the places on the days and between hours indicated and specified by posted signs indicating such prohibited parking. 
(Ord. No. 77-1, Amend. 4, § 4, 7-5-1988) 
Sec. 32-79. - Parking time limited in certain locations, certain days and hours. 
It is unlawful for the owner or operator of any motor vehicle or other vehicle to park the vehicle or allow the vehicle to remain parked in any of the places on the streets and alleys of the city, at any time on the days and between the hours indicated and specified by posted signs limiting parking time in certain locations on certain days and hours. 
(Ord. No. 77-1, Amend. 4, § 5, 7-5-1988) 
Sec. 32-80. - Prohibited for more than three hours generally. 
No vehicle shall be parked for a longer period than three hours within the zones designated for maximum three-hour parking within the city, during the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. on any given day. A vehicle, regardless of changing spaces, will violate this section if the cumulative total parking time for that vehicle during a given business day exceeds three hours within the city's parking areas limited to no more than three-hour parking. 
(Ord. No. 77-1, Amend. 4, § 6, 7-5-1988) 
Sec. 32-81. - Certain locations restricted to parallel parking only. 
All that parking on the south side of Grove Street from the Corner of Grove and Main Street at the traffic light and extending to Butler's Thriftown parking lot shall be restricted to parallel parking only. 
(Ord. No. 77-1, Amend. 1, § 1, 5-16-1980) 
Sec. 32-82. - Parking restrictions to allow for sufficient turning radius. 
No parking shall be allowed on the northwest Corner of Grove Street and Main Streets for a distance of 50 feet in each direction to allow for a sufficient turning radius. 
(Ord. No. 77-1, Amend. 1, § 2, 5-16-1980) 
Sec. 32-83. - Loading zone. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any vehicle, motorized or unmotorized, to be driven or otherwise operated along the specified section of Choice Avenue between South Chestatee Street and South Park Street in a westerly direction as noticed on posted signs. 
(b)  The former westbound lane of Choice Avenue between South Chestatee Street and South Park Avenue shall be a 30-minute loading/unloading zone. 
(c)  Signage shall be placed in appropriate places designated by the city engineer or city manager indicating loading zone only and any other signs which the city engineer or city manager may deem appropriate for the proper and safe flow of traffic. 
(d)  Any person failing to abide by these regulations shall be guilty of a civil offense which shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $150.00 nor more than $250.00 in the municipal court. 
(Ord. No. 2015-11, §§ 2—4, 9-1-2015) 
Sec. 32-84. - Parking for advertising purposes. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or to park on any street or other property owned by the city any vehicle for the primary purpose of displaying advertising, including, but not limited to, auction signs, general real estate "for sale" signs, advertisements for specific events, retail advertising signs, etc., except upon special permission of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 77-1, Amend. 4, § 11, 7-5-1988) 
Sec. 32-85. - Parking within prohibited distance of stop signs. 
It shall be unlawful for anyone to park a vehicle within 20 feet of a stop sign except within a parking space officially authorized and marked by the city. 
(Ord. No. 77-1, Amend. 4, § 12, 7-5-1988) 
Sec. 32-86. - Designation of compact vehicle parking zone. 
(a)  On North Chestatee Street in the existing diagonal parking spaces between Warwick Street and the Downtown Square, a white skipped or dashed line will be painted on the pavement near the opening of each vehicular parking space. The line shall be painted near the rear of the space and parallel to the direction of travel of the street. The white skipped or dashed line (the "compact vehicle line") shall define the qualification of any vehicle entering the space as compact or not. Any vehicle, its load, attachments or accoutrements, including, but not limited to, trailer hitches, accessory racks, ladders, lumber or anything else being transported by the vehicle after it has been parked, protruding into or touching the compact vehicle line shall be deemed in violation of this compact vehicle regulation. The front wheels and tires of the parked vehicle shall at all times be within the parking space and shall not be atop any items other than the parking surface, including, but not limited to, sidewalks, curbs, signs and/or grassed, dirt or unpaved areas adjacent to the parking space. Any parked vehicle found atop sidewalks, curbs, signs and/or grassed, dirt or unpaved areas adjacent to the parking space shall be in violation of this section. 
(b)  Any vehicle found in violation will be subject to citation. Enforcement officers will cite and confirm the violation prior to issuing any citation. Signage identifying this as a violation shall be placed in prominent locations along North Chestatee Street. 
(Ord. No. 77-1, Amend. 8, 2-6-2017) 
Sec. 32-87. - Electric vehicle charging. 
Wherever electric vehicle charging stations are located throughout the city, the city shall erect a sign designating that those particular spaces shall be reserved only for those using the car charging station to charge an electric vehicle. A citation shall be issued by city code enforcement for any vehicle parked in such reserved spaces which is not utilizing the electric vehicle charging station to charge an electric vehicle. The specified fine will be $25.00. 
(Ord. No. 2015-2, §§ 1, 2, 4-6-2015) 
Sec. 32-88. - Bus parking. 
(a)  Five short-term bus parking spaces shall be located in the former westbound lane of Enota Drive between Boyd Circle and Short Street. These spaces are not to be used for loading and unloading. These spaces should not be used for regular travel lanes at any time. 
(b)  Signage shall be placed in appropriate places as designated by the city engineer or city manager indicating "No left turns," "Dead end ahead," "Do not enter," "Bus parking only," and any other signs which the city engineer or city manager may deem appropriate for the proper and safe flow of traffic. 
(c)  Any person failing to abide by these regulations shall be guilty of a civil offense which shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $150.00 nor more than $250.00 in the municipal court. 
(Ord. No. 2015-10, §§ 2—4, 9-15-2015) 
Secs. 32-89—32-119. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BICYCLES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate bicycles, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(7); bicycles, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-290 et seq. 

Sec. 32-120. - Riding bicycles on the sidewalks in the historical and central business districts. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to ride a bicycle upon a public sidewalk in the historical and central business districts. 
(b)  The terms "historical business district" and "central business district," as used in this section, mean the area designated by the zoning ordinance of the city, as now or hereafter amended. 
(c)  Violation of any of the provisions of subsection (a) of this section is a traffic offense and shall be punished as follows: 
(1)  First offense. It is a traffic infraction for any person to violate subsection (a) of this section, and such person shall be punished by a fine of $25.00. This fine shall not be suspended or deferred, but the court may authorize community service in lieu of all or part of this fine. 
(2)  Second offense. 
a.  Every person who violates subsection (a) of this section a second time within a five-year period shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not less than $50.00 nor more than $100.00. Fifty dollars of the fine shall not be suspended or deferred, but the court may authorize community service in lieu of all or part of this fine. 
b.  Upon conviction of a second violation of subsection (a) of this section within a five-year period, the court may order forfeiture of the bicycle which was ridden in violation of subsection (a) of this section, unless it is proven to the court by a preponderance of the evidence that the defendant is not the owner of the bicycle and the owner did not or could not have reasonably known that the bicycle would be ridden in violation of subsection (a) of this section. 
(3)  Third or subsequent offense. 
a.  Every person who violates subsection (a) of this section a third or more times within a five-year period shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not less than $100.00 nor more than $150.00. One hundred dollars of the fine shall not be suspended or deferred, but the court may authorize community service in lieu of all or part of the fine. 
b.  Upon conviction of a third or subsequent violation of subsection (a) of this section within a five-year period, the court may order forfeiture of the bicycle which was ridden in violation of subsection (a) of this section, unless it is proven to the court by a preponderance of the evidence that the defendant is not the owner of the bicycle and the owner did not or could not have reasonably known that the bicycle would be ridden in violation of subsection (a) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 96-8, §§ 2, 3, 1-6-1996) 
Sec. 32-121. - Negligent bicycling. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to ride a bicycle in a negligent manner upon any publicly owned property or way open to the public in the city. For purposes of this section, the phrase "to ride in a negligent manner" means the riding or propelling of a bicycle in such a manner as to endanger or be likely to endanger any person or property; provided, however, that any person riding a bicycle on private property with the consent of the owner in a manner consistent with the owner's consent shall not be guilty of negligent bicycling. 
(b)  Negligent bicycling is a traffic misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not less than $50.00 nor more than $250.00. Twenty-five dollars of the fine shall not be suspended or deferred, but the court may authorize community service in lieu of all or part of the fine. 
(c)  Upon conviction of a violation of this section, the court may order forfeiture of the bicycle which was ridden in violation of this section, unless it is proven to the court by a preponderance of the evidence that the defendant is not the owner of the bicycle and the owner did not or could not have reasonably known that the bicycle would be ridden in violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 96-8, § 4, 1-6-1996) 
Sec. 32-122. - Seizure of bicycles. 
Whenever a law enforcement officer has probable cause to believe a bicycle was used or is being used in violation of this article, such bicycle may be seized as evidence and held until the disposition of the charge. An observation by a law enforcement officer that a bicycle is in motion upon the ground or pavement in the historical or central business districts, whether or not such bicycle is accompanied by a person, shall be sufficient to establish probable cause of a violation of Section 32-120(a). 
(Ord. No. 96-8, § 5, 1-6-1996) 
Sec. 32-123. - Bicycles; riding on sidewalks outside historical and central business districts. 
(a)  Whenever any person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk outside the historical and central business districts, such person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian. The terms historical and central business districts, as used in this section, mean any area designated by the city zoning ordinance, as now or hereafter amended. 
(b)  Violation of any provision of this section is a traffic infraction. 
(Ord. No. 96-8, § 6, 1-6-1996) 
Secs. 32-124—32-144. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SKATEBOARDING, ROLLER BLADING AND ROLLER SKATING 

Sec. 32-145. - Riding skateboards, roller blades and roller skates in the historical and central business districts. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to ride a skateboard, roller blades or roller skates upon a public sidewalk, parking lot or roadway in the historical and central business districts. 
(b)  The terms "historical business district" and "central business district," as used in this section, mean the area designated by the zoning ordinance of the city, as now or hereafter amended. 
(c)  Violation of any of the provisions of subsection (a) of this section is a traffic offense, whether or not the act at issue occurred upon a roadway, and shall be punished as follows: 
(1)  First offense. It is a traffic infraction for any person to violate subsection (a) of this section, and shall be punished by a fine of $25.00. This fine shall not be suspended or deferred, but the court may authorize community service in lieu of all or part of this fine. 
(2)  Second offense. 
a.  Every person who violates this section a second time within a five-year period shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not less than $50.00 nor more than $100.00. Fifty dollars of the fine shall not be suspended or deferred, but the court may authorize community service in lieu of all or part of this fine. 
b.  Upon conviction of a second violation of this section within a five-year period, the court may order forfeiture of the skateboard, roller blades or roller skates which were ridden in violation of subsection (a) of this section, unless it is proven to the court by a preponderance of the evidence that the defendant is not the owner of the skateboard, roller blades or roller skates and the owner did not or could not have reasonably known that the skateboard, roller blades or roller skates would be ridden in violation of subsection (a) of this section. 
(3)  Third or subsequent offense. 
a.  Every person who violates subsection (a) of this section a third or more times within a five-year period shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not less than $100.00 nor more than $150.00. One hundred dollars of the fine shall not be suspended or deferred, but the court may authorize community service in lieu of all or part of the fine. 
b.  Upon conviction of a third or subsequent violation of subsection (a) of this section within a five-year period, the court may order forfeiture of the skateboard, roller blades or roller skates which were ridden in violation of subsection (a) of this section, unless it is proven to the court by a preponderance of the evidence that the defendant is not the owner of the skateboard, roller blades or roller skates and the owner did not or could not have reasonably known that the skateboard, roller blades or roller skates would be ridden in violation of subsection (a) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, §§ 2, 3, 11-4-1996) 
Sec. 32-146. - Negligent skateboarding, roller blading or roller skating. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to ride a skateboard, roller blades or roller skates in a negligent manner upon any publicly owned property or way open to the public in the city. For purposes of this section, the phrase "to ride in a negligent manner" means the riding or propelling of a skateboard, roller blades or roller skates in such a manner as to endanger or be likely to endanger any person or property; provided, however, that any person riding a skateboard, roller blades or roller skates on private property with the consent of the owner in a manner consistent with the owner's consent shall not be guilty of negligent skateboarding, roller blading or roller skating. 
(b)  Negligent skateboarding, roller blading, or roller skating is a traffic misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not less than $50.00 nor more than $250.00. Twenty-five dollars of the fine shall not be suspended or deferred, but the court may authorize community service in lieu of all or part of the fine. 
(c)  Upon conviction of a violation of this section, the court may order forfeiture of the skateboard, roller blades or roller skates which were ridden in violation of this section, unless it is proven to the court by a preponderance of the evidence that the defendant is not the owner of the skateboard, roller blades or roller skates and the owner did not or could not have reasonably known that the skateboard, roller blades or roller skates would be ridden in violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 4, 11-4-1996) 
Sec. 32-147. - Seizure of skateboard, roller blades or roller skates. 
Whenever a law enforcement officer has probable cause to believe a skateboard, roller blades or roller skates were used or are being used in violation of this article, such skateboard, roller blades or roller skates may be seized as evidence and held until the disposition of the charge. An observation by a law enforcement officer that a skateboard, roller blades or roller skates is in motion upon the ground or pavement in the historical or central business districts, whether or not such skateboard, roller blades or roller skates is accompanied by a person, shall be sufficient to establish probable cause of a violation of section 32-145(a). 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 5, 11-4-1996) 
Sec. 32-148. - Skateboards, roller blades and roller skates; riding on sidewalks outside historical and central business districts. 
(a)  Whenever any person is riding a skateboard, roller blades or roller skates upon a sidewalk outside the historical and central business districts, such person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian. 
The term historical and central business districts, as used in this section, means any area designated by the city zoning ordinance, as now or hereafter amended. 
(b)  Violation of any provision of this section is a traffic infraction. 
(Ord. No. 96-5, § 6, 11-4-1996) 
Chapter 34 - UTILITIES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 34-1—34-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER AND SEWER RATES AND CHARGES 

Sec. 34-19. - Water. 
Water rates and charges are as established by the city. 
(Ord. No. 75-1, Amend. 45, 10-2016) 
Sec. 34-20. - Sewage. 
Sewage rates and charges are as established by the city. 
(Ord. No. 75-1, Amend. 45, 10-2016) 
Sec. 34-21. - Administrative appeal procedure regarding water and sewer tap fee determinations. 
The following procedures shall be utilized in regard to appeals from determinations made by the city manager or his designee regarding water and sewer tap fee determinations: 
(1)  An appeal may be commenced by any party aggrieved by a decision, demand, determination, interpretation or order of the city manager or his designee provided to a person in writing with respect to the water or sewer ordinances of the city, including, but not limited to, any fee, charge, rate, or amount billed (either in terms of quantity of water or sewer service used or monetary amount billed for such services). 
(2)  An appeal of a determination must be commenced within 30 days of the date of the determination and shall be commenced by mailing a notice of appeal to the city manager, 465 Riley Road, Dahlonega, Georgia 30533. The appellant should, but is not required, to pay monies owed to the city pursuant to a determination and any such payment shall not prejudice the person's appeal. A failure to properly file a notice of appeal waives any right or claim such person may have with respect to a determination. 
(3)  The notice of appeal shall include a brief statement of the appellant's grounds for appeal of the determination. 
(4)  Within ten working days of receipt of the notice of appeal, the city manager shall appoint a hearing officer who may be, but need not be, an employee of the city. 
(5)  The hearing officer shall, within five days, send by certified mail to the appellant, the city attorney and the city engineer, or his designee, a notice of hearing setting forth the following: 
a.  A statement of the time, place, and nature of the hearing to be held no sooner than 20 days and no later than 60 days from the date of the notice of hearing; 
b.  A statement of the legal authority and jurisdiction under which the hearing is to be held; 
c.  A copy of the notice of appeal, upon application of the city or at the discretion of the hearing officer, the hearing officer may require timely furnishing of a more definite and detailed statement from the appellant. Within ten days of the receipt of the notice of appeal or the more definite statement from the appellant, the city must respond in writing to all parties to the issues raised. 
(6)  Opportunity at the hearing shall be afforded all parties to respond and present evidence and argument on all issues. 
(7)  Unless precluded by law, informal disposition may be made of any appeal by stipulation, agreed settlement, consent order, or default prior to the hearing. 
(8)  The hearing officer shall have the authority to administer oaths and affirmations; regulate the course of the hearings; set the time and place for adjourned and continued hearings; fix the time for filing of briefs and confer to consider simplification of the issues by consent of the parties; and to make evidentiary rulings as he shall deem appropriate and proper. 
(9)  Parties may appear by attorney and shall have the right to examine and cross-examine all witnesses. 
(10)  No decision or order shall be made except upon consideration of the record as a whole or such portion thereof as may be cited by any party to the proceeding and as supported by and in accordance with substantial evidence. The hearing officer need not observe the formal rules of evidence observed by courts. Irrelevant, immaterial or unduly repetitious evidence or cross-examination may be excluded. Objections to evidentiary offers may be made and shall be noted in the record. All evidence shall be offered and made a part of the record and all documentary evidence may be received in the form of copies or excerpts, or by incorporation by reference. In the case of incorporation by reference, the materials so incorporated shall be available for examination by the parties before being received in evidence. 
(11)  The hearing officer shall: 
a.  Cause a complete record to be made, to include all pleadings, notices, orders, and intermediate rulings; the corrected transcript of the hearing; the relevant exhibits or copies produced and admitted into evidence at the hearing; 
b.  Prepare and make a report containing his proposed findings of fact and conclusions of law, along with his recommendations to the city council, and the basis therefor, within 30 days of the conclusion of the hearing. However, the city council shall not be bound by the proposed findings, conclusions and recommendations of the hearing officer. 
(12)  The city council shall: 
a.  Examine the report of the hearing officer and, within 15 working days, make its decision; 
b.  File a copy of the same with the city clerk and make it available for public inspection; 
c.  Include findings of fact and conclusions of law unless waived by all parties; and 
d.  Furnish a copy of its decision to each party or to his attorney of record. Appeals from the final decision of the city council shall be made by writ of certiorari to the superior court of the county. 
(Ord. No. 2016-4, 6-6-2016) 
Secs. 34-22—34-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - WATER SYSTEM 

Sec. 34-46. - Ordinances saved from repeal. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code effects any ordinance not found in this Code that relates to the city's water system. 
Sec. 34-47. - Fire hydrants. 
(a)  Permit. Permits shall be obtained from city officials for any withdrawal at the designated metered site for such withdrawals. The city shall provide to the permittee the location of the metered site for said withdrawal. The cost of the metered withdrawal shall be as designated by the city as part of its overall water rate structure. 
(b)  Civil offense. It shall be an offense punishable by a fine of $500.00 per occurrence for any unpermitted withdrawals from the city water system. 
(Ord. No. 2001-5, 5-9-2001) 
Sec. 34-48. - Water use restrictions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use or permit the use of potable water from the city water system for any purpose or use restricted or prohibited by mandatory water conservation practices established by the state board of the department of natural resources, by a permit, or by any administrative or emergency order imposed by the director of the environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources, or by any administrative order imposing water use restrictions issued by the city. 
(b)  Violators shall be cited to appear before the municipal court or other court of appropriate jurisdiction within the system's customer service area, and upon conviction shall be subject to a fine not less than $75.00 nor more than $500.00, or, if applicable, charged upon state warrant with committing a misdemeanor as defined by general law. 
(c)  A water surcharge, in an amount double the customer's most recent monthly water bill, shall be imposed on any customer for a second conviction of the customer for violation of this article; and a water use surcharge, in an amount triple the customer's most recent monthly water bill, shall be imposed for a third conviction of the customer for violation of this section. For any subsequent violations within any 12-month period, water service shall be discontinued to any customer of the city water system that willfully or systematically violates restrictions or prohibitions on water usage after written notice from the city manager of the facts establishing such violation. When service has been discontinued under this section, service shall not be reinstated unless the customer posts a surety bond in the amount of $5,000.00 payable to the city, conditioned on faithful adherence to all use policies and restrictions of the system. 
(d)  The city manager is hereby authorized, as necessary, to seek from any court of appropriate equitable jurisdiction, injunctive relief against any user of the city water system for summary abatement or remedying of appropriate conditions dangerous or prejudicial to the public health and safety, together with recovery of the costs and legal expenses thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2007-6, §§ 1—4, 9-12-2007) 
Secs. 34-49—34-67. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SEWER USE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 34-68. - Purpose and policy. 
(a)  Compliance with state and federal water pollution control laws. This division sets forth uniform requirements for persons who cause wastewater to be discharged into the wastewater collection and treatment system of the city and enables the city to comply with all applicable state and federal laws required by the Clean Water Act, as amended, and the general pretreatment regulations (40 CFR Part 403). 
The federally mandated objectives of this ordinance are: 
a.  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the city wastewater system which will interfere with the operation of the system or contaminate the resulting sludge; 
b.  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the city wastewater system which will pass through the system, inadequately treated, into receiving waters or the atmosphere or otherwise be incompatible with the system; 
c.  To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewater and sludge from the system; and 
d.  To provide for equitable distribution of the cost of the city wastewater system. 
This division provides for the regulation of persons who cause wastewater to be discharged into the city wastewater system through the issuance of permits to certain non-domestic users and through enforcement activities, requires user reporting, assumes that existing customers' capacity will not be preempted, and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the operation and maintenance of the water and wastewater systems. 
(b)  Applicability. This division shall apply to the residents of the city and to all users of the city water and wastewater systems including persons outside the city, who are, by contract or agreement with the city, users of the city Water and wastewater systems. Except as otherwise provided herein, the superintendent of wastewater, also known as the superintendent, and hereafter referred to, as the superintendent, or his designee shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of the division. 
(Ord. No. 2003-2, § 1, 4-7-2003) 
Sec. 34-69. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Act or the Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 USC 1251 et seq. 
Ammonia (NH3) means a colorless gaseous alkaline compound of nitrogen and hydrogen that is very soluble in water. 
Approval authority means the director of the Georgia Environmental Protection Division. 
Authorized representative of the user: 
(1)  If the user is a corporation: 
a.  The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; or 
b.  The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operation facilities, if authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures. 
(2)  If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general partner or proprietor, respectively. 
(3)  If the user is a federal, state, or local governmental facility: a director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility, or their designee. 
(4)  The individuals described in subsections (1) through (3) of this definition, may designate another authorized representative if the authorization is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, and the written authorization is submitted to the city. 
Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees Celsius, expressed in milligrams per liter. 
Building drain means that part of the piping of a building, which collects wastewater inside the walls of the building and conveys it to outside the building wall. 
Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other point of acceptance, also called "house connection." Proper maintenance of this service line is the owner's responsibility from the building drain to the point of acceptance. At this point, the service line or lateral becomes the city's responsibility as it continues from this point to the sanitary sewer trunk line. 
Composite means the make-up of a number of individual samples, so taken as to represent the nature of sewage or industrial wastes. 
Cooling water means the water discharged from any use such as air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant added is heat. 
Customer means every person, firm, association, corporation, government agency, or similar organization who is responsible for contracting (expressly or implicitly) with the city in obtaining, having or using water or wastewater connections with, or sewer taps to the city wastewater system and in obtaining, having or using water or other related services furnished by the city for the purpose of disposing of wastewater through said system. The term "customer" shall also include illicit users of the water or wastewater systems. 
Direct discharge means the discharge of treated or untreated wastewater directly to the waters of the state. 
Domestic wastewater means that wastewater discharged into the wastewater system from domestic sources such as toilets, washing machines, dishwashers, sinks, showers, and bathtubs from normal household usage. 
Easement means an acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others. 
Effluent means the discharge flow of a treatment facility. 
Environmental protection agency or EPA means the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, or, where appropriate, the term "environmental protection agency" may also be used as a designation for the administrator or other duly authorized official of said agency. 
Existing source means any source of discharge, the construction or operation of which commenced prior to the publication by EPA of proposed categorical pretreatment standards, which will be applicable to such source if the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with section 307 of the Act. 
Federal categorical pretreatment standard or federal pretreatment standard means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with section 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 USC 1317) which applies to a specific category of industrial users. Categorical standards appear in 40 CFR, Chapter 1, Subchapter N, Parts 405—471. 
Floatable oil and grease means oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will separate by flotation from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment facility or sand and oil/grease interceptor. 
Flush toilet means the common sanitary flush commode in general use for the disposal of human excrement. 
Garbage means the animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, and serving of foods. 
Governing body means the board of commissioners of the City of Dahlonega, Georgia. 
Grab sample means a sample which is taken from a waste stream without regard to the flow in the waste stream and over a period of time not to exceed 15 minutes. 
Grit means matter consisting of sand, gravel, cinders or other heavy solid materials that has settling velocities or specific gravities greater than those of organic putrescible solids normally encountered in domestic wastewater. 
Health department means the City of Dahlonega Board of Health. 
High strength wastewater means wastewater, which contains quantities of specified constituents that exceed the quantities normally encountered in domestic wastewater. 
Holding tank waste means any waste from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, and vacuum-pump tank trucks. 
House connection means same as the term "building sewer." 
Indirect discharge or discharge means the introduction of pollutants into the POTW from any non-domestic source regulated under section 307(b), (c), or (d) of the Act. 
Industrial customers means persons who, on account of their particular type of business activity, discharge into the city sanitary sewerage system an unusual amount or unusual type of sewage which present special problems in sewage disposal and sewage treatment. 
Industrial user or contributor means an industry which discharges waste waters having the characteristics of industrial wastes, as distinct from commercial wastes or domestic wastes. 
Infiltration/inflow means groundwater and surface water which leaks into the wastewater system through cracked pipes, joints, manholes or other openings. 
Inflow means water that flows into the wastewater system from the surface, streams, roof drains, down spouts or other such source. 
Instantaneous maximum allowable discharge limit means the maximum concentration of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete or composite sample collected, independent of the industrial flowrate and the duration of the sampling event. 
Interference means a discharge, which alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and therefore, is a cause of a violation of the city's NPDES permit or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with any of the following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued thereunder, or any more stringent state or local regulations: section 405 of the Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act, including title 11, commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); any state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act; and the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act. 
Main means the pipe, conduit, or facility, which conveys utility service to individual services or to other mains. 
Medical waste means isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and dialysis wastes. 
Meter means any device used to measure service rendered to a customer by the city. 
National pollution discharge elimination system or NPDES permit means a permit issued pursuant to section 402 of the Act (33 USC 1342). 
Natural outlet means any outlet, including storm sewers, watercourses, ponds, ditches, lakes or other bodies of surface water or groundwater. 
New source: 
(1)  Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that: 
a.  The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; 
b.  The building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or 
c.  The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility, or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should be considered. 
(2)  Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the criteria of subsection (1)b. or (1)c. of this definition but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment. 
(3)  Construction of a new source, as defined under this subsection, has commenced if the owner or operator has: 
a.  Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous on-site construction program: 
1.  Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; 
2.  Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or 
b.  Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment, which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this subsection. 
Noncontact cooling water means water used for cooling, which does not come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product, or finished product. 
Nondomestic user means any user of the city wastewater system who discharges wastewater into the wastewater system from a structure other than a residential user. 
Nondomestic wastewater means the wastewater generated from nondomestic users as distinct from domestic or sanitary wastes. 
Ordinance means this sewer use ordinance, as amended, including any future codification thereof by City of Dahlonega. 
pH means the logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the molar concentration of hydrogen ions, in solution. 
POTW treatment plant means that portion of the POTW designed to provide treatment to wastewater. 
Pass through means a discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the city's NPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation. 
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents, or assigns. This definition includes all federal, state, and local governmental entities. 
Phosphorus (P) means an element that appears in wastewater in different forms and serves as an essential element for biological growth. 
Pit privy means a shored, vertical pit in the earth used for the disposal of human or animal wastes. 
Point of acceptance , for sewer systems, the point of acceptance is the point at which the city's piping connects with the customer's piping. Commonly called the tap. 
Pollutant means dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes, biological material, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, municipal, agricultural and industrial wastes, and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, or odor). 
Pollution means the manmade or man-induced detrimental alteration of the chemical, physical, biological, and radiological integrity of water or soil, or the products which create or cause such alteration. 
Pretreatment coordinator means the person designated by the city to supervise the operation of the industrial pretreatment program. 
Pretreatment requirements means any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment, other than a national pretreatment standard imposed on a nondomestic user. 
Pretreatment standards or standards means prohibited discharge standards, categorical pretreatment standards, and local limits. 
Pretreatment or treatment means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into the wastewater treatment system. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes, or by process changes or other means, except as prohibited by 40 CFR 403.6(d). 
Prohibited discharge standards or prohibited discharges means absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances; these prohibitions appear in section 34-94. 
Properly shredded garbage means the wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that has been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension. 
Public sewer means a common sewer controlled by a governmental agency or public utility; in this case, the City of Dahlonega. 
Publicly owned treatment works (POTW) means a treatment works as defined by section 212 of the Act (33 USC 1292), which is owned, in this instance, by the city. This definition includes any sewers that convey wastewater to the POTW treatment plant; it does not include pipes, sewers or other conveyances not connected to a facility providing treatment. For the purposes of this article, the term "POTW" shall also include any sewers that convey wastewaters to the POTW from persons outside the city who are by contract or agreement with the city, users of the city's POTW. 
Sanitary sewer or sewer means a sewer that carries liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions. 
Septic tank means a subsurface impervious tank designed to temporarily retain sewage or similar waterborne wastes together with: 
(1)  A sewer line constructed with solid pipe, with the joints scaled, connecting the impervious tank with a plumbing stub out; and 
(2)  A subsurface system of trenches, piping and other materials constructed to drain the clarified discharge from the tank and distribute it underground to be absorbed or filtered. 
Service connection means the point of connection of the customer's piping with the meter or service pipe owned by the city. 
Service lateral means the pipe between the utility's mains and the point of delivery and shall include all of the pipe, fittings, and valves necessary to make the connection excluding the meter. 
Sewage means a combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, businesses, institutions, and industrial establishments, together with such groundwaters, surface waters and stormwaters as may be present. 
Sewer means a pipe or conduit that carries wastewater. 
Significant industrial user. 
(1)  A user subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or 
(2)  A user that: 
a.  Discharges an average of 25,000 gpd or more of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact coolant, and boiler blowdown wastewater); 
b.  Contributes a process waste stream which makes up five percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant; or 
c.  Is designated as such by the city on the basis that it has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement. 
(3)  Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in subsection (2) has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the city may at any time; on its own initiative or in response to a petition received from a user, and in accordance with procedures in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine that such user should not be considered a significant industrial user. 
Slug load or slug means any discharge at a flowrate or concentration, which could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in this article. 
State means the State of Georgia. 
Standard industrial classification (SIC) means a classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1987, as amended. 
Standard methods means those procedures or methods established by the latest edition of the Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, as prepared, approved, and published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association, and the Water Environment Federation, a copy of which is on file in the office of the superintendent. 
Storm drain , sometimes termed storm sewer, means a drain or sewer for conveying surface water, groundwater, subsurface water, or unpolluted water from any source. 
Stormwater means any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation and resulting therefrom. 
Superintendent or superintendent of wastewater means the person designated by the city as manager of the wastewater department. Whenever superintendent is referred to in this article, it shall mean the superintendent or his designee. 
Surcharge means the payment made by an industrial user for the discharge of any wastewater into the city collection and treatment system in excess of the plant design levels. The surcharge assessment will only be based on the concentration in excess of these levels. The total wastewater user charge shall then be the normal wastewater user charge as defined in this section plus the surcharge. 
Suspended solids or total suspended solids (TSS) means total suspended matter that either floats on the surface of, or is in suspension in, water, wastewater, or other liquids, and that is removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, and referred to as nonfilterable residue. 
Toxic means constituents of wastes, which adversely affect the organisms involved in wastewater treatment. 
Unpolluted water means water of quality equal to or better than the effluent criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving water quality standards and would not be benefited by discharge to the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities. 
User means any person who contributes, causes or permits the discharge of wastewater into the city wastewater system. 
Wastewater means liquid and water-carried industrial wastes and sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, and institution whether treated or untreated, which are contributed to the POTW. 
Wastewater system or city wastewater system means the total wastewater collection and disposal facilities owned and operated by the city; also the administrative framework, which operates the facilities. 
Wastewater user charge means the charge established annually by the city of through which each sanitary sewer user pays for the use of said sewer to dispose of this wastewater. The total sewer user charge is the sum of the wastewater user charge plus the surcharge as defined in this section. 
Water meter means those devices, approved by the city for the purpose of establishing the quantity of water consumed by a premises or person. 
Water system or city water system means the total water distribution facilities owned and operated by the city; also the administrative framework, which operates the facilities. 
Watercourse means a natural or artificial channel for the passage of water either continuously or intermittently. 
Waters of the state means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
(Ord. No. 2003-2, § 2, 4-7-2003) 
Sec. 34-70. - Abbreviations. 
The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings: 

 
(Ord. No. 2003-2, § 3, 4-7-2003) 
Sec. 34-71. - Sewage and waste disposal; impoundment of surface waters. 
It shall be unlawful to use any waters of the state for the disposal of sewage, industrial wastes, or other wastes, or to withdraw, divert, or impound any surface waters of the state, except in such a manner as to conform to and comply with O.C.G.A. title 12, ch. 5, art. 2. 
(Ord. No. 2003-2, § 4, 4-7-2003) 
Sec. 34-72. - Connection to public water and wastewater systems required; septic tanks and individual sewage management systems; certificate of occupancy. 
In the interest of the public health, sanitation and general welfare, all buildings and structures located within the city, of every nature, use and design, intended for human occupancy, shall have a proper source of potable drinking water and sewage disposal. Buildings and structures accessible to a public water system and/or a public sanitary sewer system shall be properly connected on or into such systems) prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy. No permit for the construction of any residence, building or other facility which cannot be served by public sanitary sewer shall be issued, and no certificate for the use and occupancy for any existing residence, building or other facility which cannot be served by public sanitary sewer shall be issued, unless a septic tank or individual sewage management system permit has been issued by the city board of health in conformity with any state-wide minimum standards for sewage management systems and the regulations of the county board of health then in force and effect. It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, maintain, or permit to exist upon their property any privy, privy vault, cesspool, or other facility intended for use or disposal of human excrement, and the existence thereof is hereby declared a public nuisance, abatable in accordance with the provisions of the city Code. 
(Ord. No. 2003-2, § 5, 4-7-2003) 
Sec. 34-73. - Duty of owner and occupant to properly operate and maintain septic tanks and other permitted individual sewage management systems. 
It shall be the duty of the property owner, and any person occupying private property under lease or by permission of the owner, on which is located a building or structure intended for human occupancy whose sole means of sewage disposal is a septic tank or individual sewage management system, to properly operate and maintain such system in good working condition, free of odor, at all times. In addition to the enforcement provisions of this article, continued violation of this section shall constitute grounds for discontinuance or revocation of any permit issued for such system and for revocation or suspension of any certificate of occupancy for the building or structure served. 
(Ord. No. 2003-2, § 6, 4-7-2003) 
Sec. 34-74. - Connection to public sewer required upon failure of septic tank or individual sewage management system. 
At such time as public sanitary sewer becomes accessible in those areas where existing buildings or structures intended for human occupancy are currently served by septic tanks or individual sewage management systems, upon the failure of such septic tank or individual sewage management system, use of such system shall be discontinued and no permit shall be issued for maintenance or bringing the system into compliance, and the property owner shall cause the building or structure to be connected to the public sanitary sewer system. Abandoned septic tanks and individual systems shall either be removed by the owner or filled with suitable material so as not to constitute a hazard or nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 2003-2, § 7, 4-7-2003) 
Sec. 34-75. - Separate building sewers required. 
A separate building sewer shall be provided for every building and structure intended for human occupancy and accessible to the public sanitary sewer system, unless for good cause shown the superintendent issues a written permit to allow more than one building or structure to be connected on a common building sewer. 
(Ord. No. 2003-2, § 8, 4-7-2003) 
Secs. 34-76—34-93. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - NON-DOMESTIC (INDUSTRIAL, COMMERCIAL, INSTITUTIONAL) USE OF PUBLIC WASTEWATER FACILITIES 

Sec. 34-94. - Prohibited discharges. 
(a)  General prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass through or interference. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other national, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements. 
(b)  Specific prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW the following pollutants, substances, or wastewater: 
(1)  Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW, including, but not limited to, waste streams with a closed-cup flashpoint of less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit (60 degrees Celsius) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21; 
(2)  Wastewater having a pH less than 5.5 or more than 9.5, or otherwise causing corrosive structural damage to the POTW or equipment; 
(3)  Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause obstruction of the flow in the sewer system or POTW resulting in interference; 
(4)  Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.), released in a discharge at a flowrate and/or pollutant concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause interference with the POTW; 
(5)  Wastewater having a temperature greater than 150 degrees Fahrenheit (65 degrees Celsius), or which will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant to exceed 104 degrees Fahrenheit (40 degrees Celsius); 
(6)  Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass through; 
(7)  Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems; 
(8)  Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the superintendent in accordance with section 34-106; 
(9)  Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance or a hazard to life, or to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance or repair; 
(10)  Wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to the treatment plant's effluent, thereby violating the city's NPDES permit; 
(11)  Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations; 
(12)  Stormwater, surface water, groundwater, artesian well water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate, deionized water, noncontact cooling water, and unpolluted wastewater, unless specifically authorized by the superintendent; 
(13)  Sludge, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of industrial wastes; 
(14)  Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the superintendent in a wastewater discharge permit; 
(15)  Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources, the treatment plant's effluent to fail toxicity test; 
(16)  Detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances which may cause excessive foaming in the POTW; 
(17)  Fats, oils, or greases of animal or vegetable origin in concentrations greater than 100 milligrams per liter; 
(18)  Wastewater causing two readings on an explosion hazard meter at the point of discharge into the POTW, or at any point in the POTW, of more than five percent or any single reading over ten percent of the lower explosive limit of the meter; 
(19)  The following pollutant limits are established to protect against process interference, stream standards violation, or sludge contamination. Discharges by users of the collection and treatment system are limited such that the concentrations of specific pollutants measured at the point of discharge into the collection system do not exceed concentrations specified below. 
(c)  No user shall discharge wastewater, which exceeds the following daily maximum limits (all numbers shown in milligrams per liter, mg/l): 

 
Pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by this section shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be discharged to the POTW. 
(Ord. No. 2003-2, § 11, 4-7-2003) 
Sec. 34-95. - Federal and state requirements. 
(a)  Any laws or regulations promulgated by the state relative to the construction or use of wastewater facilities, which are stricter than the regulations provided in the city Code are incorporated herein by reference, and such regulations shall be enforced by the city. 
(b)  Federal pretreatment standards. The federal government has adopted regulations governing wastewater discharges from industries into POTWs. These federal regulations are generally referred to as the Federal Pretreatment Standards, as set forth in 40 CFR part 403, or the Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards, as set forth in 40 CFR parts 405—471. Any portion of these federal standards which are stricter than the regulations provided in the city Code are incorporated herein by reference, and such regulations will be enforced by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2003-2, § 12, 4-7-2003) 
Sec. 34-96. - Wastewater pretreatment permit application. 
(a)  All nondomestic users shall, upon the request of the superintendent, complete and submit to the superintendent a wastewater pretreatment permit application. The wastewater pretreatment permit application shall be on a form provided by the superintendent and shall be used for the purpose of determining whether the industry is a significant industrial user, issuing a permit and for other purposes. The wastewater pretreatment permit application shall include the following information, at a minimum: 
(1)  Name, address and location, if different from the address. 
(2)  SIC number according to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, U.S. Office of Management and Budget, 1987, as amended. 
(3)  Wastewater constituents and characteristics, including, but not limited to, those shown in section 34-94. 
(4)  Time and duration of contribution. 
(5)  Average daily and peak wastewater flowrates, including daily, monthly and seasonal variations if any. 
(6)  Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details to show all sewers, sewer connections and appurtenances by size, location and elevation. 
(7)  Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the premises, including all materials, which are or could be discharged. 
(8)  Each product produced by type, amount, processes and rate of production. 
(9)  Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day). 
(10)  Number and type of employees and hours of operation of plant and proposed or actual hours of operation of pretreatment system. 
(11)  Any other information as may be deemed by the city to be necessary to evaluate the permit application. 
(12)  All wastewater discharge permit applications and user reports must be signed by the user or an authorized representative of the user and contain the following certification statement: 
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to ensure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations." 
The superintendent will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. 
(b)  Industrial wastewater pretreatment permit fees. In addition to any other rates, fees, charges, and penalties authorized by this article, the city council may adopt reasonable industrial wastewater pretreatment permit fees for reimbursement of various costs related to the pretreatment program. The fee for an industrial pretreatment permit will be due at the time application is made to the city. 
(Ord. No. 2003-2, § 13, 4-7-2003) 
Sec. 34-97. - Sampling and testing procedures. 
(a)  Sampling procedures. 
(1)  Except as indicated in subsection (2) of this section, the user must collect wastewater samples using flow proportional composite collection techniques. In the event flow proportional sampling is infeasible, the superintendent may authorize the use of time proportional sampling or a minimum of four grab samples where the user demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged. In addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with instantaneous discharge limits. 
(2)  Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols, hexavalent chromium, sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab collection techniques. 
(b)  Testing procedures. 
(1)  All wastewater-monitoring samples required by the city shall be tested by an independent laboratory for the parameters required, with the results submitted to the city on the original laboratory report sheets. 
(2)  All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this article shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association, or in accordance with any applicable EPA testing procedure of general acceptance in the chemical testing industry; provided, however, that all such analyses shall be determined in accordance with the requirements of 40 CFR 136, which requirements shall prevail in the event of conflict. 
(3)  The cost incurred for testing shall be the responsibility of the customer. 
(Ord. No. 2003-2, § 14, 4-7-2003) 
Sec. 34-98. - Significant industrial users. 
All significant industrial users (see definition of the term "significant industrial user" in section 34-69) that discharge wastewater effluent into the city wastewater system shall comply with the following: 
(1)  Sampling manhole. In order to provide for accurate sampling and measurement of industrial wastes, each significant industrial user shall provide and maintain, on each of its industrial waste outlet sewers, a monitoring station to be located outside the plant. If inside the plant fence, there shall be a gate near the sampling manhole with a key furnished to the city. In accordance with the city water and sewer specifications, there shall be ample room provided in each monitoring station to enable convenient inspection and sampling by the city, or its agent. Also, a partial flume and a 110-volt electrical outlet may be required to allow for composite sampling. In certain monitoring stations where noxious fumes may accumulate, the city may require a fume exhaust system to protect the life and health of the city employees who are required to enter the monitoring station. The fume exhaust system should extract the fumes from the bottom of the station and provide not less than one air change per minute. 
(2)  Discharge permit required. It shall be unlawful for any significant industrial user, as determined under this article, to discharge wastewater into the city wastewater system without a city issued discharge permit. 
(Ord. No. 2003-2, § 15, 4-7-2003) 
Sec. 34-99. - Discharge permits. 
(a)  General. All significant industrial users proposing to connect to or to contribute to the city wastewater system shall obtain a wastewater discharge permit before connecting to or contributing to the city system. 
(b)  Application. 
(1)  When requested to do so by the superintendent, all significant industrial users shall complete and file with the superintendent an application for a permit accompanied by a nonrefundable fee as set by resolution of the city council, from time to time. Existing users shall apply for a discharge permit within 60 days of notification by the superintendent that a discharge permit is required. Proposed new users shall make application not less than 90 days prior to connecting to or contributing to the city wastewater system. The completed wastewater pretreatment permit application described in section 34-96 will serve as application for a discharge permit. 
(2)  The superintendent will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. Within 60 days of receipt of a complete wastewater discharge permit application, the superintendent will determine whether or not to issue a wastewater discharge permit. The superintendent may deny any application for a wastewater discharge permit, in writing, stating the reasons for denial. 
(3)  Any aggrieved user, whose permit application has been denied, may petition the superintendent to reconsider the terms of a wastewater discharge permit within 30 days of notice of its denial. 
a.  Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be a waiver of any administrative appeal. The petition shall set forth all grounds of alleged error upon which the permit denial was based. 
b.  If the superintendent fails to act within 30 days, a request for reconsideration shall be deemed to be denied. Decisions not to reconsider a wastewater discharge permit denial shall be considered final administrative actions for purposes of judicial review. 
c.  Aggrieved users seeking judicial review of the final administrative wastewater discharge permit decision must do so by filing a petition for writ of certiorari in the county superior court. 
(c)  The superintendent may modify a wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons: 
(1)  To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements; 
(2)  To address significant alterations or additions to the user's operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of wastewater discharge permit issuance; 
(3)  A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge; 
(4)  Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the authority's POTW, authority personnel, or the receiving waters; 
(5)  Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge permit; 
(6)  Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting; 
(7)  Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13; 
(8)  To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater discharge permit; or 
(9)  To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a new owner or operator. 
(d)  Conditions. Wastewater discharge permits shall be expressly subject to all provisions of this article and all other applicable regulations, user charges and fees established by the city. 
(1)  Permits must contain, at a minimum, the following: 
a.  A statement that indicates wastewater discharge permit duration, which in no event shall exceed five years; 
b.  A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is nontransferable without prior notification to the city in accordance with subsection (e) of this section, and provisions for furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy of the existing wastewater discharge permit; 
c.  Effluent limits based on applicable pretreatment standards; 
d.  Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and recordkeeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type based on federal, state, and local law; and 
e.  A statement of applicable sanctions for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance beyond that required by applicable federal, state, or local law. 
(2)  Wastewater discharge permits may also contain, but need not be limited to, the following conditions: 
a.  Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization; 
b.  Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology, pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment devices, designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the treatment works; 
c.  Requirements for the development and implementation of spill control plans or other special conditions including management practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or non-routine discharges; 
d.  Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW; 
e.  The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW; 
f.  Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities and equipment; 
g.  A statement of compliance with the wastewater discharge permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable federal and state pretreatment standards, including those which become effective during the term of the wastewater discharge permit; and 
h.  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the superintendent to ensure compliance with this article, and state and federal laws, rules, and regulations. 
(e)  Duration. Permits shall be issued for a period as determined by the city, not to exceed five years, and shall bear a stated expiration date. It shall be the responsibility of the permittee to apply for permit renewal a minimum of 60 days prior to the expiration of the existing permit. The terms and conditions of the permit may be subject to modification by the city during the term of the permit as limitations or requirements as identified in subsection (c) of this section, are modified, conditions change, or other just cause exists. The permittee shall be informed of any proposed changes in his permit at least 30 days prior to the effective date of change. Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance. 
(f)  Transfer. Wastewater discharge permits may be transferred to a new owner or operator only if the permittee gives at least 60 days advance notice to the superintendent and the superintendent approves the wastewater discharge permit transfer. The notice to the superintendent must include a written certification by the new owner or operator which: 
(1)  States that the new owner and/or operator has no immediate intent to change the facility's operations and processes; 
(2)  Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur; and 
(3)  Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing wastewater discharge permit. 
Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the wastewater discharge permit void as of the date of facility transfer. 
(g)  Suspension, revocation or denial. 
(1)  Procedure. When the superintendent has reason to believe that any one of the conditions enumerated in subsection (2) of this section exists, he shall give written notice thereof to the permittee. Said notice shall set forth the time and place where the charges shall be heard by the superintendent. The hearing date shall not be less than 15 days from the mailing of such notice by certified mail to the permittee at the address shown on the permit or at permittee's last known address. At the hearing, the permittee shall have an opportunity to refute the allegations set forth in the proposed permit revocation notice. If, after the hearing, the superintendent finds that any one of the conditions hereinafter enumerated in subsection (g) of this section exists, he shall have the right to suspend, revoke or deny the permit. 
(2)  Any of the following is reason for permit suspension, revocation or denial: 
a.  Failure to notify the superintendent of significant changes to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge; 
b.  Failure to provide prior notification to the superintendent of changed conditions pursuant to section 34-100; 
c.  Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application; 
d.  Falsifying self-monitoring reports; 
e.  Tampering with monitoring equipment; 
f.  Refusing to allow the superintendent timely access to the facility premises and records; 
g.  Failure to meet effluent limitations; 
h.  Failure to pay fines; 
i.  Failure to pay sewer charges; 
j.  Failure to meet compliance schedules; 
k.  Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater discharge permit application; 
l.  Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business ownership of a permitted facility; or 
m.  Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this article. 
Wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon cessation of operations or transfer of business ownership. All wastewater discharge permits issued to a particular user are void upon the issuance of a new wastewater discharge permit to that user. 
(3)  A requirement for new significant industrial users discharging into sewers of a contributing municipality to obtain a wastewater discharge permit from the superintendent; 
(4)  In the event the contributing municipality has in place an industrial pretreatment program approved by the EPD, a provision specifying which pretreatment implementation activities, including wastewater discharge permit issuance, inspection and sampling, and enforcement, will be conducted by the contributing municipality, which of these activities will be conducted by the superintendent, and which of these activities will be conducted jointly by the contributing municipality and the superintendent; 
(5)  A requirement for the contributing municipality to provide the superintendent with access to all information that the contributing municipality obtains as part of its pretreatment activities; 
(6)  Limits on the nature, quality, and volume of the contributing municipality's wastewater at the point where it discharges to the POTW; 
(7)  Requirements for monitoring the contributing municipality's discharge; 
(8)  A provision ensuring the superintendent access to the facilities of users located within the contributing municipality's jurisdictional boundaries for the purpose of inspection, sampling, and any other duties deemed necessary by the superintendent; and 
(9)  A provision specifying remedies available for breach of the terms of the intergovernmental contract. 
(Ord. No. 2003-2, § 16, 4-7-2003) 
Sec. 34-100. - Reporting requirements. 
(a)  Baseline monitoring reports. 
(1)  Within either 180 days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing categorical users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall submit to the superintendent a report which contains the information listed in subsection (a) of this section. At least 90 days prior to commencement of their discharge, new sources, and sources that become categorical users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, shall submit to the superintendent a report which contains the information listed in subsection (a), of this section. A new source shall report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical standards. A new source also shall give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged. 
(2)  Users described above shall submit the information set forth below. 
a.  Identifying information. The name and address of the facility, including the name of the operator and owner. 
b.  Environmental permits. A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility. 
c.  Description of operations. A brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial classifications of the operation carried out by such user. This description should include a schematic process diagram, which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes. 
d.  Flow measurement. Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined waste stream formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e). 
e.  Measurement of pollutants. 
1.  The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process. 
2.  The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration, and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the superintendent, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term average concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in section 34-97. 
3.  Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set out in section 34-97. 
f.  Certification. A statement, reviewed by the user's authorized representative and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements. 
g.  Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O&M. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set out in subsection (b) of this section. 
h.  Signature and certification. All baseline-monitoring reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 34-96. 
(b)  Compliance schedule progress reports. The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule required by subsection (a)(2)g of this section: 
(1)  The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but are not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing construction, and beginning and conducting routine operation); 
(2)  No increment referred to in subsection (b)(1) of this section shall exceed nine months; 
(3)  The user shall submit a progress report to the superintendent no later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date of compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the established schedule; and 
(4)  In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress reports to the superintendent. 
(c)  Periodic compliance reports. 
(1)  All significant industrial users shall, at a frequency determined by the superintendent, but in no case less than twice per year (in June and December), submit a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards and the measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 34-96. 
(2)  All other users who have been issued discharge permits are required to submit compliance reports at the intervals set forth in each user's individual permit. The compliance reports shall address the discharge parameters and all other information indicated as being necessary to report as shown in the user's permit. 
(3)  All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge. 
(4)  If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the superintendent, using the procedures prescribed in section 34-97, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report. 
(d)  Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline. Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or, in the case of a new source following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the superintendent a report containing the information described in subsections (a)(2)d through (2)f of this section. For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's long-term production rate. For all other users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 34-96. 
(e)  Reports of changed conditions. Each user must notify the superintendent of any planned significant changes to the user's operations or system, which might alter the nature, quality, or volume of its wastewater at least 60 days before the change. 
(1)  The superintendent may require the user to submit such information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under section 34-99. 
(2)  The superintendent may issue a wastewater discharge permit under section 34-99 or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit under section 34-99 in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions. 
(3)  For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include, but are not limited to, flow increases of 20 percent or greater, and the discharge of any previously unreported pollutants. 
(f)  Reports of potential problems, including slug loading. 
(1)  In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to, accidental discharges, discharges of a nonroutine, episodic nature, a noncustomary batch discharge, or a slug load, that may cause potential problems for the POTW, the user shall immediately telephone and notify the industrial pretreatment coordinator of the incident. This notification shall include the location of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the user. 
(2)  Within five days following such discharge, the user shall, unless waived by the superintendent, submit a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability, which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, natural resources, or any other damage to persons or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, penalties, or other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this article. 
(3)  A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of a discharge described in subsection (f) of this section. Employers shall ensure that all employees, who may cause such a discharge to occur, are advised of the emergency notification procedure. 
(g)  Reports from unpermitted users. All users not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall provide appropriate reports to the superintendent as the superintendent may require, in writing. 
(h)  Notice of violation/repeat sampling and reporting. If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must notify the superintendent within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the superintendent within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation. The user is not required to resample if the city monitors at the user's facility at least once a month, or if the city samples between the user's initial sampling and when the user receives the results of this sampling. 
(i)  Notification of the discharge of hazardous waste. 
(1)  Any user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall notify the POTW, the EPA regional waste management division director, and state hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any discharge into the POTW of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR part 261. Such notification must include the name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR part 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and the type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other). If the user discharges more than 100 kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the POTW, the notification also shall contain the following information to the extent such information is known and readily available to the user: an identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes, an estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the waste stream discharged during that calendar month, and an estimation of the mass of constituents in the waste stream expected to be discharged during the following 12 months. All notifications must take place no later than 180 days after the discharge commences. Any notification under this subsection need be submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged. However, notifications of changed conditions must be submitted under subsection (e) of this section. The notification requirement in this section does not apply to pollutants already reported by users subject to categorical pretreatment standards under the self-monitoring requirements of subsections (a)(3) and (4) of this section. 
(2)  Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of subsection (i) of this section, during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than 15 kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more than 15 kilograms of nonacute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires a one-time notification. Subsequent months during which the user discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not require additional notification. 
(3)  In the case of any new regulations under section 3001 of RCRA identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any additional substance as a hazardous waste, the user must notify the director, the EPA regional waste management waste division director, and state hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such substance within 90 days of the effective date of such regulations. 
(4)  In the case of any notification made under this section, the user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be economically practical. 
(5)  This provision does not create a right to discharge any substance not otherwise permitted to be discharged by this article, a permit issued thereunder, or any applicable federal or state law. 
(j)  Sampling and testing requirements. All sampling and testing performed under this subsection for reporting requirements shall be conducted in accordance with section 34-97. 
(k)  Reports dates. Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date postmarked. For reports which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date of receipt of the report shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 2003-2, § 17, 4-7-2003) 
Sec. 34-101. - Maintenance of records. 
(a)  Sampling and testing records. Any permitted user subject to the reporting requirements established in section 34-100 shall maintain records of all information resulting from any monitoring activities required by section 34-99. Such records shall include for all samples: 
(1)  The date, exact place, method, and time of sampling and names of the persons taking the samples; 
(2)  The dates analyses were performed; 
(3)  The name of the person who performed the analysis; 
(4)  The analytical techniques/methods used; and 
(5)  The results of such analyses. 
(b)  Monitoring activities and records of results. Any permitted user subject to the reporting requirements established in section 34-100 shall be required to retain for a minimum of three years any records of monitoring activities and results (whether or not such monitoring activities are required by this article) and shall make such records available for inspection and copying by the city, state, or EPA. This period of retention shall be extended during the course of any unresolved litigation regarding the permitted user, or when requested by the city, state, or EPA. 
(Ord. No. 2003-2, § 18, 4-7-2003) 
Sec. 34-102. - Regulation of waste received from other jurisdictions. 
(a)  If another municipality, or user located within another municipality, contributes wastewater to the POTW, the city may enter into an intergovernmental contract with the contributing municipality. 
(b)  Prior to entering into an agreement required by subsection (a) of this section, the superintendent shall request the following information from the contributing municipality: 
(1)  A description of the quality and volume of wastewater discharged to the POTW by the contributing municipality; 
(2)  An inventory of all users located within the contributing municipality that are discharging to the POTW; and 
(3)  Such other information as the superintendent may deem necessary. 
(c)  An intergovernmental contract, as required by subsection (a) of this section, shall contain the following conditions: 
(1)  A requirement for the contributing municipality to adopt a sewer use ordinance, which is at least as stringent as this article, and local limits, which are at least as stringent as those, set out in section 34-94 of this article. The requirement shall specify that such ordinance and limits must be revised as necessary to reflect changes made to the city's ordinance or local limits. 
(2)  A requirement for the contributing municipality to submit a revised user inventory on at least an annual basis. 
(Ord. No. 2003-2, § 19, 4-7-2003) 
Sec. 34-103. - Industrial pretreatment facilities. 
(a)  Requirement. All users shall provide necessary wastewater pretreatment as required to comply with the limitations and provisions contained in this article and to achieve compliance with all Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards within the time limitations as specified by the Federal Pretreatment Regulations. Any facilities required to pretreat wastewater to a level acceptable to the city shall be provided, operated and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans prepared by a registered professional engineer showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the city for review and shall be acceptable to the city prior to commencement of construction of the facility. The review of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the user of the responsibility for modifying the facility as necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to the city under the provisions of this article. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be reported to and be acceptable to the city prior to the user's initiation of the changes. 
(b)  Compliance schedules. The timing of construction and operation of pretreatment facilities as required hereby shall be in accordance with the compliance schedules provided by the city as described in section 34-100(b); however, the city shall also have the authority to issue compliance schedules independent of the permitting process and such compliance schedules may be enforced by the city as provided in the enforcement and penalties article of this chapter. 
(c)  Maintenance of pretreatment facilities. All wastewater pretreatment facilities shall be properly and adequately maintained by the user so as to achieve the intended purpose of the facilities. 
(d)  Whenever deemed necessary, the superintendent may require users to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage waste streams from industrial waste streams, and such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the POTW and determine the user's compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(e)  The superintendent may require any person discharging into the POTW to install and maintain, on their property and at their expense, a suitable storage and flow-control facility to ensure equalization of flow. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued solely for flow equalization. 
(f)  Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter. 
(Ord. No. 2003-2, § 20, 4-7-2003) 
Sec. 34-104. - Sand and oil/grease interceptors. 
(a)  Requirement. 
(1)  All users involved in the preparation of food for commercial purposes shall provide oil/grease interceptors or traps. Additionally, any user who generates wastewater which contains greater than the quantity of oil and grease regulated under section 34-94, and provided that the excess oil and grease is floatable and can be effectively removed in an oil/grease interceptor or trap, then said user will be required to install a grease/oil interceptor. 
(2)  All users whose wastewater stream is associated with unusually large quantities of grit, sand or gravel shall be required to install, operate, and maintain a sand/grit trap. All car/truck wash systems and poultry hatcheries shall be required to install a sand/grit trap. Their design and installation shall be approved by the city. 
(3)  The requirements of this section shall not apply to private living quarters or dwelling units. 
(b)  Design criteria. 
(1)  For restaurants and other eating establishments. All sand and oil/grease interceptors used in conjunction with restaurants or other eating establishments shall have a capacity of 15 gallons per seat, except that no grease trap shall be smaller than 750 gallons or larger than 3,000 gallons. 
(2)  For facilities other than eating establishments. All sand and oil/grease interceptors used in conjunction with facilities other than eating establishments shall have a capacity that will provide not less than ten minutes nor more than 30 minutes retention time at the peak eight-hour flowrate; flow-through velocities shall not exceed one foot per second at the peak eight-hour flowrate. 
(3)  Where such parameters have not been otherwise set forth herein, all sand and oil/grease interceptors shall be sized, located and constructed in accordance with the provisions of the Georgia State Minimum Standards Plumbing Code adopted by the city in conjunction with the Georgia Uniform Codes Act. 
(c)  Maintenance. 
(1)  All grease, oil and sand/grit interceptors or traps shall be maintained by the user at their expense, in continuously efficient operation at all times. 
(2)  In the maintaining of these interceptors, the owner shall be responsible for the proper removal and disposal by appropriate means of the captured material, and shall maintain records of the dates, and means of disposal, which are subject to review by the superintendent. The frequency of removal shall be such as to ensure that no overflows of oil, grease, or sand into the wastewater system ever results. 
(3)  Material haulers are required to give a manifest to the producer each time materials are removed. As materials are removed manifests from haulers are required to be sent to the superintendent within 30 days of removal at: 
City of Dahlonega Wastewater Department 
Attn. Wastewater Superintendent 
465 Riley Road 
Dahlonega, Georgia 30533 
(4)  The wastewater department will inspect interceptors yearly at a fee established by the city. If a re-inspection is required, an additional charge, as established by the city, will be given. 
(d)  Proper disposal of collected materials. Any removal and hauling of the collected materials not performed by the owner's employees must be performed by currently licensed waste disposal firms. All material shall be disposed of at a facility permitted to receive such waste. Under no circumstances shall the collected materials ever be returned to the wastewater system. 
(Ord. No. 2003-2, § 21, 4-7-2003) 
Sec. 34-105. - Accidental discharges. 
(a)  Protection against. Each significant industrial user shall provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this article. Additionally, any person or industry which handles hazardous wastes, any priority pollutant as shown on the EPA list, or any prohibited materials shall, upon the request of the city, provide proof of protection from accidental discharge of hazardous wastes, priority pollutants, or prohibited materials. Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the owner's or user's own cost and expense. Detailed plans prepared by a registered professional engineer showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the city for review, and shall be approved by the city before construction of the facilities. All existing users shall complete such a plan within 90 days after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. Construction shall be completed within 180 days of approval of plans by the city. No significant industrial user who commences contribution to the city wastewater system after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall be permitted to introduce pollutants into the system until accidental discharge procedures and facilities (if required) have been approved by the city. Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the user from the responsibility to modify the user's facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this article. 
(b)  Notification required. Notification of accidental discharge shall be in accordance with section 34-100(f). 
(c)  Accidental discharge/slug control plans. At least once every two years, the superintendent shall evaluate whether each significant industrial user needs an accidental discharge/slug control plan. The superintendent may require any user to develop, submit for approval, and implement such a plan. Alternatively, the superintendent may develop such a plan for any user. An accidental discharge/slug control plan shall address, at a minimum, the following: 
(1)  Description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch discharges; 
(2)  Description of stored chemicals; 
(3)  Procedures for immediately notifying the superintendent of any accidental or slug discharge; as required by section 34-100; and 
(4)  Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency response. 
(Ord. No. 2003-2, § 22, 4-7-2003) 
Sec. 34-106. - Hauled wastewater. 
(a)  Septic tank waste may be introduced into the POTW only at locations designated by the superintendent, and at such times as are established by the superintendent. Such waste shall not violate any section of this article or any other requirements established by the city. The superintendent may require septic tank waste haulers to obtain wastewater discharge permits. 
(b)  The superintendent shall require haulers of industrial waste to obtain wastewater discharge permits. The superintendent also may prohibit the disposal of hauled industrial waste. The discharge of hauled industrial waste is subject to all other requirements of this article. 
(c)  Industrial waste haulers may discharge loads only at locations designated by the superintendent. No load may be discharged without prior consent of the superintendent; the superintendent may collect samples of each hauled load to ensure compliance with applicable standards. The superintendent may require the industrial waste hauler to provide a waste analysis of any load prior to discharge. 
(d)  Industrial waste haulers must provide a waste-tracking form for every load. This form shall include, at a minimum, the name and address of the industrial waste hauler, permit number, truck identification, names and addresses of sources of waste, and volume and characteristics of waste. The form shall identify the type of industry, known or suspected waste constituents, and whether any wastes are RCRA hazardous wastes. 
(Ord. No. 2003-2, § 23, 4-7-2003) 
Sec. 34-107. - Affirmative defenses to discharge violations. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Bypass means the intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of a user's treatment facility. 
Severe property damage means substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production. 
(b)  A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential maintenance to ensure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to the provisions of subsections (c) and (d) of this section. 
(c)  Notice of need for bypass. 
(1)  If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the superintendent, at least ten days before the date of the bypass, if possible. 
(2)  A user shall submit oral notice to the pretreatment coordinator of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within 24 hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five days of the time the user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The superintendent may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received within 24 hours. 
(d)  Bypass is prohibited, and the superintendent may take an enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless: 
(1)  Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage; 
(2)  There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and 
(3)  The user submitted notices as required under subsection (c) of this section. 
(e)  The superintendent may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if the superintendent determines that it will meet the three conditions listed in subsection (d) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2003-2, § 24, 4-7-2003) 
Sec. 34-108. - City's right of revision. 
The city reserves the right to establish, by future amendment to this article or in wastewater discharge permits, more stringent standards or requirements on discharges to the POTW. 
(Ord. No. 2003-2, § 25, 4-7-2003) 
Sec. 34-109. - Dilution. 
No user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation unless expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement. The superintendent may impose mass limitations on users who are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases when the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 2003-2, § 26, 4-7-2003) 
Sec. 34-110. - Confidential information. 
Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater discharge permit applications, wastewater discharge permits, and monitoring programs, and from the city's inspection and sampling activities, shall be available to the public without restriction, unless the user specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the superintendent, that the release of such information would divulge information, processes, or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets under applicable state law. Any such request must be asserted at the time of submission of the information or data. To the extent allowed by law, when requested and demonstrated by the user furnishing a report that such information should be held confidential, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available immediately upon request to governmental agencies for uses related to the NPDES program or pretreatment program, and in enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other effluent data as defined by 40 CFR 2.302 will not be recognized as confidential information and will be available to the public without restriction. 
(Ord. No. 2003-2, § 27, 4-7-2003) 
Sec. 34-111. - Industrial wastewater pretreatment system operators. 
Operators of industrial wastewater pretreatment systems must comply with State of Georgia Rule for Certification of Water and Wastewater Treatment Plant Operators and Laboratory Analyst. 
(Ord. No. 2003-2, § 28, 4-7-2003) 
Sec. 34-112. - High strength wastewater surcharge. 
(a)  Establishment of. Users discharging high strength wastewater into the city wastewater system may be assessed a monetary surcharge, in addition to the normally required wastewater use charges, in an amount to be calculated as shown below. The term high strength wastewater is defined as wastewater which contains the below shown parameters in excess of the concentrations provided in the following schedule: 

 
(b)  Surcharge basis. All persons discharging industrial wastes into the public sewers shall be charged and assessed a surcharge, in addition to any sewer services charge, if these wastes have concentrations greater than the plant design loadings and are less than the prohibited levels. The amount of surcharge, which is hereby charged and assessed against all persons discharging industrial wastewater into the public sewers, shall be as established by the city. 
(c)  Determining persons liable for surcharge. The city manager or his designees shall determine which users are discharging waters or waste to the wastewater collection and treatment system in excess of acceptable levels. 
(d)  Quantitative measurement of surchargeable parameters. The measurement of the surcharge parameters (BOD5, TSS, ammonia, and phosphorus) shall be conducted as follows: 
(1)  Monitoring to determine surcharge shall be conducted by the industrial user as specified in the user's permit except that frequency of testing for surchargeable parameters shall be a minimum of two tests per month. If the permit requires more frequent testing, then the average of all test results will be used to calculate the surcharge. If the permit requires less frequent testing for compliance purposes, then testing frequency will be increased to twice per month. 
(2)  The city may sample the user as often as desired at the city's expense. The city will split the sample with the industrial user at the user's request. 
(e)  Billing, payment of surcharge. The surcharge shall be assessed against each permittee on the basis of an arithmetic average of all tests conducted for each month and be billed monthly by the city manager or his designee with the normal user charge, and the conditions for payment and penalties applicable to the normal user charge shall apply to the surcharge. 
(Ord. No. 2003-2, § 29, 4-7-2003) 
Secs. 34-113—34-137. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES 

Sec. 34-138. - Enforcement. 
(a)  General. The failure of any person to comply with any provision contained in this article shall be a violation, which shall be enforced in accordance with the penalties, and provisions as hereinafter set forth. 
(b)  Inspections. The superintendent shall have the right to direct and conduct such investigations as he may reasonably deem necessary to carry out his duties as described in this division. For this purpose, the superintendent and his authorized employees and representatives, upon presentation of proper credentials, shall have the right to enter at reasonable times on any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigating and inspecting the conditions relating to pollution and to inspect the operating records of any sewage system, waste treatment work, or other sewage disposal method. Upon refusal of the right of entry, the superintendent may apply to the municipal court for an administrative search warrant, upon showing probable cause that a violation exists. 
(c)  Significant noncompliance. The term "significant noncompliance" means: 
(1)  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as 66 percent or more of wastewater measurements taken during a six month period exceed the daily maximum limit or average limit for the same pollutant parameter by any amount; 
(2)  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which 33 percent or more of wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant parameter during a six month period equals or exceeds the product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH); 
(3)  Any other discharge violation that the superintendent believes has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through, including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public; 
(4)  Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the superintendent's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge; 
(5)  Failure to meet, within 90 days of the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance; 
(6)  Failure to provide within 30 days after the due date, any required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules; 
(7)  Failure to accurately report noncompliance. 
(Ord. No. 2003-2, § 41, 4-7-2003) 
Sec. 34-139. - Notice of violation. 
When the superintendent finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or consent order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the superintendent shall serve upon that user a written notice of violation. Within ten days of the receipt of this notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted by the user to the superintendent. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the superintendent to take any action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without a notice of violation first being issued. 
(Ord. No. 2003-2, § 42, 4-7-2003) 
Sec. 34-140. - Consent orders. 
The superintendent may enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with any user responsible for noncompliance. Such documents shall include specific action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a time period specified in the document. Such documents shall have the same force and effect as binding contracts under state law and shall be judicially enforceable by petition for specific performance. 
(Ord. No. 2003-2, § 43, 4-7-2003) 
Sec. 34-141. - Injunctive relief. 
When the superintendent finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the superintendent may petition the county superior court, through the city attorney, for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains the further violation and/or compels the specific performance of the wastewater discharge permit, consent order, or other requirement imposed by this article on activities of the user. The superintendent may also seek such other action as is appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief, including a requirement for the user to conduct environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. 
(Ord. No. 2003-2, § 44, 4-7-2003) 
Sec. 34-142. - Termination of discharge. 
Any user who violates the following conditions is subject to discharge termination: 
(1)  Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions; 
(2)  Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge; 
(3)  Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater volume, constituents, and characteristics prior to discharge; 
(4)  Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection, monitoring, or sampling; or 
(5)  Violation of the pretreatment standards in division 2 of this article. 
Such user shall be notified, in writing, of the proposed termination of his discharge and be offered a reasonable opportunity to show cause before the superintendent why the proposed action should not be taken. The decision of the superintendent, after notice and opportunity for hearing, shall be deemed a final action by city. Exercise of this option by the superintendent shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. Aggrieved users may seek judicial review by petitioning the superior court of the county for writ of certiorari. 
(Ord. No. 2003-2, § 45, 4-7-2003) 
Sec. 34-143. - Emergency suspensions. 
The superintendent may immediately suspend a user's discharge, after oral notice to the user, whenever, in the superintendent's sole discretion, such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which reasonably appears to present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons. The superintendent may also immediately suspend a user's discharge that threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW, or which presents, or may present, an endangerment to the environment. 
(1)  Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the superintendent may take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The superintendent may allow the user to recommence his discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the superintendent that the period of endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings in section 34-142 are initiated against the user. 
(2)  A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement, describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the superintendent prior to the date of a termination hearing under section 34-142. 
Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to any emergency suspension under this section. 
(Ord. No. 2003-2, § 46, 4-7-2003) 
Sec. 34-144. - Civil liability. 
(a)  A user who has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or consent order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall be liable to the city for a maximum penalty of $1,000.00 per violation, per day. In the case of a monthly or other long-term average discharge limit, penalties shall accrue for each day during the period of the violation, but shall not exceed $25,000.00 cumulatively. The superintendent shall cause a citation to be issued to the violator to appear before the municipal court of city to show cause why such penalty should not be imposed. 
(b)  In addition to any monetary fine imposed, the superintendent may seek restitution of reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the city. 
(c)  In determining the amount of penalty to be imposed, the court shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the violation, any economic benefit gained through the user's violation, corrective actions voluntarily undertaken by the user, the compliance history of the user, and any other factor as justice requires. 
(d)  In lieu of the provisions of subsections (a) through (c) of this section, the superintendent may, in his sole discretion, elect to file a complaint for civil liability in the superior court, in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 12-5-51. In those cases where the violator has been cited to municipal court and refuses to waive the right to trial by jury, the municipal court may bind the case over to the superior court under this section. 
(e)  Conviction in the municipal court under this section shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. 
(Ord. No. 2003-2, § 47, 4-7-2003) 
Sec. 34-145. - Criminal prosecution. 
(a)  A user who willfully or knowingly violates any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or consent order issued hereunder, or any orders of the municipal court issued under section 34-144, shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor. The superintendent shall apply for a state warrant for violation of O.C.G.A. § 12-5-53(a), returnable to the superior court. 
(b)  The superintendent shall seek the issuance of state warrants for any person violating any of the provisions set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-5-53(b) through (d), returnable to the appropriate superior courts of criminal jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 2003-2, § 48, 4-7-2003) 
Sec. 34-146. - Remedies non-exclusive. 
The remedies provided for in this article are not exclusive. The superintendent may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a noncompliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance with the city's enforcement response plan. However, the superintendent may take other action against any user when the circumstances warrant. Further, the superintendent is empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any noncompliant user. Further, actions of a lesser nature may be taken in the municipal court of the city by citation for a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 2003-2, § 49, 4-7-2003) 
Sec. 34-147. - Publication of users in significant noncompliance. 
The superintendent shall publish annually, in the largest daily newspaper published in the municipality where the POTW is located, a list of the users which, during the previous 12 months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements as defined in subsection 34-138(c). 
(Ord. No. 2003-2, § 50, 4-7-2003) 
Sec. 34-148. - Notification delivery of enforcement actions. 
Written notice personally delivered or placed in the U.S. Mail by certified mail to the person's last known address, as shown in city utility billing records, shall be deemed sufficient notice for all enforcement actions in this article. Such notice may be personally served on the user or any authorized representative of the user. With respect to article violations regarding nonpayment of amounts due under this article, only notice mailed to the person's last known address, by regular U.S. Mail, of the amount owed and the date upon which payment is due shall be required. 
(Ord. No. 2003-2, § 51, 4-7-2003) 
Subpart B - LAND USE AND LAND DEVELOPMENT 
Chapter 101 - GENERAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS 

Sec. 101-1. - Application of chapter 1. 
The provisions of chapter 1 apply to this subpart. 
Sec. 101-2. - Legal status. 
This subpart B is a codification of ordinances pertaining to land use or land development and subpart A is a codification of other ordinances; however: 
(1)  The failure to include provisions in subpart B that relate to land use or land development does not excuse noncompliance with such provisions. 
(2)  The inclusion in subpart B of provisions that do not relate to land use or land development does not excuse noncompliance with such provisions. 
Sec. 101-3. - Standards governing the exercise of zoning power. 
In exercising the zoning powers granted to the mayor and city council by state law, the city council shall apply the following standards in making zoning decisions, weighing each standard to the extent appropriate or relevant to each zoning decision: 
(1)  Standards for consideration of rezonings. 
a.  Whether the zoning proposal will permit a use that is suitable in view of the use and development of adjacent and nearby property. 
b.  Whether the zoning proposal will adversely affect the existing use or usability of adjacent or nearby property. 
c.  Whether the zoning proposal will result in a use that will or could cause an excessive or burdensome use of existing streets, transportation facilities, utilities, or schools. 
d.  Whether the zoning proposal is consistent with the comprehensive plan, transportation plans, or other plans adopted for guiding development within the city. 
e.  Whether there are other existing or changing conditions affecting the use and development of property that give supporting grounds for either approval or disapproval of the zoning or special use proposal. 
(2)  Standards for considering the adoption of or amendment to Ordinance No. 91-9, as amended, or other "zoning" ordinances. 
a.  Is the proposal consistent with the purpose and intent of the ordinance or regulation under consideration? 
b.  Does the proposal further, or is it compatible with, the purpose and intent of the comprehensive plan? 
c.  Is the proposal required to adequately address new or changing conditions or to properly implement the comprehensive plan? 
d.  Does the proposal reasonably promote the public health, safety, morality or general welfare? 
(Ord. No. 2016-7, art. 1, 2016) 
Sec. 101-4. - Policies and procedures which govern the calling and holding of a public hearing on zoning matters. 
Prior to making any zoning decision, the city council shall conduct a public hearing. The public hearing shall be called and a public notice provided in accordance with the provisions of Ordinance No. 91-9, as amended, and in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 36-66-4 Public Hearing Notice, as follows: 
(1)  A notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be published at least 15 days, but not more than 45 days, prior to said public hearing in the official legal organ of the city or another newspaper of general circulation within the territorial boundaries of the city. The notice shall state the time, place and purpose of the hearing in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 36-66-4. If the proposed amendment is a rezoning of property or special use initiated by a party other than the city council, then: 
a.  The published notice, in addition to the foregoing, shall include the location of the property, the present zoning classification of the property, and the proposed zoning classification of the property; and 
b.  A sign containing that same information shall be placed on the property by the city not less than 15 days, nor more than 45 days, prior to the date of the hearing. The sign shall be placed in a conspicuous location on the property frontage in such manner as to be legible from the public road. On lots with more than one road frontage, a sign will be placed facing each public road. If the property has no road frontage, a sign shall be placed at a location on each road where access will be gained to the property. 
(2)  Public hearing. All public hearings regarding applications considered by the board of zoning appeals, planning commission, and city council shall be held in accordance with any procedures adopted by said body and, in addition, shall be governed by the following procedure: 
a.  As a preliminary matter, the applicant and any opponents to the zoning decision shall acquaint themselves with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 36-67A-3, regarding disclosure of campaign contributions and shall comply with the provisions of that statute. 
b.  The presiding officer (as used herein the term "presiding officer" shall mean the chair of the body or the city attorney) shall open the hearing by stating the specific application being considered at the public hearing. At this time, the presiding officer may summarize the public hearing procedures. The applicant may, upon recognition and upon statement of his name and address, present and explain his application. The applicant shall be provided a full opportunity to be heard and may present any evidence, information or materials which the applicant desires for the body to consider in arriving at its determination. The applicant, or his designated agent, shall be required to attend the public hearing unless written notice of hardship is received prior to such meeting. Failure of the applicant or his agent to attend the public hearing or meeting, except in cases of hardship, may be due cause for dismissal or denial of such application. A time limitation may be imposed at the discretion of the presiding officer, but in no event shall such time limitation provide for less than ten minutes, nor shall it be any less than the time allowed for those persons speaking in opposition to the application. 
c.  Persons who oppose the application will be asked to comment next. All interested parties, after being recognized, shall be afforded an opportunity to address the proposed application by standing before the appropriate body and identifying their name and address along with any comments on the proposed application. A time limitation may be imposed at the discretion of the presiding officer, but in no event shall such time limitation provide for less than ten minutes, nor shall it be any less than the time allowed for those persons speaking in favor of the application. Public comments will be accepted and individuals making public comments may present any evidence, information and/or materials that the individual desires for the body to consider in arriving at its determination. 
d.  All comments shall be directed to the body and shall be made in an orderly manner. 
e.  The applicant shall then have an opportunity for summary remarks and rebuttal concerning the proposed application. 
f.  Upon the completion of any comments from interested parties and the summary by the applicant, the public hearing shall be completed and adjourned. 
g.  A member of the city staff will then briefly summarize the requested application and staff shall respond to any questions from the body regarding the staff recommendation related to the proposed application, any applicable background material, and the recommendations and reports of the planning commission if appropriate. All public comments having been heard, the members of the body considering the application may discuss the request among themselves. During this discussion period, the members of the body may call on the applicant or other interested parties to clarify points made previously or to answer questions. Said applicant or interested parties may respond upon recognition. 
h.  The mayor and council will then take the matter under consideration for voting but may ask questions of the staff, consultants, applicant or other persons in attendance during the voting process. 
(Ord. No. 2016-6, art. 1, 2016) 
Sec. 101-5. - Building permit and other development fees. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of any ordinance of the city to the contrary, fees for the following shall be as established by the city: 
(1)  Building permits for any building or structure required by city ordinance or building code to be permitted. 
(2)  Plumbing permit. 
(3)  Electrical permit. 
(4)  Heating and air permit (mechanical). 
(5)  Low voltage permit. 
(6)  Mobile home permit. 
(7)  Sign permit, which permit is required before a sign is installed, constructed, enlarged, moved or converted. 
(8)  Banner permit. 
(9)  Swimming pool permit. 
(10)  Certification of appropriateness. 
(11)  Other miscellaneous fee schedules. 
(12)  Application fee for rezoning, variance, conditional use and appeal. 
(13)  Application fee for zoning text amendment or application fee for alteration or extension of conditional zoning. 
(14)  Application fee for plan approval for mobile home park, residential condominium and planned unit development (PUD). 
(15)  Application fee for preliminary subdivision/development plan approval. 
(16)  Application fee for final subdivision/development plan approval. 
(17)  Copy of official zoning map. 
(Ord. No. 94-4, Amend. 6, 2-2-2009) 
Chapter 103 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— State construction codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 103-1—103-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CONSTRUCTION CODES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 103-19. - State standards adopted. 
(a)  The mayor and city council hereby adopt the following state minimum standard codes, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs: 
(1)  International Building Code, 2012 edition, with state amendments (2014) (2015). 
(2)  International Mechanical Code, 2012 edition, with state amendments (2014) (2015). 
(3)  International Fuel Gas Code, 2012 edition, with state amendments (2014) (2015). 
(4)  International Plumbing Code, 2012 edition, with state amendments (2014) (2015). 
(5)  National Electrical Code, 2014 edition (no state amendments). 
(6)  International Fire Code, 2012 edition, with state amendments (2014). 
(7)  International Residential Code, 2012 edition, with state amendments (2014) (2015). 
(8)  International Energy Conservation Code, 2009 edition, with state supplements and amendments (2011) (2012). 
(b)  The following appendices of said codes, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, are hereby adopted by reference as though they were copied herein fully: 
(1)  International Building Code: All appendices. 
(2)  International Mechanical Code: All appendices. 
(3)  International Fuel Gas Code: All appendices. 
(4)  International Plumbing Code: All appendices. 
(5)  National Electrical Code: All appendices. 
(6)  International Fire Code: All appendices. 
(7)  International Residential Code: All appendices. 
(8)  International Energy Conservation Code: All appendices. 
(c)  The following are adopted by reference as though they were copied herein fully: 
(1)  International Property Maintenance Code, 2012 edition, with state amendments (2015). 
(2)  International Existing Building Code, 2012 edition, with state amendments (2015). 
(3)  International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, 2012 edition, with state amendments (2014). 
(Ord. No. 2006-3, Amend. 2, 12-5-2016) 
State Law reference— State construction codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20 et seq. 
Secs. 103-20—103-39. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 103-40. - Purpose and scope. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this article is to provide for the administration and enforcement of the state minimum standard codes for construction as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs. Hereinafter, the state minimum standard codes for construction shall be referred to as "the construction codes." 
(b)  Code remedial. 
(1)  General. These construction codes are hereby declared to be remedial, and shall be construed to secure the beneficial interests and purposes thereof, which are public safety, health, and general welfare, through structural strength, stability, sanitation, adequate light and ventilation, and safety to life and property from fire and other hazards attributed to the built environment, including alteration, repair, removal, demolition, use and occupancy of buildings, structures, or premises, and by regulating the installation and maintenance of all electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, which may be referred to as service systems. 
(2)  Quality control. Quality control of materials and workmanship is not within the purview of the construction codes except as it relates to the purposes stated therein. 
(3)  Permitting and inspection. The inspection or permitting of any building, system or plan, under the requirements of construction codes, shall not be construed in any court as a warranty of the physical condition of such building, system or plan or their adequacy. The city, nor any employee thereof, shall be liable in tort for damages for any defect or hazardous or illegal condition or inadequacy in such building, system or plan, nor for any failure of any component of such, which may occur subsequent to such inspection or permitting. 
(c)  Scope. 
(1)  Applicability. 
a.  General. Where, in any specific case, different sections of these construction codes specify different materials, methods of construction or other requirements, the most restrictive shall govern. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. 
b.  Building. The provisions of the International Building Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal and demolition, of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures, except in one- and two-family dwellings. 
c.  Electrical. The provisions of the National Electrical Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall apply to the installation of electrical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances thereto. 
d.  Gas. The provisions of the International Fuel Gas Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall apply to the installation of consumer's gas piping, gas appliances and related accessories as covered in this Code. These requirements apply to gas piping systems extending from the point of delivery to the inlet connections of appliances and the installation and operation of residential and commercial gas appliances and related accessories, except in one- and two-family dwellings. 
e.  Mechanical. The provisions of the International Mechanical Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall apply to the installation of mechanical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and/or appurtenances, including ventilating, heating, cooling, air conditioning and refrigeration systems, incinerators, and other energy related systems, except in one- and two-family dwellings. 
f.  Plumbing. The provisions of the International Plumbing Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall apply to every plumbing installation, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances, and when connected to a water or sewerage system. 
g.  Fire prevention. The provisions of the International Fire Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, and/or maintenance of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures. 
h.  Energy. The provisions of the International Energy Conservation Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall regulate the design of building envelopes for adequate thermal resistance and low air leakage and the design and selection of mechanical, electrical, service water heating and illumination systems and equipment that will enable the effective use of energy in new building construction. 
i.  One- and two-family dwellings. The provisions of the International Residential Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, of every one- or two-family dwelling or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures. 
(2)  Federal and state authority. The provisions of the construction codes shall not be held to deprive any federal or state agency, or any applicable governing authority having jurisdiction, of any power or authority which it had on the effective date of the adoption of the construction codes or of any remedy then existing for the enforcement of its orders, nor shall it deprive any individual or corporation of its legal rights as provided by law. 
(3)  Appendices. Appendices referenced in the text of the construction codes shall be considered an integral part of the construction codes. 
(4)  Referenced standards. Standards referenced in the text of the construction codes shall be considered an integral part of the construction codes. If specific portions of a standard are denoted by code text, only those portions of the standard shall be enforced. Where construction code provisions conflict with a standard, the construction code provisions shall be enforced. Permissive and advisory provisions in a standard shall not be construed as mandatory. 
(5)  Maintenance. All buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, both existing and new, and all parts thereof, shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. All devices or safeguards, which are required by the construction codes when constructed, altered, or repaired, shall be maintained in good working order. The owner, or his designated agent, shall be responsible for the maintenance of buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems. 
(d)  Building department. There is hereby established a department to be called the building department, and the person in charge shall be known as the building official. The city council shall establish the qualifications for the building official and other code enforcement personnel. 
(1)  Restrictions on employees. An officer or employee connected with the department, except one whose only connection is as a member of the board established by section 103-44(a), shall not be financially interested in the furnishing of labor, material, or appliances for the construction, alteration, or maintenance of a building, structure, service, system, or in the making of plans or of specifications thereof, unless he is the owner of such. This officer or employee shall not engage in any other work, which is inconsistent with his duties or conflicts with the interests of the department. 
(2)  Records. The building official shall keep, or cause to be kept, a record of the business of the department. The records of the department shall be open to public inspection pursuant to the provisions of the state Open Records Act. 
(3)  Liability. Any officer or employee, or member of the board of adjustments and appeals, charged with the enforcement of the construction codes, acting for the applicable governing authority in the discharge of his duties, shall not thereby render himself personally liable, and is hereby relieved from all personal liability, for any damage that may occur to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties. Any suit brought against any officer or employee or member because of such act performed by him in the enforcement of any provision of the construction codes shall be defended by the governing jurisdiction until the final termination of the proceedings. 
(4)  Reports. The building official shall submit annually a report covering the work of the building department during the preceding year. He may incorporate in said report a summary of the decisions of the board of adjustment and appeals during said year. 
(e)  Existing buildings. 
(1)  General. Alterations, repairs or rehabilitation work may be made to any existing structure, building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system without requiring the building, structure, plumbing, electrical, mechanical or gas system to comply with all the requirements of the construction codes, provided that the alteration, repair or rehabilitation work conforms to the requirements of the construction codes for new construction. The building official shall determine the extent to which the existing system shall be made to conform to the requirements of the construction codes for new construction. 
(2)  Change of occupancy. If the occupancy classification of any existing building or structure is changed, the building, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems shall be made to conform to the intent of the construction codes as required by the building official. 
(f)  Special historic buildings. The provisions of the construction codes relating to the construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation or moving of buildings or structures shall not be mandatory for existing buildings or structures identified and classified by the state or local jurisdiction as historic buildings when such buildings or structures are judged by the building official to be safe and in the public interest of health, safety and welfare regarding any proposed construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation or moving of buildings within fire districts. 
(Ord. No. 2014-2, § 1, 3-20-2014) 
Sec. 103-41. - Powers and duties of the building official. 
(a)  General. The building official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of the construction codes. The building official is further authorized to render interpretations of the construction codes, which are consistent with its intent and purpose. 
(b)  Right of entry. 
(1)  Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of the construction codes, or whenever the building official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists, in any building or upon any premises, any condition or code violation which makes such building, structure, premises, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the building official may enter such building, structure or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the building official by these construction codes, provided that if such building or premises is occupied, he shall first present proper credentials and request entry. If such building, structure, or premises is unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of such and request entry. If entry is refused, the building official shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
(2)  When the building official shall have first obtained a proper inspection warrant or other remedy provided by law to secure entry, no owner or occupant or any other persons having charge, care or control of any building, structure, or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper request is made as herein provided, to promptly permit entry therein by the building official for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to the construction codes. 
(c)  Stop work orders. Upon notice from the building official, work on any building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system that is being done contrary to the provisions of the construction codes or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or to his agent, or to the person doing the work, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. Where an emergency exists, the building official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work. 
(d)  Revocation of permits. 
(1)  Misrepresentation of application. The building official may revoke a permit or approval, issued under the provisions of the construction codes, in case there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to the material fact in the application or plans on which the permit or approval was based. 
(2)  Violation of code provisions. The building official may revoke a permit upon determination by the building official that the construction, erection, alteration, repair, moving, demolition, installation or replacement of the building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems for which the permit was issued is in violation of, or not in conformity with, the provisions of the construction codes. 
(e)  Unsafe buildings or systems. All buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems which are unsafe, unsanitary, or do not provide adequate egress, or which constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to human life, or which in relation to existing use, constitute a hazard to safety or health, are considered unsafe buildings or service systems. All such unsafe buildings, structures or service systems are hereby declared illegal and shall be abated by repair and rehabilitation or by demolition in accordance with the provisions of the standard unsafe building abatement code. 
(f)  Requirements not covered by code. Any requirements necessary for the strength, stability or proper operation of an existing or proposed building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, or for the public safety, health and general welfare, not specifically covered by the construction codes, shall be determined by the building official. 
(g)  Alternate materials and methods. The provisions of the construction codes are not intended to prevent the use of any material or method of construction not specifically prescribed by them, provided any such alternate has been reviewed by the building official. The building official shall approve any such alternate, provided the building official finds that the alternate for the purpose intended is at least the equivalent of that prescribed in the construction codes, in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety. The building official shall require that sufficient evidence or proof be submitted to substantiate any claim made regarding the alternate. 
(Ord. No. 2014-2, § 2, 3-20-2014) 
Sec. 103-42. - Permits. 
(a)  Permit application. 
(1)  When required. 
a.  Any owner, authorized agent, or contractor who desires to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, or change the occupancy of a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert or replace any electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system, the installation of which is regulated by the construction codes, or to cause any such work to be done, shall first make application to the building official and obtain the required permit for the work. 
b.  Exception. Permits shall not be required for the following mechanical work: 
1.  Any portable heating appliance; 
2.  Any portable ventilation equipment; 
3.  Any portable cooling unit; 
4.  Any steam, hot or chilled water piping within any heating or cooling equipment regulated by the construction codes; 
5.  Replacements of any part which does not alter its approval or make it unsafe; 
6.  Any portable evaporative cooler; 
7.  Any self-contained refrigeration system containing ten pounds (4.54 kg.) or less of refrigerant and actuated by motors of one horsepower (746 W) or less. 
(2)  Work authorized. A building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing permit shall carry with it the right to construct or install the work, provided the same are shown on the drawings and set forth in the specifications filed with the application for the permit. Where these are not shown on the drawings and covered by the specifications submitted with the application, separate permits shall be required. 
(3)  Minor repairs. Ordinary minor repairs may be made with the approval of the building official without a permit, provided that such repairs shall not violate any of the provisions of the construction codes. 
(4)  Information required. Each application for a permit, with the required fee, shall be filed with the building official on a form furnished for that purpose, and shall contain a general description of the proposed work and its location. The application shall be signed by the owner, or his authorized agent. The building permit application shall indicate the proposed occupancy of all parts of the building and of that portion of the site or lot, if any, not covered by the building or structure, and shall contain such other information as may be required by the building official. 
(5)  Time limitations. An application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned six months after the date of filing for the permit, unless before then a permit has been issued. One or more extensions of time for periods of not more than 90 days each may be allowed by the building official for the application, provided the extension is requested in writing and justifiable cause is demonstrated. 
(b)  Drawings and specifications. 
(1)  Requirements. When required by the building official, two or more copies of specifications and of drawings drawn to scale with sufficient clarity and detail to indicate the nature and character of the work, shall accompany the application for a permit. Such drawings and specifications shall contain information, in the form of notes or otherwise, as to the quality of materials, where quality is essential to conformity with the construction codes. Such information shall be specific, and the construction codes shall not be cited as a whole or in part, nor shall the term "legal" or its equivalent be used, as a substitute for specific information. All information, drawings, specifications and accompanying data shall bear the name and signature of the person responsible for the design. 
(2)  Additional data. The building official may require details, computations, stress diagrams, and other data necessary to describe the construction or installation and the basis of calculations. All drawings, specifications and accompanying data required by the building official to be prepared by an architect or engineer, shall be affixed with their official seal. 
(3)  Design professional. 
a.  The design professional shall be an architect or engineer legally registered under the laws of this state regulating the practice of architecture or engineering and shall affix his official seal to said drawings, specifications and accompanying data, for the following: 
1.  All group A, E, and I occupancies. 
2.  Buildings and structures three stories or higher. 
3.  Buildings and structures 5,000 square feet (465 m 2 ) or more in area. 
b.  For all other buildings and structures, the submittal shall bear the certification of the applicant that some specific state law exception permits its preparation by a person not so registered. 
c.  Exception: Single-family dwellings, regardless of size, shall require neither a registered architect nor engineer, nor a certification that an architect or engineer is not required. 
(4)  Structural and fire resistance integrity. Plans for all buildings shall indicate how required structural and fire resistance integrity will be maintained where a penetration of a required fire resistance wall, floor or partition will be made for electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing, signal and communication conduits, pipes and systems and also indicate in sufficient detail how the fire integrity will be maintained where required fire resistance floors intersect the exterior walls. 
(5)  Site drawings. Drawings shall show the location of the proposed building or structure and of every existing building or structure on the site or lot. The building official may require a boundary line survey prepared by a qualified surveyor. 
(6)  Hazardous occupancies. The building official may require the following: 
a.  General site plan. A general site plan drawn at a legible scale which shall include, but not be limited to, the location of all buildings, exterior storage facilities, permanent access ways, evacuation routes, parking lots, internal roads, chemical loading areas, equipment cleaning areas, storm and sanitary sewer accesses, emergency equipment and adjacent property uses. The exterior storage areas shall be identified with the hazard classes and the maximum quantities per hazard class of hazardous materials stored. 
b.  Building floor plan. A building floor plan drawn to a legible scale, which shall include, but not be limited to, all hazardous materials storage facilities within the building and shall indicate rooms, doorways, corridors, exits, fire rated assemblies with their hourly rating, location of liquid-tight rooms, and evacuation routes. Each hazardous materials storage facility shall be identified on the plan with the hazard classes and quantity range per hazard class or the hazardous materials stored. 
(c)  Examination of documents. 
(1)  Plan review. The building official shall examine or cause to be examined each application for a permit and the accompanying documents, consisting of drawings, specifications, computations, and additional data, and shall ascertain by such examinations whether the construction indicated and described is in accordance with the requirements of the construction codes and all other pertinent laws or ordinances. 
(2)  Affidavits. The building official may accept a sworn affidavit from a registered architect or engineer stating that the plans submitted conform to the construction codes. For buildings and structures, the affidavit shall state that the plans conform to the laws as to egress, type of construction and general arrangement and if accompanied by drawings showing the structural design, and by a statement that the plans and design conform to the requirements of the construction codes as to strength, stresses, strains, loads and stability. The building official may, without any examination or inspection, accept such affidavit, provided the architect or engineer who made such affidavit agrees to submit to the building official, copies of inspection reports as inspections are performed and upon completion of the structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems a certification that the structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system has been erected in accordance with the requirements of the construction codes. Where the building official relies upon such affidavit, the architect or engineer shall assume full responsibility for the compliance with all provisions of the construction codes and other pertinent laws or ordinances. 
(d)  Issuing permits. 
(1)  Action on permits. The building official shall act upon an application for a permit without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. If the building official is satisfied that the work described in an application for a permit and the contract documents filed therewith conform to the requirements of the construction codes and other pertinent laws and ordinances, he shall issue a permit to the applicant. 
(2)  Refusal to issue permit. If the application for a permit and the accompanying contract documents describing the work do not conform to the requirements of the construction codes or other pertinent laws or ordinances, the building official shall not issue a permit, but shall return the contract documents to the applicant with his refusal to issue such permit. Such refusal shall, when requested, be in writing and shall contain the reason for refusal. 
(3)  Special foundation permit. When application for permit to erect or enlarge a building has been filed and pending issuance of such permit, the building official may, at his discretion, issue a special permit for the foundation only. The holder of such a special permit is proceeding at his own risk and without assurance that a permit for the remainder of the work will be granted, nor that corrections will not be required in order to meet provisions of the construction codes. 
(4)  Public right-of-way. A permit shall not be given by the building official for the construction of any building, or for the alteration of any building where said building is to be changed and such change will affect the exterior walls, bays, balconies, or other appendages or projections fronting on any street, alley or public lane, or for the placing on any lot or premises of any building or structure removed from another lot or premises, unless the applicant has made application at the office of the director of public works for the lines of the public street on which he proposes to build, erect or locate said building; and it shall be the duty of the building official to see that the street lines are not encroached upon except as provided for in chapter 22 of the standard building code. 
(e)  Contractor responsibilities. It shall be the duty of every contractor who shall make contracts for the installation or repairs of buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical, sprinkler or plumbing systems, for which a permit is required, to comply with state or local rules and regulations concerning licensing which the applicable governing authority may have adopted. In such case that the state requires a contractor to have obtained a state license before they are permitted to perform work, the contractor shall supply the local government with their license number before receiving a permit for work to be performed. 
(f)  Conditions of the permit. 
(1)  Permit intent. A permit issued shall be construed to be a license to proceed with the work and not as authority to violate, cancel, alter, or set aside any of the provisions of the construction codes, nor shall issuance of a permit prevent the building official from thereafter requiring a correction of errors in plans, construction, or violations of the construction codes. Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced within six months after its issuance, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of six months after the time the worked is commenced. One or more extensions of time, for periods not more than 90 days each, may be allowed for the permit. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. Extensions shall be in writing by the building official. 
(2)  Permit issued on basis of an affidavit. Whenever a permit is issued in reliance upon an affidavit or whenever the work to be covered by a permit involves installation under conditions which, in the opinion of the building official, are hazardous or complex, the building official shall require that the architect or engineer who signed the affidavit or prepared the drawings or computations shall supervise such work. In addition, they shall be responsible for conformity with the permit, provide copies of inspection reports as inspections are performed, and, upon completion, make and file with the building official a written affidavit that the work has been done in conformity with the reviewed plans and with the structural provisions of the construction codes. In the event such architect or engineer is not available, the owner shall employ in his stead a competent person or agency whose qualifications are reviewed by the building official. 
(3)  Plans. When the building official issues a permit, he shall enforce, in writing or by stamp, both sets of plans "Reviewed for Code Compliance." One set of drawings so reviewed shall be retained by the building official and the other set shall be returned to the applicant. The permitted drawings shall be kept at the site of work and shall be open to inspection by the building official or his authorized representative. 
(g)  Fees. 
(1)  Prescribed fees. A permit shall not be issued until the fees prescribed by the governing body have been paid. Nor shall an amendment to a permit be released until the additional fee, if any, due to an increase in the estimated cost of the building, structure, electrical, plumbing, mechanical or gas systems, etc., has been paid. 
(2)  Work commencing before permit issuance. Any person who commences any work on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing, etc., system before obtaining the necessary permits, shall be subject to a penalty of 100 percent of the usual permit fee in addition to the required permit fees. 
(3)  Accounting. The building official shall keep a permanent and accurate accounting of all permit fees and other money collected, the names of all persons upon whose account the same was paid, along with the date and amount thereof. 
(4)  Schedule of permit fees. On all buildings, structures, electrical, plumbing, mechanical and gas systems or alterations requiring a permit, a fee for each permit shall be paid as required at the time of filing application, in accordance with the fee schedules for same. 
(5)  Building permit valuations. If, in the opinion of the building official, the valuation of a building, alteration, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems appears to be underestimated on the application, a permit shall be denied, unless the applicant can show detailed estimates to meet the approval of the building official. Permit valuations shall include total cost, such as electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing equipment and other systems, including materials and labor. 
(h)  Inspections. 
(1)  Existing building inspections. Before issuing a permit, the building official may examine or cause to be examined any building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems for which an application has been received for a permit to enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, install, or change the occupancy. He shall inspect all buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, from time to time, during and upon completion of the work for which a permit was issued. He shall make a record of every such examination and inspection and of all violations of the construction codes. 
(2)  Manufacturers and fabricators. When deemed necessary by the building official, he shall make, or cause to be made, an inspection of materials or assemblies at the point of manufacture or fabrication. A record shall be made of every such examination and inspection and of all violations of the construction codes. 
(3)  Inspection service. The building official may make, or cause to be made, the inspections required by subsection (h)(6) of this section. He may accept reports of inspectors of recognized inspection services, provided that, after investigation, he is satisfied as to their qualifications and reliability. A certificate called for by any provision of the construction codes shall not be based on such reports unless the same are in writing and certified by a responsible officer of such service. 
(4)  Inspections prior to issuance of certificate of occupancy or completion. The building official shall inspect or cause to be inspected at various intervals all construction or work for which a permit is required, and a final inspection shall be made of every building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system upon completion, prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy or completion. 
(5)  Posting of permit. Work requiring a permit shall not commence until the permit holder or his agent posts the permit card in a conspicuous place on the premises. The permit shall be protected from the weather and located in such position as to permit the building official or representative to conveniently make the required entries thereon. This permit card shall be maintained in such position by the permit holder until the certificate of occupancy or completion is issued by the building official. 
(6)  Required inspections. The building official, upon notification from the permit holder or his agent, shall make the following inspections and such other inspections as necessary, and shall either release that portion of the construction or shall notify the permit holder or his agent of any violations which must be corrected in order to comply with the technical code: 
a.  Building. 
1.  Foundation inspection. To be made after trenches are excavated and forms erected. 
2.  Frame inspection. To be made after the roof, all framing, fire-blocking and bracing are in place, all concealing wiring, all pipes, chimneys, ducts and vents are complete. 
3.  Final inspection. To be made after the building is completed and ready for occupancy. 
b.  Electrical. 
1.  Underground inspection. To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, conduit or cable installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
2.  Rough-in inspection. To be made after the roof, framing, fire-blocking and bracing is in place and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
3.  Final inspection. To be made after the building is complete, all required electrical fixtures are in place and properly connected or protected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
c.  Plumbing. 
1.  Underground inspection. To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, piping installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
2.  Rough-in inspection. To be made after the roof, framing, fire-blocking and bracing is in place and all soil, waste and vent piping is complete, and prior to this installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
3.  Final inspection. To be made after the building is complete, all plumbing fixtures are in place and properly connected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
4.  Note. See section 311 of the standard plumbing code for required tests. 
d.  Mechanical. 
1.  Underground inspection. To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, underground duct and fuel piping installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
2.  Rough-in inspection. To be made after the roof, framing, fire blocking and bracing are in place and all ducting, and other concealed components are complete, and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
3.  Final inspection. To be made after the building is complete, the mechanical system is in place and properly connected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
e.  Gas. 
1.  Rough piping inspection. To be made after all new piping authorized by the permit has been installed, and before any such piping has been covered or concealed or any fixtures or gas appliances have been connected. 
2.  Final piping inspection. To be made after all piping authorized by the permit has been installed and after all portions which are to be concealed by plastering or otherwise have been so concealed, and before any fixtures or gas appliances have been connected. This inspection shall include a pressure test. 
3.  Final inspection. To be made on all new gas work authorized by the permit and such portions of existing systems as may be affected by new work or any changes in order to ensure compliance with all the requirements of the construction codes and to ensure that the installation and construction of the gas system is in accordance with reviewed plans. 
f.  Energy. 
1.  Foundation inspection. To be made before slab concrete is poured in place. To verify that perimeter insulation has been installed correctly on any slab on grade foundations, if required. 
2.  Frame inspection. To be made before exterior wall insulation is concealed by wall board, to check installation of exterior walls insulation and to inspect that all holes and cracks through the structure envelope have been sealed in an appropriate manner as to restrict air passage. 
3.  Final inspection. To be made after the building is completed and ready for occupancy. To verify installation and R-value of ceiling and floor insulation. To verify correct SEER ratings on appliances. 
(7)  Written release. Work shall not be done on any part of a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining a written release from the building official. Such written release shall be given only after an inspection has been made of each successive step in the construction or installation as indicated by each of the foregoing three inspections. 
(8)  Reinforcing steel, structural frames, insulation, plumbing, mechanical, or electrical systems. Reinforcing steel, structural frame, insulation, or plumbing, work of any part of any building or structure shall not be covered or concealed without first obtaining a release from the building official. 
(9)  Plaster fire protection. In all buildings where plaster is used for fire protection purposes, the permit holder or his agent shall notify the building official after all lathing and backing is in place. Plaster shall not be applied until the release from the building official has been received. 
(i)  Certificates. 
(1)  Certificate of occupancy. 
a.  Building occupancy. A new building shall not be occupied or a change made in the occupancy, nature or use of a building or part of a building until after the building official has issued a certificate of occupancy. Said certificate shall not be issued until all required electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing and fire protection systems have been inspected for compliance with the construction codes and other applicable laws and ordinances and released by the building official. 
b.  Issuing certificate of occupancy. Upon satisfactory completion of construction of a building or structure and installation of electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems in accordance with the construction codes, reviewed plans and specifications, and after the final inspection, the building official shall issue a certificate of occupancy stating the nature of the occupancy permitted, the number of persons for each floor when limited by law, and the allowable load per square foot for each floor in accordance with the provisions of the construction codes. 
c.  Temporary/partial occupancy. A temporary/partial certificate of occupancy may be issued for a portion of a building, which may safely be occupied prior to final completion of the building. 
d.  Existing building certificate of occupancy. A certificate of occupancy for any existing building may be obtained by applying to the building official and supplying the information and data necessary to determine compliance with the construction codes for the occupancy intended. Where necessary, in the opinion of the building official, two sets of detailed drawings, or a general inspection, or both, may be required. When, upon examination and inspection, it is found that the building conforms to the provisions of the construction codes and other applicable laws and ordinances for such occupancy, a certificate of occupancy shall be issued. 
(2)  Certificate of completion. Upon satisfactory completion of a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, a certificate of completion may be issued. This certificate is proof that a structure or system is complete and for certain types of permits is released for use and may be connected to a utility system. This certificate does not grant authority to occupy or connect a building, such as a shell building, prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(3)  Service utilities. 
a.  Connection of service utilities. No person shall make connections from a utility, source of energy, fuel or power to any building or system which is regulated by the construction codes for which a permit is required, until released by the building official and a certificate of occupancy or completion is issued. 
b.  Temporary connection. The building official may authorize the temporary connection of the building or system to the utility source of energy, fuel or power for the purpose of testing building service systems or for use under a temporary certificate of occupancy. 
c.  Authority to disconnect service utilities. The building official shall have the power to authorized disconnection of utility service to the building, structure or system regulated by the construction codes, in case of emergency, where necessary, to eliminate an immediate hazard to life or property. The building official shall notify the serving utility, and, whenever possible, the owner and occupant of the building, structure or service system of the decision to disconnect prior to taking such action. If not notified prior to disconnecting, the owner or occupant of the building, structure or service system shall be notified in writing, as soon as practical thereafter. 
(j)  Posting floor loads. 
(1)  Occupancy. An existing or new building shall not be occupied for any purpose, which will cause the floors thereof to be loaded beyond their safe capacity. The building official may permit occupancy of a building for mercantile, commercial or industrial purposes, by a specific business, when he is satisfied that such capacity will not thereby be exceeded. 
(2)  Storage and factory-industrial occupancies. It shall be the responsibility of the owner, agent, proprietor or occupant of group S and group F occupancies, or any occupancy where excessive floor loading is likely to occur, to employ a competent architect or engineer in computing the safe load capacity. All such computations shall be accompanied by an affidavit from the architect or engineer stating the safe allowable floor load on each floor in pounds per square foot uniformly distributed. The computations and affidavit shall be filed as a permanent record of the building department. 
(3)  Signs required. In every building or part of a building used for storage, industrial or hazardous purposes, the safe floor loads, as reviewed by the building official on the plan, shall be marked on plates or approved design which shall be supplied and securely affixed by the owner of the building in a conspicuous place in each story to which they relate. Such plates shall not be removed or defaced, and if lost, removed or defaced, shall be replaced by the owner of the building. 
(Ord. No. 2014-2, § 3, 3-20-2014) 
Sec. 103-43. - Tests. 
The building official may require tests or test reports as proof of compliance. Required tests are to be made at the expense of the owner, or his agent, by an approved testing laboratory or other approved agency. 
(Ord. No. 2014-2, § 4, 3-20-2014) 
Sec. 103-44. - Construction board of adjustment and appeals. 
(a)  Appointment. There is hereby established a board to be called the construction board of adjustment and appeals, which shall consist of seven members and two alternates. The city council shall appoint the board. 
(b)  Membership and terms. 
(1)  Membership. The construction board of adjustment and appeals should consist of seven members. Such board members should be composed of individuals with knowledge and experience in the construction codes, such as design professionals, contractors or building industry representatives. In addition to the regular members, there should be two alternate members, one member at large from the building industry and one member at large from the public. A board member shall not act in a case in which he has a personal or financial interest. 
(2)  Terms. The terms of office of the board member shall be staggered so no more than one-third of the board is appointed or replaced in any 12-month period. The two alternates, if appointed, shall serve one-year terms. Vacancies shall be filled for an unexpired term in the manner in which original appointments are required to be made. Continued absence of any member from required meetings of the board shall, at the discretion of the applicable governing body, render any such member subject to immediate removal from office. 
(3)  Quorum and voting. A simple majority of the board shall constitute a quorum. In varying any provision of the construction codes, the affirmative votes of the majority present shall be required. In modifying a decision of the building official, not less than two affirmative votes shall be required. In the event that regular members are unable to attend a meeting, the alternate members, if appointed, shall vote. 
(4)  Secretary of board. The building official shall act as secretary of the board and shall make a detailed record of all its proceedings, which shall set forth the reasons for its decision, the vote of each member, the absence of a member and any failure of a member to vote. 
(c)  Powers. The construction board of adjustments and appeals shall have the power, as further defined in subsection (d) of this section, to hear the appeals of decisions and interpretations of the building official and consider variances of the construction codes. 
(d)  Appeals. 
(1)  Decision of the building official. The owner of a building, structure or service system, or his duly authorized agent, may appeal a decision of the building official to the construction board of adjustment and appeals whenever any one of the following conditions are claimed to exist: 
a.  The building official rejected or refused to approve the mode or manner of construction proposed to be followed or materials to be used in the installation or alteration of a building, structure or service system. 
b.  The provisions of the construction codes do not apply to this specific case. 
c.  That an equally good or more desirable form of installation can be employed in any specific case. 
d.  The true intent and meaning of the construction codes or any of the regulations thereunder have been misconstrued or incorrectly interpreted. 
(2)  Variances. The construction board of adjustment and appeals, when so appealed to and after a hearing, may vary the application of any provision of the construction codes to any particular case when, in its opinion, the enforcement thereof would do manifest injustice and would be contrary to the spirit and purpose of this Code or the construction codes or public interest, and also finds all of the following: 
a.  That special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the building, structure or service system involved and which are not applicable to others. 
b.  That the special conditions and circumstances do not result from the action or inaction of the applicant. 
c.  That granting the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by the construction codes to other buildings, structures or service system. 
d.  That the variance granted is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of the building, structure or service system. 
e.  That the grant of the variance will be in harmony with the general intent and purpose of the construction codes and will not be detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(3)  Condition of variances. In granting the variance, the board may prescribe a reasonable time limit within which the action for which the variance is required shall be commenced or completed, or both. In addition, the board may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with the construction codes. Violation of the conditions of a variance shall be deemed a violation of the construction codes. 
(4)  Notice of appeal. Notice of appeal shall be in writing and filed within 30 calendar days after the building official renders the decision. Appeals shall be in a form acceptable to the building official. 
(5)  Unsafe or dangerous buildings or service systems. In the case of a building, structure, or service system, which, in the opinion of the building officials, is unsafe, unsanitary or dangerous, the building official may, in his order, limit the time for such notice of appeals to a shorter period. 
(e)  Rules and regulations. 
(1)  General. The board shall establish rules and regulations for its own procedure not inconsistent with the provisions of these procedures. The board shall meet on call of the chairperson. The board shall meet within 30 calendar days after notice of appeal has been received. 
(2)  Decisions. The construction board of adjustment and appeals shall, in every case, reach a decision without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. Each decision of the board shall also include the reasons for the decision. If a decision of the board reverses or modifies a refusal, order, or disallowance of the building official or varies the application of any provision of the construction codes, the building official shall immediately take action in accordance with such decision. Every decision shall be promptly filed in writing in the office of the building official and shall be open to public inspection. A certified copy of the decision shall be sent by mail or otherwise to the appellant and a copy shall be kept publicly posted in the office of the building official for two weeks after filing. Every decision of the board shall be final, subject, however, to such remedy as any aggrieved party might have at law or in equity. 
(Ord. No. 2014-2, § 5, 3-20-2014 
Sec. 103-45. - Violations and penalties. 
Any person, firm, corporation or agent who shall violate a provision of the construction codes, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall erect, construct, alter, install, demolish or move any structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, or has erected, constructed, altered, repaired, moved or demolished a building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, in violation of a detailed statement or drawing submitted and permitted thereunder, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each such person shall be considered guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of the construction codes is committed or continued, and upon conviction of any such violation, such person shall be punished within the limits and as provided by state laws. 
(Ord. No. 2014-2, § 7, 3-20-2014) 
Chapter 105 - EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL 

Sec. 105-1. - Title. 
This chapter will be known as "City of Dahlonega Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 85-4, Amend. 8, § I, 12-5-2015) 
Sec. 105-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Best management practices (BMPs) means sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in state, published by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land disturbing activity was permitted. 
Board means the board of natural resources. 
Buffer means the area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
CPESC means certified professional in erosion and sediment control with current certification by EnviroCert, Inc., which is also referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc. 
Certified personnel means a person who has successfully completed the appropriate certification course approved by the state soil and water conservation commission. 
Coastal marshlands shall have the same meaning as in O.C.G.A. § 12-5-282. 
Commission means the state soil and water conservation commission (GSWCC). 
Cut means a portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to the excavated surface. Also known as excavation. 
Department means the state department of natural resources (DNR). 
Design professional means a professional licensed by the state in the field of engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying; or a person that is a certified professional in erosion and sediment control (CPESC) with a current certification by EnviroCert, Inc. Design professionals shall practice in a manner that complies with applicable state law governing professional licensure. 
Director means the director of the environmental protection division or an authorized representative. 
District means the Upper Chattahoochee River Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Division means the environmental protection division (EPD) of the department of natural resources. 
Drainage structure means a device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for stormwater management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
Erosion means the process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan means a plan required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq., that includes, as a minimum protections at least as stringent as the state general permit, best management practices, and requirements in section 105-4(c). 
Fill means a portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground surface or an excavation. 
Final stabilization means all soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that has been certified by EPD for waste disposal, 100 percent of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of 70 percent or greater, or equivalent permanent stabilization measures (such as the use of rip rap, gabions, permanent mulches or geotextiles) have been used. Permanent vegetation shall consist of planted trees, shrubs, perennial vines; a crop of perennial vegetation appropriate for the time of year and region; or a crop of annual vegetation and a seeding of target crop perennials appropriate for the region. Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction. 
Finished grade means the final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Grading means altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Ground elevation means the original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Land disturbing activity means any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land, but not including agricultural practices as described in section 105-3(5). 
Larger common plan of development or sale means a contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this chapter, the term "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
Local issuing authority means the governing authority of any county or municipality which is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). 
Metropolitan river protection act (MRPA) means a state law referenced as O.C.G.A. 12-5-440 et seq. which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
NOI means a notice of intent form provided by EPD for coverage under the state general permit. 
NOT means a notice of termination form provided by EPD to terminate coverage under the state general permit. 
Natural ground surface means the ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU) means numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed or suspended particles are present. 
Operator means the parties that have: 
(1)  Operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or 
(2)  Day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
Outfall means the location where stormwater in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, leaves a facility or site or, if there is a receiving water on-site, becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water. 
Permit means the authorization necessary to conduct a land disturbing activity under the provisions of this chapter. 
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Phase or phased means sub-parts or segments of construction projects where the sub-part or segment is constructed and stabilized prior to completing construction activities on the entire construction site. 
Project means the entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
Properly designed means designed in accordance with the design requirements and specifications contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia (manual) published by the state soil and water conservation commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land disturbing activity was permitted and amendments to the manual as approved by the commission up until the date of NOI submittal. 
Roadway drainage structure means a device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled roadway consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Sediment means solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by wind, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation means the process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
Soil and water conservation district approved plan means an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan approved in writing by the Upper Chattahoochee River Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Stabilization means the process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
State general permit means the National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) general permit or permits for stormwater runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 USC section 1251 et seq., and O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f). 
State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
Structural erosion, sedimentation and pollution control practices means practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are rip rap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures and sediment traps, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Trout streams means all streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the wildlife resources division of the state department of natural resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq., in the rules and regulations for water quality control, chapter 391-3-6 at www.gaepd.org. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self- sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures means measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
(1)  Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover; 
(2)  Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or 
(3)  Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
Such measures can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Watercourse means any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Wetlands means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support and that, under normal circumstances, do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
(Ord. No. 85-4, Amend. 8, § II, 12-5-2015) 
Sec. 105-3. - Exemptions. 
This chapter shall apply to any land disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
(1)  Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72; 
(2)  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; 
(3)  Such minor land disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
(4)  The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre and not otherwise exempted under this subsection; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 and this subsection. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this subsection, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to the state Water Quality Control Act (O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq.). In any such buffer zone, no land disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, but the director may grant variances to no less than 25 feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least 25 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b) and the buffer zones provided by this subsection shall be enforced by the local issuing authority; 
(5)  Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, definitions, to include those practices involving the establishment, cultivation, or harvesting of products of the field or orchard; the preparation and planting of pasture land; farm ponds; dairy operations; livestock and poultry management practices; and the construction of farm buildings; 
(6)  Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in section 105-4(c)(15) through (17), no other land disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three years after completion of such forestry practices; 
(7)  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the natural resources conservation service (NRCS) of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
(8)  Any project involving less than one acre of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre or within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this subsection, the term "state waters" excludes channels and drainageways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one acre, which involves land disturbing activity, and which is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainageway, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located, and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the local issuing authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by subsections (1) through (10) of this section; 
(9)  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the department of transportation, the state highway authority, or the state road and tollway authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of the department of transportation or the state road and tollway authority which disturb one or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7.1; except where the department of transportation, the state highway authority, or the state road and tollway authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the local issuing authority, the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; 
(10)  Any land disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and 
(11)  Any public water system reservoir. 
(Ord. No. 85-4, Amend. 8, § III, 12-5-2015) 
Sec. 105-4. - Minimum requirements for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control using best management practices. 
(a)  General provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land disturbing activities if requirements of the ordinance and the NPDES general permit are not met. Therefore, plans for those land disturbing activities which are not exempted by this chapter shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of subsections (b) and (c) of this section. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion, sedimentation and pollution during all stages of any land disturbing activity in accordance with requirements of this chapter and the NPDES general permit. 
(b)  Minimum requirements/BMPs. 
(1)  Best management practices as set forth in this subsection and subsection (c) of this section shall be required for all land disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with subsection (b)(2) of this section or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of stormwater issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f). As used in this section, the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b). 
(2)  A discharge of stormwater runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. This subsection shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single-family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five acres. 
(3)  Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f) for each day on which such failure occurs. 
(4)  The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land disturbing activities occur. 
(5)  The local issuing authority may set more stringent buffer requirements than stated in subsections (c)(15) through (17) of this section, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(c). 
(c)  The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to the Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act (O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.) for the purpose of governing land disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit; and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, published by the state soil and water conservation commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
(1)  Stripping of vegetation, regrading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; 
(2)  Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum; 
(3)  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practicable erosion potential; 
(4)  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; 
(5)  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
(6)  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; 
(7)  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
(8)  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; 
(9)  To the extent necessary, sediment in run-off water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this subsection, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of the Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act (O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.); 
(10)  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills; 
(11)  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property; 
(12)  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
(13)  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; 
(14)  Land disturbing activity plans for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in subsection (b)(2) of this section; 
(15)  Except as provided in subsections (c)(16) and (17) of this section, there is established a 25 foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; or where bulkheads and sea walls are installed to prevent shoreline erosion on Lake Oconee and Lake Sinclair; or along any ephemeral stream. As used in this provision, the term "ephemeral stream" means a stream that under normal circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events, that has the channel located above the ground-water table year round, for which groundwater is not a source of water, and for which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow. Unless exempted as along an ephemeral stream, the buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to the Metropolitan River Protection Act (O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq.), shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director as provided in this subsection. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
a.  No land disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer, and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the streambed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the streambed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: 
1.  Stream crossings for water lines; or 
2.  Stream crossings for sewer lines; and 
(16)  There is established a 50 foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to the state Water Quality Control Act (O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq.), except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of 25 gallons per minute or less shall have a 25-foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer: 
a.  No land disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the streambed, provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the streambed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: 
1.  Stream crossings for water lines; or 
2.  Stream crossings for sewer lines; and 
(17)  There is established a 25-foot buffer along coastal marshlands, as measured horizontally from the coastal marshland-upland interface, as determined in accordance with the Coastal Marshlands Protection Act of 1970 (O.C.G.A. § 12-5-280 et seq.) and the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, where an alteration within the buffer area has been authorized pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-286, for maintenance of any currently serviceable structure, landscaping, or hardscaping, including bridges, roads, parking lots, golf courses, golf cart paths, retaining walls, bulkheads, and patios; provided, however, that if such maintenance requires any land disturbing activity, adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented, where a drainage structure or roadway drainage structure is constructed or maintained; provided, however, that if such maintenance requires any land disturbing activity, adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented, on the landward side of any currently serviceable shoreline stabilization structure, or for the maintenance of any manmade stormwater detention basin, golf course pond, or impoundment that is located entirely within the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. For the purposes of this subsection, the term "maintenance" shall be defined as actions necessary or appropriate for retaining or restoring a currently serviceable improvement to the specified operable condition to achieve its maximum useful life. Maintenance includes emergency reconstruction of recently damaged parts of a currently serviceable structure so long as it occurs within a reasonable period of time after damage occurs. Maintenance does not include any modification that changes the character, scope or size of the original design, and the term "serviceable" shall be defined as usable in its current state or with minor maintenance but not so degraded as to essentially require reconstruction. 
a.  No land disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to crossings for utility lines that cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer, provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. 
c.  The buffer shall not apply to any land disturbing activity conducted pursuant to and in compliance with a valid and effective land disturbing permit issued subsequent to April 22, 2014, and prior to December 31, 2015; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented or any lot for which the preliminary plat has been approved prior to December 31, 2015, if roadways, bridges, or water and sewer lines have been extended to such lot prior to the effective date of the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975 (O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.) and if the requirement to maintain a 25-foot buffer would consume at least 18 percent of the high ground of the platted lot otherwise available for development; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. 
d.  Activities where the area within the buffer is not more than 500 square feet or that have a minor buffer impact as defined in EPD rule 391-3-7-.01(r), provided that the total area of buffer impacts is less than 5,000 square feet, are deemed to have an approved buffer variance by rule. Bank stabilization structures are not eligible for coverage under the variance by rule and notification shall be made to the division at least 14 days prior to the commencement of land disturbing activities. 
(d)  Nothing contained in the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975 (O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.) shall prevent any local issuing authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain stream buffer requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in subsections (b) and (c) of this section. 
(e)  The fact that land disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this chapter or the terms of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 85-4, Amend. 8, § IV, 12-5-2015) 
Sec. 105-5. - Application/permit process. 
(a)  General. The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall design and review before submittal the general development plans. The local issuing authority shall review the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall consult the zoning ordinance, stormwater management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, this chapter, and any other ordinances, rules, regulations or permits, which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. However, the owner and/or operator are the only parties who may obtain a permit. 
(b)  Application requirements. 
(1)  No person shall conduct any land disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city without first obtaining a permit from the city planning department to perform such activity and providing a copy of notice of intent submitted to the EPD if applicable. 
(2)  The application for a permit shall be submitted to the city planning department and must include the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in subsection (c) of this section. Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans, together with supporting data, must demonstrate affirmatively that the land disturbing activity proposed will be carried out in such a manner that the provisions of section 105-4(b) and (c) will be met. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by four copies of the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan in accordance with EPD Rule 391-3-7-.10. 
(3)  In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-23(a)(5), provided that such fees shall not exceed $80.00 per acre of land disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. In a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the division, except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17(9) or (10) shall be submitted in full to the division, regardless of the existence of a local issuing authority in the jurisdiction. 
(4)  Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the local issuing authority shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. The district shall approve or disapprove a plan within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the district to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the local issuing authority. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by section 105-4(c)(15) through (17) have been obtained, all fees have been paid, and bonding, if required as per subsection (b)(6) of this section, have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the local issuing authority and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the local issuing authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. The local issuing authority with plan review authority shall approve or disapprove a revised plan submittal within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the local issuing authority with plan review authority to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the revised plan submittal. 
(5)  If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this chapter, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975 (O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.), within three years prior to the date of filing the application under consideration, the local issuing authority may deny the permit application. 
(6)  The local issuing authority may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this section or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the local issuing authority with respect to alleged permit violations. 
(c)  Plan requirements. 
(1)  Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in section 105-4(b) and (c), or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia is hereby incorporated by reference into this chapter. The plan for the land disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and stormwater management facilities, local ordinances and state laws. Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature and seal of the certified design professional. Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspections or any land disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on his level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission and in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(2)  Data required for site plans shall include all the information required from the appropriate erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan review checklist established by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land disturbing activity was permitted. 
(d)  Permits. 
(1)  Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but, in any event, not later than 45 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary and all applicable fees have been paid prior to permit issuance. The permit shall include conditions under which the activity may be undertaken. 
(2)  No permit shall be issued by the local issuing authority unless the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan has been approved by the district and the local issuing authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this chapter, any variances required by section 105-4(c)(15) through (17) are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per subsection (b)(6) of this section are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(3)  Any land disturbing activities by a local issuing authority shall be subject to the same requirements of this chapter, and any other ordinances relating to land development, as are applied to private persons and the division shall enforce such requirements upon the local issuing authority. 
(4)  If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
(5)  The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the local issuing authority, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this chapter. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
(6)  The local issuing authority may reject a permit application if the applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975 (O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.) permit requirements within three years prior to the date of the application, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(f)(1). 
(Ord. No. 85-4, Amend. 8, § V, 12-5-2015) 
Sec. 105-6. - Inspection and enforcement. 
(a)  The city planning department will periodically inspect the sites of land disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, the local issuing authority shall regulate primary, secondary and tertiary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land disturbing activities. Tertiary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance where the tertiary permittee is conducting land disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this chapter, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this chapter. 
(b)  The local issuing authority must amend its ordinances to the extent appropriate within 12 months of any amendments to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975 (O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.). 
(c)  The city planning department shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this chapter, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land disturbing activities. 
(d)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the local issuing authority, the commission, the district, or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(e)  The district or the commission or both shall semi-annually review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). The district or the commission or both may provide technical assistance to any county or municipality for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the county's or municipality's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control program. The district or the commission shall notify the division and request investigation by the division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. 
(f)  The division may periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of a governing authority's ordinance and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the governing authority. If such review indicates that the governing authority of any county or municipality certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(e), the division shall notify the governing authority of the county or municipality in writing. The governing authority of any county or municipality so notified shall have 90 days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as a local issuing authority. If the county or municipality does not take necessary corrective action within 90 days after notification by the division, the division shall revoke the certification of the county or municipality as a local issuing authority. 
(Ord. No. 85-4, Amend. 8, § VI, 12-5-2015) 
Sec. 105-7. - Penalties and incentives. 
(a)  Failure to obtain a permit for land disturbing activity. If any person commences any land disturbing activity requiring a land disturbing permit as prescribed in this chapter without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. 
(b)  Stop work orders. 
(1)  For the first and second violations of the provisions of this chapter, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five days, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a stop work order requiring that land disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop work order in lieu of a warning; 
(2)  For a third and each subsequent violation, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop work order; 
(3)  All stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; and 
(4)  When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the local issuing authority or by the director or his designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop work order shall be issued by the local issuing authority or by the director or his designee. All such stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop work orders shall apply to all land disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. 
(c)  Bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this chapter and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of section 105-5(b)(6). The local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(d)  Monetary penalties. Any person who violates any provisions of this chapter, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this chapter, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director issued as provided in this chapter shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter, notwithstanding any provisions in any city charter to the contrary, municipal courts shall be authorized to impose a penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of county ordinances, any magistrate court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of this chapter under county ordinances approved under this chapter shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 85-4, Amend. 8, § VII, 12-5-2015) 
Sec. 105-8. - Education and certification. 
(a)  Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(b)  For each site on which land disturbing activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary, secondary, or tertiary permittee, as defined in the state general permit, shall have, as a minimum, one person who is in responsible charge of erosion and sedimentation control activities on behalf of said entity or person and meets the applicable education or training certification requirements developed by the commission present on-site whenever land disturbing activities are conducted on that site. The term "project site" shall herein be defined as any land-disturbance site or multiple sites within a larger common plan of development or sale permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the state general permit. 
(c)  Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit but otherwise requiring certified personnel on-site may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of this chapter. 
(d)  If a state general permittee who has operational control of land disturbing activities for a site has met the certification requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19(b)(1), then any person or entity involved in land disturbing activity at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee shall meet those educational requirements specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19(b)(4) and shall not be required to meet any educational requirements that exceed those specified in said subsection. 
(Ord. No. 85-4, Amend. 8, § VIII, 12-5-2015) 
Sec. 105-9. - Administrative appeal judicial review. 
(a)  Administrative remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the local issuing authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion, sediment and pollution control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the city council within 20 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of written notice of appeal. 
(b)  Judicial review. Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the local issuing authority, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal de novo to the superior court of the county. 
(Ord. No. 85-4, Amend. 8, § IX, 12-5-2015) 
Sec. 105-10. - Responsibility and violations. 
(a)  Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this chapter, nor the compliance with provisions of this chapter shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law, nor impose any liability upon the local issuing authority or district for damage to any person or property. 
(b)  The fact that a land disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this chapter or the terms of the permit. 
(c)  No provision of this chapter shall permit any persons to violate the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975 (O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.), the state Water Quality Control Act (O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq.) or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder or pollute any waters of the state as defined thereby. 
(Ord. No. 85-4, Amend. 8, § X, 12-5-2015) 
Chapter 107 - FLOODS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 107-1—107-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 107-26. - Authorization. 
Article IX, section II of the constitution of the State of Georgia and O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(a) have delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. 
(Ord. No. 82-4, Amend. 1, art. 1, § A, 9-2-2008) 
Sec. 107-27. - Findings of fact. 
(a)  The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  These flood losses are caused by the occupancy in flood hazard areas of uses vulnerable to floods, which are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages, and by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities. 
(Ord. No. 82-4, Amend. 1, art. 1, § B, 9-2-2008) 
Sec. 107-28. - Statement of purpose. 
It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
(3)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; 
(4)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; 
(5)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters. 
(Ord. No. 82-4, Amend. 1, art. 1, § C, 9-2-2008) 
Sec. 107-29. - Objectives. 
The objectives of this article are: 
(1)  To protect human life and health; 
(2)  To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(3)  To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas; 
(4)  To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(5)  To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(6)  To minimize prolonged business interruptions; and 
(7)  To ensure that potential homebuyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Ord. No. 82-4, Amend. 1, art. 1, § D, 9-2-2008) 
Sec. 107-30 - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accessory structure means a structure having minimal value and used for parking, storage and other non-habitable uses, such as garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns, hay sheds and the like. 
Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition, which is connected by a firewall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall, shall be considered new construction. 
Appeal means a request for a review of the city manager or his designee's interpretation of any provision of this article. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of special flood hazard means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. In the absence of official designation by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, areas of special flood hazard shall be those designated by the local community and referenced in section 107-32. 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Base flood elevation (BFE) means the elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map for Zones AE, AH, AI-A30, AR, AR/A, AR/AE, AR/AI-A30, AR/AH, AR/AO, VI-V30, and VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year. 
Basement means that portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Building means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. 
Critical facility means any public or private facility, which, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the disaster or would increase the hazard to life and health. Critical facilities include: 
(1)  Structures or facilities that produce, use, or store highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic, or water-reactive materials; 
(2)  Hospitals and nursing homes, and housing for the elderly, which are likely to contain occupants who may not be sufficiently mobile to avoid the loss of life or injury during flood and storm events; 
(3)  Emergency operation centers or data storage centers which contain records or services that may become lost or inoperative during flood and storm events; and 
(4)  Generating plants, and other principal points of utility lines. 
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, and storage of materials or equipment. 
Elevated building means a non-basement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
Existing construction means any structure for which the start of construction commenced before September 18, 1991. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before December 6, 1982. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as Zone A. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study means the official report by the Federal Insurance Administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
Floodproofing means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Freeboard means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. Freeboard tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed foundation of a building. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this article. 
Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of this article, the term "mean sea level" is synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD). 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD), as corrected in 1929, means a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
New construction means any structure (see definition) for which the start of construction commenced on or after September 18, 1991, and includes any subsequent improvements to the structure. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after December 6, 1982. 
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD), as corrected in 1988, is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle, which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Start of construction means the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. (Note: accessory structures are not exempt from any article requirements. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank. 
Subdivision means the division of a single lot into two or more lots for the purpose of sale or development. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement. 
(1)  The term "substantial improvement" means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, taking place during a five-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure prior to the start of construction of the improvement. The market value of the structure should be the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement. In the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. The term "substantial improvement" includes structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. 
For the purposes of this definition, substantial improvement is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
(2)  The term does not, however, include those improvements of a structure required to comply with existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to ensure safe living conditions and which have been identified by the code enforcement official, and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project, or any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions means the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Variance means a grant of relief from the requirements of this article, which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this article. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, or other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this article is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Ord. No. 82-4, Amend. 1, art. 6, 9-2-2008) 
Sec. 107-31. - Lands to which this article applies. 
This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Ord. No. 82-4, Amend. 1, art. 2, § A, 9-2-2008) 
Sec. 107-32. - Basis for area of special flood hazard. 
(a)  The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its flood insurance study (FIS), dated September 18, 1991, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared a part of this article. 
(b)  For those land areas acquired by a municipality through annexation, the current effective FIS dated April 2, 1991, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, for the county are hereby adopted by reference. 
(c)  Areas of special flood hazard may also include those areas known to have flooded historically or defined through standard engineering analysis by governmental agencies or private parties but not yet incorporated in a FIS. 
(d)  The repository for public inspection of the flood insurance study (FIS), accompanying maps and other supporting data are located at city hall. 
(Ord. No. 82-4, Amend. 1, art. 2, § B, 9-2-2008) 
Sec. 107-33. - Establishment of development permit. 
A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this article prior to the commencement of any development activities. 
(Ord. No. 82-4, Amend. 1, art. 2, § C, 9-2-2008) 
Sec. 107-34. - Compliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. No. 82-4, Amend. 1, art. 2, § D, 9-2-2008) 
Sec. 107-35. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing ordinance, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this article and another ordinance conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. Specifically noted, Ordinance No. 91-9 contains elements which may be in conflict herewith and thus this article shall control. 
(Ord. No. 82-4, Amend. 1, art. 2, § E, 9-2-2008) 
Sec. 107-36. - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this article all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the city council; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 82-4, Amend. 1, art. 2, § F, 9-2-2008) 
Sec. 107-37. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the city or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 82-4, Amend. 1, art. 2, § G, 9-2-2008) 
Sec. 107-38. - Penalties for violation. 
Failure to comply with the provisions of this article or with any of its requirements, including conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions, shall constitute a violation. Any person who violates this article or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $1,000.00 or imprisoned for not more than 180 days, or both, and, in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful actions as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. No. 82-4, Amend. 1, art. 2, § H, 9-2-2008) 
Secs. 107-39—107-63. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 107-64. - Designation of article administrator. 
The city manager or his designee is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 82-4, Amend. 1, art. 3, § A, 9-2-2008) 
Sec. 107-65. - Permit procedures. 
(a)  Application for a development permit. Application for a development permit shall be made to the city manager or his designee on forms furnished by the city prior to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to, the following: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the elevations of the area in question and the nature, location, dimensions, of existing or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, storage of materials or equipment, and drainage facilities. 
(b)  Application contents. Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)  Application stage. 
a.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed; 
c.  Design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any proposed nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet the floodproofing criteria of section 107-117(2); 
d.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of a proposed development. 
(2)  Construction stage. 
a.  For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit holder shall provide to the administrator an as-built certification of the regulatory floor elevation or floodproofing level immediately after the lowest floor or floodproofing is completed. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized for nonresidential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. 
b.  Any work undertaken prior to submission of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. 
c.  The city manager or his designee shall review the above referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make said corrections required hereby shall be cause to issue a stop work order for the project. 
(Ord. No. 82-4, Amend. 1, art. 3, § B, 9-2-2008) 
Sec. 107-66. - Duties and responsibilities of the administrator. 
Duties of the city manager or his designee shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)  Review proposed development to ensure that the permit requirements of this article have been satisfied. 
(2)  Review proposed development to ensure that all necessary permits have been received from governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1334. Require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file. 
(3)  Review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(4)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 107-32, then the city manager or his designee shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other sources in order to administer the provisions of division 3 of this article. 
(5)  Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures in accordance with section 107-65(b)(2). 
(6)  Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any new or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed, in accordance with section 107-65(b)(2). 
(7)  When floodproofing is utilized for a structure, the city manager or his designee shall obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect in accordance with section 107-65(b)(1)(c) and section 107-117(2) or 107-119. 
(8)  Make substantial damage determinations following a flood event or any other event that causes damage to structures in flood hazard areas. 
(9)  Notify adjacent communities and the state department of natural resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
(10)  For any altered or relocated watercourse, submit engineering data/analysis within six months to FEMA to ensure accuracy of community flood maps through the letter of map revision process. Assure flood carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse is maintained. 
(11)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions), the city manager or his designee shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this article. 
(12)  All records pertaining to the provisions of this article shall be maintained in the office of the city manager or his designee and shall be open for public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 82-4, Amend. 1, art. 3, § C, 9-2-2008) 
Secs. 7-67—7-115. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

Sec. 107-116. - General standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure. 
(2)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage. 
(3)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 
(4)  Elevated buildings. All new construction or substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
1.  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and 
3.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in both directions; 
b.  So as not to violate the "lowest floor" criteria of this article, the unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure shall only be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; and 
c.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
(5)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
(6)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces. 
(7)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system. 
(8)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters. 
(9)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(10)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure, which is not compliant with the provisions of this article, shall be undertaken only if the nonconformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. 
(Ord. No. 82-4, Amend. 1, art. 4, § A, 9-2-2008) 
Sec. 107-117. - Specific standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and/or substantial improvements. Where base flood elevation data are available, new construction and/or substantial improvement of any structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate equalization of flood hydrostatic forces on both sides of exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 107-116(4). All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), and all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated at or above one foot above the base flood elevation. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. New construction and/or the substantial improvement of any structure located in A1-30, AE, or AH zones, may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to one foot above the base flood elevation, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions in this section, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth in section 107-66(6). 
(3)  Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. Where base flood elevation data are available: 
a.  All manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved on: 
1.  Individual lots or parcels; 
2.  In new and/or substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions; 
3.  In expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions; or 
4.  On a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision where a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as the result of a flood; 
Must have the lowest floor including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. 
b.  Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision may be elevated so that either: 
1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than one foot above the level of the base flood elevation; or 
2.  The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
c.  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement as referenced in section 107-116(6). 
d.  All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
1.  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; 
2.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or 
3.  The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for new construction, including the anchoring and elevation requirements of subsection (3)a through c of this section. 
(4)  Floodways. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 107-32 are areas designated as floodways. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, the area must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
a.  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway. Development may be permitted, however, provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels or floodway widths during a base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof. 
b.  Only if subsection (4)a of this section is satisfied, then any new construction or substantial improvement shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 82-4, Amend. 1, art. 4, § B, 9-2-2008) 
Sec. 107-118. - Building standards for streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodway (A zones). 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 107-32 where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A zones), or where base flood data have been provided but a floodway has not been delineated, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 107-32, then the city manager or his designee shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any scientific or historic base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of this division. Only if data are not available from these sources, then the provisions of subsections (2) and (3) of this section shall apply. 
(2)  No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to the width of the stream or 20 feet, whichever is greater, measured from the top of the stream bank, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in more than a one-foot increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(3)  In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. (Note: Require the lowest floor to be elevated one foot above the estimated base flood elevation in A zone areas where a limited detail study has been completed). Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 107-116(4). All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), and all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. The city manager or his designee shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(Ord. No. 82-4, Amend. 1, art. 4, § C, 9-2-2008) 
Sec. 107-119. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO zones). 
Areas of special flood hazard established in section 107-32, may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. The following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the flood depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 107-116(4). The city manager or his designee shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(2)  New construction or the substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one foot above the highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and as required in section 107-65(b)(1)c and (b)(2). 
(3)  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwaters around and away from any proposed structure. 
(Ord. No. 82-4, Amend. 1, art. 4, § D, 9-2-2008) 
Sec. 107-120. - Standards for subdivisions. 
The following are the standards for subdivisions: 
(1)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
(2)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
(3)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; and 
(4)  For subdivisions and/or developments greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is less, base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision and all other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions. Any changes or revisions to the flood data adopted herein and shown on the FIRM shall be submitted to FEMA for review as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. Upon completion of the project, the developer is responsible for submitting the "as-built" data to FEMA in order to obtain the final LOMR. 
(Ord. No. 82-4, Amend. 1, art. 4, § E, 9-2-2008) 
Sec. 107-121. - Standards for critical facilities. 
The following are the standards for critical facilities: 
(1)  Critical facilities shall not be located in the 100-year floodplain or the 500-year floodplain. 
(2)  All ingress and egress from any critical facility must be protected to the 500-year flood elevation. 
(Ord. No. 82-4, Amend. 1, art. 4, § F, 9-2-2008) 
Secs. 7-122—7-140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - VARIANCE PROCEDURES 

Sec. 107-141. - Established. 
(a)  The zoning board of appeals, as established by city council, shall hear and decide requests for appeals or variance from the requirements of this article. 
(b)  The board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision, or determination is made by the city manager or his designee in the enforcement or administration of this article. 
(c)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the zoning board of appeals may appeal such decision to the superior court of the city, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1. 
(d)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(e)  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this article are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(f)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(g)  In reviewing such requests, the zoning board of appeals shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this article. 
(h)  Conditions for variances: 
(1)  A variance shall be issued only when there is: 
a.  A finding of good and sufficient cause; 
b.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
c.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, or create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(2)  The provisions of this article are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore, any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of an historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
(3)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(4)  The city manager or his designee shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(i)  Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this article, the zoning board of appeals may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this article. 
(Ord. No. 82-4, Amend. 1, art. 5, 9-2-2008) 
Chapter 109 - HISTORIC PRESERVATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 109-1—109-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - HISTORIC PRESERVATION ORDINANCE 

Sec. 109-19. - Short title, purpose and definitions. 
(a)  Short title. This article shall be known as and may be cited as the "Historic Preservation Ordinance of Dahlonega, Georgia." 
(b)  Purpose. 
(1)  In support and furtherance of its findings and determination that the historical, cultural and aesthetic heritage of the city is among its most valued and important assets and that the preservation of this heritage is essential to the promotion of the health, prosperity and general welfare of the people; 
(2)  In order to maintain the business districts and historic neighborhoods and to protect and enhance local historical and aesthetic attractions to tourists and thereby promote and stimulate business; 
(3)  In order to enhance the opportunities for federal or state tax benefits under relevant provisions of federal or state law; 
(4)  In order to provide for designation, protection, preservation and rehabilitation of historic properties and historic districts and to participate in federal or state programs to do the same; 
(5)  The city council hereby declares it to be the purpose and intent of this article to establish a uniform procedure for use in providing for the protection, enhancement, perpetuation and use of places, districts, sites, buildings, structures, objects, and landscape features having special historical, cultural, archeological or aesthetic interest or value, in accordance with the provisions of the article. 
(c)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Building means a structure, either temporary or permanent, above or below ground, having a roof or other covering, and designed, built, or used as a shelter or enclosure for persons, animals, or property of any kind, such as a house, barn, church, hotel, or similar structure, and including tents, awnings, or vehicles used for purposes of a building. The term "building" may refer to a historically related complex such as a courthouse and jail or a house and barn. 
Certificate of appropriateness means a document evidencing approval by the historic preservation commission of an application to make a material change in the appearance of a designated historic property or of a property located within a designated historic district. 
Exterior architectural features means the architectural style, general design and general arrangement of the exterior of a building, structure or object, including, but not limited to, the kind or texture of the building material and the type and style of all windows, doors, signs and other appurtenant architectural fixtures, features, details or elements relative to the foregoing. 
Exterior environmental features means all those aspects of the landscape or the development of a site which affect the historical character of the property. 
Historic district means a geographically definable area, possessing a significant concentration, linkage, or continuity of sites, buildings, structures or objects united by past events or aesthetically by plan or physical development. A district may also comprise individual elements separated geographically but linked by association or history. The term "historic district" shall further mean an area designated by the city council as a historic district pursuant to the criteria established in section 109-21(c). 
Historic property means an individual building, structure, site, or object, including the adjacent area necessary for the proper appreciation thereof, designated by the city council as a historic property pursuant to the criteria established in section 109-21(d). 
Material change in appearance means a change that will affect either the exterior architectural or environmental features of a historic property or any building, structure, site, object, or landscape feature within a historic district, such as: 
(1)  A reconstruction or alteration of the size, shape or facade of a historic property, including relocation of any doors or windows or removal or alteration of any architectural features, details or elements; 
(2)  Demolition or relocation of a historic structure; 
(3)  Commencement of excavation for construction purposes; 
(4)  A change in the location of advertising visible from the public right-of-way; or 
(5)  The erection, alteration, restoration or removal of any buildings or other structures within a historic property or district, including walls, fences, steps and pavements, or other appurtenant features. 
Object means a material thing of functional, aesthetic, cultural, historical or scientific value that may be, by nature or design, movable yet related to a specific setting or environment. 
Site means the location of a significant event, a prehistoric or historical occupation or activity, or a building or structure, whether standing, ruined, or vanished, where the location itself maintains historical or archaeological value regardless of the value of any existing structure. 
Structure means anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires more or less permanent location on the ground, or which is attached to something having more or less permanent location on the ground, not including utility poles. 
(Ord. No. 2009-4, Amend. 1, § I, 7-2-2012) 
Sec. 109-20. - Historic preservation commission. 
(a)  Creation. There is hereby created a commission whose title shall be "Dahlonega Historic Preservation Commission" (hereinafter "commission"). 
(b)  Position within the city. The preservation commission shall be part of the planning functions of the city. 
(c)  Members; number; appointment; terms and compensation. 
(1)  The commission shall consist of seven members appointed by the mayor and ratified by the city council. All members shall be residents of the city and shall be persons who have demonstrated special interest, experience or education in history, architecture or the preservation of historic resources. In addition, two ex officio members may be appointed to the commission who own property in the city limits, but who are not residents of the city. 
(2)  To the extent available in the city, at least three members shall be appointed from among professionals in the disciplines of architecture, history, architectural history, planning, archaeology or related professions, and at least one member shall be appointed from among professionals in the disciplines of building construction or real property appraisal. 
(3)  The members of the historical commission at the time this article takes effect shall be the initial members of the historic preservation commission to be appointed by the mayor and city council and shall hold office for the balance of their terms then remaining as members of such commission, and their successors shall be appointed according to the requirements of this article by the mayor and ratified by the city council. 
(4)  Members and ex officio members shall serve three-year terms. Members may not serve more than two consecutive terms. Members shall not receive a salary, although they may be reimbursed for expenses with the approval of the city council. 
(d)  Statement of the powers. The preservation commission shall be authorized to: 
(1)  Prepare and maintain an inventory of all property within the city having the potential for designation as historic property; 
(2)  Recommend to the city council specific districts, sites, buildings, structures, or objects to be designated by this article as historic properties or historic districts; 
(3)  Review applications for certificates of appropriateness, and grant or deny same in accordance with the provisions of this article; 
(4)  Recommend to the city council that the designation of any district, site, building, structure or object as a historic property or as a historic district be revoked or removed; 
(5)  Restore or preserve any historic properties acquired by the city; 
(6)  Promote the acquisition by the city of facade easements and conservation easements, as appropriate, in accordance with the provisions of the Georgia Uniform Conservation Easement Act (O.C.G.A. § 44-10-1 et seq.); 
(7)  Conduct educational programs on historic properties located within the city and on general historic preservation activities; 
(8)  Make such investigations and studies of matters relating to historic preservation, including consultation with historic preservation experts or the city council, as the commission itself may, from time to time, deem necessary or appropriate for the purposes of preserving historic resources; 
(9)  Seek out local, state, federal or private funds for historic preservation, and make recommendations to the city council concerning the most appropriate uses of any funds acquired; 
(10)  Submit to the historic preservation division of the department of natural resources a list of historic properties or historic districts designated; 
(11)  Perform historic preservation activities as the official agency of the historic preservation program; 
(12)  Employ persons, if necessary, to carry out the responsibilities of the commission with approval of the city council; 
(13)  Receive donations, grants, funds, or gifts of historic property and acquire and sell historic properties. The preservation commission shall not obligate the city without prior consent; 
(14)  Review and make comments to the historic preservation division of the department of natural resources concerning the nomination of properties within the city to the National Register of Historic Places; and 
(15)  Participate in private, state and federal historic preservation programs and with the consent of the city council enter into agreements to do the same. 
(e)  Power to adopt rules and standards. The preservation commission shall adopt rules and standards for the transaction of its business and for consideration of applications for designations and certificates of appropriateness, such as bylaws, removal of membership provisions, and design guidelines and criteria. The preservation commission shall have the flexibility to adopt rules and standards without amendment to this article. The commission shall provide for the time and place of regular meetings and a method for the calling of special meetings. The commission shall select such officers as it deems appropriate from among its members. A quorum shall consist of a majority of these members. All rules shall be reviewed by the city council before going into use. 
(f)  Conflict of interest. The commission shall be subject to all conflict of interest laws set forth in state statutes and in the city Charter. 
(g)  Authority to receive funding from various sources. The commission shall have the authority to accept donations and shall ensure that these funds do not displace appropriated governmental funds. 
(h)  Records of meetings. A public record shall be kept of the commission's resolutions, proceedings and actions. Reports to the city council will also be made on a timely basis. 
(Ord. No. 2009-4, Amend. 1, § II, 7-2-2012) 
Sec. 109-21. - Recommendation and designation of historic districts and properties. 
(a)  Historic district designated. The downtown historic district is hereby designated by the city council and are subject to all provisions of this article, the zoning ordinance and all other applicable ordinances, rules, regulations, design guidelines or other acts of the city council or the historic preservation commission. 
(1)  Boundaries. The downtown historic district boundaries are designated by the city council as the boundaries of the B-3 historical business district and the CBD central business district under the zoning ordinance. 
(2)  Boundary amendments. It is the intent of this article that the boundaries of the downtown historic district be amended automatically upon the rezoning approval of any property adjacent to or across the street from the downtown historic district to the B-3 or CBD zoning districts, or upon the rezoning approval of any property within the downtown historic district to any zoning district other than B-3 or CBD. 
(b)  Preliminary research by commission. 
(1)  Commission's mandate to conduct a survey of local historical resources. The commission shall compile and collect information and conduct surveys of historic resources within the city. Records shall be stored in the city storage area. 
(2)  Commission's power to recommend districts and buildings to the city council for designation. The commission shall present to the city council recommendations for historic districts and properties. 
(3)  Commission's documentation of proposed designation. Prior to the commission's recommendation of a historic district or historic property to the city council for designation, the commission shall prepare a report for nomination consisting of: 
a.  A physical description; 
b.  A statement of the historical, cultural, architectural and/or aesthetic significance; 
c.  A map showing district boundaries and classification (i.e., contributing, non-contributing) of individual properties therein, or showing boundaries of individual historic properties; 
d.  A statement justifying district or individual property boundaries; and 
e.  Representative photographs. 
(c)  Criteria for designation of a historic district. 
(1)  Criteria for selection of historic districts. A historic district is a geographically definable area, which contains buildings, structures, sites, objects, and landscape features or a combination thereof, which: 
a.  Have special character or special historic/aesthetic value or interest; 
b.  Represent one or more periods, styles or types of architecture typical of one or more eras in the history of the city, county, state or region; and 
c.  Cause such area, by reason of such factors, to constitute a visibly perceptible section of the city or county. 
(2)  Evaluation of properties within historic districts. Individual properties within historic districts shall be classified as: 
a.  Contributing (contributes to the district by meeting the criteria of subsection (c)(1) of this section. 
b.  Non-contributing (does not contribute to the district). 
(d)  Criteria for designation of a historic property, criteria for selection of historic properties. A historic property is a building, structure, site, or object, including the adjacent area necessary for the proper appreciation or use thereof, deemed worthy of preservation by reason of value to the nation, the state, or the city for one of the following reasons: 
(1)  It is an outstanding example of a structure representative of its era; 
(2)  It is one of the few remaining examples of a past architectural style or type; 
(3)  It is a place or structure associated with an event or persons of historic or cultural significance to the city, state, or the region; or 
(4)  It is the site of natural or aesthetic interest that is continuing to contribute to the cultural or historical development and heritage of the city, county, state or region. 
(e)  Requirement for adopting an ordinance for the designation of new historic districts and historic properties. The following applies to the creation of any historic district or historic property not previously designated by this article or other ordinance of the city. 
(1)  Application for designation of new historic districts or property. Designations may be proposed by the city council, the commission, or: 
a.  For historic districts. A historical society, neighborhood association or group of property owners may apply to the commission for designation; 
b.  For historic properties. A historical society, neighborhood association or property owner may apply to the commission for designation. 
(2)  Required components of a designation ordinance. Any ordinance designating any new property or district as historic shall: 
a.  List each property by street address or tax parcel identifier in a proposed historic district or describe the proposed individual historic property; 
b.  Set forth the name and mailing address of the owner of the designated property or properties as shown on the most recent city tax digest; 
c.  Set forth the boundary of the historic property or district by general boundary description, reference to a tax parcel identifier, or as shown on a map or plat of the property or district; 
d.  Require that a certificate of appropriateness be obtained from the commission prior to any material change in appearance of the designated property or of any property within a historic district; and 
e.  Require that the property or district be shown on the official zoning map of the city and kept as a public record to provide notice of such designation. 
(3)  Required public hearings. The commission and the city council shall hold a public hearing on any proposed ordinance for the designation of any new historic district or property. Notice of the hearing shall be published in at least three consecutive issues in the principal newspaper of local circulation, and written notice of the hearing shall be mailed not less than ten, nor more than 20, days prior to the date set for the public hearing. A notice sent via the United States Mail to the last-known owner of the property shown on the city tax digest shall constitute legal notification to the owner and occupant under this article. 
(4)  Notification of historic preservation division. No less than 30 days prior to making a recommendation on any ordinance designating a property or district as historic, the commission must submit the report, required in subsection (b)(3) of this section, to the historic preservation division of the department of natural resources. 
(5)  Recommendations on proposed designations. A recommendation to affirm, modify or withdraw the proposed ordinance for designation shall be made by the commission within 15 days following their public hearing and shall be in the form of a resolution to the city council. 
(6)  City council action on the commission's recommendation. Following receipt of the commission recommendation, the city council may adopt the ordinance as proposed, may adopt the ordinance with any amendments it deems necessary, or may reject the ordinance. 
(7)  Notification of adoption of ordinance for designation. Within 30 days following the adoption of the ordinance for designation by the city council, the owners of each designated historic property, and the owners of each structure, site or work of art located within a designated historic district, shall be given written notification of such designation by the city council, which notice shall apprise said owners of the necessity of obtaining a certificate of appropriateness prior to undertaking any material change in appearance of the historic property designated or within the historic district designated, and require that each owner notify the occupants of their property if different from the owner of such requirement for a certificate of appropriateness. A notice sent via the United States Mail to the last-known owner of the property shown on the city tax digest and a notice sent via United States Mail to the address of the property shall constitute legal notification under this article. 
(8)  Notification of other agencies regarding designation. The commission shall notify all necessary agencies within the city of the ordinance designation. 
(9)  Moratorium on applications for alteration or demolition while an ordinance for designation is pending. If an ordinance for designation is being considered, the commission shall have the power to freeze the status of the involved property or properties. 
(f)  Amendments to boundaries of a historic district or historic property. Once a historic district or historic property has been designated by the city council by this article or other ordinance of the city, its boundaries may be amended in accordance with the following procedures: 
(1)  Historic districts or properties designated by zoning district. For an area or property previously designated as a historic district or property by virtue of its zoning classification (such as being zoned B-3, historic business district, or CBD, central business district), the rezoning process shall control the boundary amendment process, as follows: 
a.  A parcel of land adjacent to or across the street from the historic district or property may be added to the historic district or property by rezoning the parcel to a historic zoning district (such as B-3 or CBD), and parcels zoned within a historic district or property may be removed from the historic district or property by rezoning the parcel to a non-historic zoning district (such as a zoning district other than B-3 or CBD). 
b.  The petition to amend the official zoning map submitted in accordance with the zoning ordinance of the city shall serve as the application to amend the boundary of the historic district or property. 
c.  In addition to the zoning map amendment procedures in the zoning ordinance requiring a public hearing to be held by the planning commission, the historic preservation commission shall be provided a copy of the rezoning petition and recommendation by the zoning administrative officer, and invited to provide comments or recommendations on the petition by no later than the time of the public hearing on the petition by the city council. Failure to provide comments or recommendations shall be of no effect. 
d.  The action taken by the city council to approve or approve with modifications the rezoning petition shall automatically amend the boundaries of the historic district or property. 
e.  For parcels added to a designated historic district or property, notification to the owners of such parcels shall be given in accordance with subsection (e)(7) of this section. 
(2)  Historic districts or properties designated by general boundary description, tax parcel identifier, or map or plat. The boundary of a previously designated historic district or property set forth by general boundary description, tax parcel identifier, or map or plat, shall be amended in the same manner as the historic district or property was initially designated, following the procedures of subsection (e) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2009-4, Amend. 1, § III, 7-2-2012) 
Sec. 109-22. - Application to commission for certificate of appropriateness. 
(a)  Approval of material change in appearance in historic districts or involving historic properties. After the designation by ordinance of a historic property or of a historic district, no material change in the appearance of such historic property, or of a contributing or non-contributing building, structure, site or object within such historic district, shall be made or be permitted to be made by the owner or occupant thereof unless or until the application for a certificate of appropriateness has been submitted to and approved by the commission. A building permit shall not be issued without a certificate of appropriateness. 
(b)  Submission of plans to commission. An application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be accompanied by drawings, photographs, plans and documentation as may be required by the commission. 
(c)  Interior alterations. In its review of applications for certificates of appropriateness the commission shall not consider interior arrangement or use having no effect on exterior architectural features. 
(d)  Technical advice. The commission shall have the power to seek technical advice from outside its members on any application. 
(e)  Public hearings on applications for certificates of appropriateness. 
(1)  The commission shall hold a public hearing at which each proposed certificate of appropriateness is considered, in accordance with its adopted rules for public notice of and procedures for conducting such hearings. 
(2)  The commission shall give the property owner and/or applicant an opportunity to be heard at the certificate of appropriateness hearing, as well as any interested party in attendance. 
(f)  Acceptable commission reaction to the applications for certificates of appropriateness. 
(1)  Commission action. The commission may approve the certificate of appropriateness as proposed, approve the certificate of appropriateness with any modifications it deems necessary, or reject it. 
(2)  The commission shall approve the application and issue a certificate of appropriateness if it finds that the proposed material change in the appearance would not have a substantial adverse effect on the aesthetic, historic, or architectural significance and value of the historic property or the historic district. 
(3)  In making this determination, the commission shall consider applicable standards for rehabilitation in the Secretary of the Interior's standards for historic preservation projects, any design guidelines the commission may adopt, any other factors the commission may deem pertinent, and the following specific criteria depending on the type of action proposed by the application: 
a.  Reconstruction, alteration, new construction or renovation. A decision by the commission approving or denying a certificate of appropriateness for the reconstruction, alteration, new construction or renovation of any building, structure, site feature, or object within a historic district shall be guided by: 
1.  The architectural style of the structures located on or proposed to be located on the property; 
2.  The general design, arrangement, texture, and material of the architectural features involved; and 
3.  The relationship of the property to the exterior architectural style and pertinent features of other structures on properties adjacent to or directly across the street from the subject property. 
b.  Relocation. A decision by the commission approving or denying a certificate of appropriateness for the relocation of a building, structure, or object into or within a historic district shall be guided by: 
1.  The historic character and aesthetic interest that the building, structure, or object will contribute to its proposed location; 
2.  Whether there are definite plans for the area to be vacated and what the effect of those plans on the character of the surrounding area will be; 
3.  Whether the building, structure, or object can be moved without significant damage to its physical integrity; 
4.  Whether the historical and architectural character of the building, structure, site, or object to be relocated will be compatible with the historical and architectural character of the historic district. 
c.  Demolition. A decision by the commission approving or denying a certificate of appropriateness for the demolition of buildings, structures, sites, trees judged to be 50 years old or older, or objects shall be guided by: 
1.  The historic, scenic, or architectural significance of the building, structure, site, tree, or object; 
2.  The importance of the building, structure, site, tree, or object to the ambiance of the district; 
3.  The difficulty or impossibility of reproducing such a building, structure, site, tree, or object because of its design, texture, material, detail, or unique location; 
4.  Whether the building, structure, site, tree, or object is one of the last remaining examples of its kind in the neighborhood or the city; 
5.  Whether there are definite plans for use of the property if the proposed demolition is carried out, and what the effect of those plans on the character of the surrounding area would be; 
6.  Whether reasonable measures can be taken to save the building, structure, site, tree, or object from collapse; 
7.  Whether the building, structure, site, tree, or object is capable of earning reasonable economic return on its value. 
(4)  In cases where the approved application covers a material change in the appearance of a structure which would require the issuance of a building permit, said permit shall not be issued within less than 15 days from the date of issuance of determination established in accordance with subsection (h)(2) of this section, or within 15 days after the 45-day period leading to automatic approval under subsection (h)(3) of this section. An appeal of the commission's determination filed under subsection (n) of this section shall suspend issuance of any building permit until the appeal is decided by the city council. 
(g)  Undue hardship. When, by reason of unusual circumstances, the strict application of any provision of this article would result in the exceptional practical difficulty or undue economic hardship upon any owner of a specific property, the commission, in passing upon applications, shall have the power to vary or modify strict adherence to said provisions, or to interpret the meaning of said provisions, so as to relieve such difficulty or hardship; provided such variances, modifications or interpretations shall remain in harmony with the general purpose and intent of said provisions, so that the architectural or historical integrity, or character of the property, shall be conserved and substantial justice done. In granting variances, the commission may impose such reasonable and additional stipulations and conditions as will, in its judgment, best fulfill the purpose of this article. An undue hardship shall not be a situation of the person's own making. 
(h)  Deadline for approval or rejection of application for certificate of appropriateness. 
(1)  The commission shall approve or reject an application for a certificate of appropriateness within 45 days after the official filing date as established by the commission for an application submitted by the owner or occupant of a historic property or of a building, structure, site, or object located within a historic district. Evidence of approval shall be by a certificate of appropriateness issued by the commission. Notice of the issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness shall be sent by United States Mail to the applicant and all other persons who have requested such notice in writing filed with the commission. 
(2)  Issuance of determination. 
a.  Following action on an application for a certificate of appropriateness by the commission, the commission's secretary or other designated person shall prepare, sign and mail an issuance of determination to the applicant or the applicant's representative of record. 
b.  The issuance of determination shall include the action taken by the commission and the date of said action, and shall be sent by U.S. Certified Mail, return receipt requested, to the address shown on the application for the applicant or the applicant's representative of record. An electronic copy may be sent via the Internet at the applicant's request. 
c.  The effective date of an issuance of determination shall be the date it is signed by the commission's secretary or other designated person and placed in the U.S. Mail. 
(3)  Failure of the commission to approve or reject an application within 45 days after the official filing date shall constitute approval, and no other evidence of approval shall be needed. 
(i)  Necessary action to be taken by commission upon rejection of application for certificate of appropriateness. 
(1)  In the event the commission rejects an application, it shall state its reasons for doing so, and shall transmit a record of such actions and reasons, in writing, to the applicant. The commission may suggest alternative courses of action it thinks proper although it disapproves of the application submitted. The applicant, if he so desires, may make modifications to the plans and may resubmit the application after doing so. 
(2)  In cases where the application covers a material change in the appearance of a structure which would require the issuance of a building permit, the rejection of the application for a certificate of appropriateness by the commission shall be binding upon the building inspector or other administrative officer charged with issuing building permits and, in such a case, no building permit shall be issued. 
(j)  Requirement of conformance with certificate of appropriateness. 
(1)  All work performed pursuant to an issued certificate of appropriateness shall conform to the requirements of such certificate. In the event work is performed not in accordance with such certificate, the commission shall issue a cease and desist order and all work shall cease. 
(2)  The city council or the commission shall be authorized to institute any appropriate action or proceeding in a court of competent jurisdiction to prevent any material change in appearance of a designated historic property or historic district, except those changes made in compliance with the provisions of this ordinance or to prevent any illegal act or conduct with respect to such historic property or historic district. 
(k)  Certificate of appropriateness void if construction not commenced. 
(1)  A certificate of appropriateness shall become void unless a building permit is issued or construction is commenced within six months of date of issuance of determination pursuant to subsection (h)(2) of this section. 
(2)  Certificates of appropriateness shall be issued for a period of 18 months and are renewable upon approval by the commission. 
(l)  Recording an application for certificate of appropriateness. The commission shall keep a public record of all applications for certificate of appropriateness, and of all the commissions' proceedings in connection with said application. These records shall be maintained at city hall. 
(m)  Acquisition of property. The commission may, where such action is authorized by the city council and is reasonably necessary or appropriate for the preservation of a unique historic property, enter into negotiations with the owner for the acquisition by gift, purchase, exchange, or otherwise, of the property or any interest therein. 
(n)  Appeals. Any person adversely affected by any determination made by the commission relative to the issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness may appeal such determination to the city council. Any such appeal must be filed with the city council within 15 days after the issuance of determination pursuant to subsection (h)(2) of this section or, in the case of a failure of the commission to act, within 15 days of the expiration of the 45-day period allowed for the commission action under subsection (h)(3) of this section. The city council may approve, modify, or reject the determination made by the commission, if the city council finds that the commission abused its discretion in reaching its decision, or may return the matter to the commission for further consideration for any reason the city council finds pertinent. Appeals from decisions of the city council to approve, modify, or reject the determination made by the commission may be taken to the superior court of the county in the manner provided by law for appeals from conviction for the city ordinance violations. 
(Ord. No. 2009-4, Amend. 1, § IV, 7-2-2012) 
Sec. 109-23. - Maintenance of historic properties and building and zoning code provision. 
(a)  Ordinary maintenance or repair. Ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior architectural or environmental feature in or on a historic property to correct deterioration, decay, or to sustain the existing form, and that does not involve a material change in design, material, or outer appearance thereof, does not require a certificate of appropriateness. 
(b)  Failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. Property owners of historic properties or properties within historic districts shall not allow their buildings to deteriorate by failing to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. The commission shall be charged with the following responsibilities regarding deterioration by neglect: 
(1)  The commission shall monitor the condition of historic properties and existing buildings in historic districts to determine if they are being allowed to deteriorate by neglect. Such conditions as broken windows, doors and openings which allow the elements and vermin to enter, and the deterioration of a building's structural system shall constitute failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. 
(2)  In the event the commission determines a failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair, the commission will notify the owner of the property and set forth the steps which need to be taken to remedy the situation. The owner of such property will have 30 days in which to do this. 
(3)  In the event that the condition is not remedied in 30 days, the owner shall be punished as provided in section 1-7 and, at the direction of the city council, the commission may perform such maintenance or repair as is necessary to prevent deterioration by neglect. The owner of the property shall be liable for the cost of such maintenance and repair performed by the commission. 
(c)  Affirmation of existing building and zoning codes. Nothing in this article shall be construed as to exempt property owners from complying with existing city or county building and zoning codes, nor to prevent any property owner from making any use of this property not prohibited by other statutes, ordinances, or regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2009-4, Amend. 1, § V, 7-2-2012) 
Sec. 109-24. - Conformance to state law. 
By virtue of the city having adopted ordinances relative to planning and zoning for historic preservation prior to March 31, 1980, it is recognized that the city is exempt from all provisions of the Georgia Historic Preservation Act pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 44-10-23, and that said exemption extends to all subsequent replacements or amendments, in whole or in part, of such ordinances. Any conformity between ordinances, regulations or other acts of the city related to historic preservation and the Georgia Historic Preservation Act is voluntary on the part of the city and shall not disturb or affect the exemption established under O.C.G.A. § 44-10-23. 
(Ord. No. 2009-4, Amend. 1, § VI, 7-2-2012) 
Chapter 121 - RESERVOIR MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 121-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Buffer means a natural or enhanced vegetated area with no or limited minor land disturbances, such as trails and picnic areas. 
Corridor means all land within the buffer areas. 
Impervious surface means a manmade structure or surface that prevents the infiltration of stormwater into the ground below the structure or surface. Examples include buildings, roads, driveways, parking lots, decks, swimming pools, or patios. 
Perennial stream means a stream that flows throughout the whole year as indicated on a USGS quad map. 
Reservoir boundary means the edge of a water supply reservoir defined by its normal pool elevation. The reservoir boundary of the Yahoola Reservoir shall be at approximately 1238 NGVD (National Geodetic Vertical Datum, formerly known as mean sea level). 
Reservoir property means all of the water supply reservoir plus adjacent lands owned by the city. 
Utility means public or private water or sewer piping systems, water or sewer pumping stations, electric power lines, fuel facilities, telephone lines, roads, driveways, bridges, river/lake access facilities, stormwater systems, railroads, and other utilities identified by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2005-4, 8-1-2005; Ord. No. 2005-4, Amend. No. 1, 10-2-2006) 
Sec. 121-2. - Prohibitions. 
As required in the state criteria for water supply watersheds (Ga. Admin. Code § 391-3-16.018.(b)1.), the general public shall be prohibited from the following on property within the boundaries of the reservoir: 
(1)  Public access, except in the two existing parking areas on Morrison Moore Parkway; 
(2)  Wading, swimming or bathing; 
(3)  Littering or dumping; 
(4)  Boats with gasoline-powered motors; 
(5)  Building boat docks; 
(6)  Discharge of any pollutant; 
(7)  Fishing, except between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m., year round, by individuals holding a valid state fishing license. 
(Ord. No. 2005-4, 8-1-2005; Ord. No. 2005-4, Amend. No. 1, 10-2-2006) 
Sec. 121-3. - Buffer restrictions. 
(a)  There shall be a reservoir buffer zone around the entire reservoir boundary. The buffer distance around the reservoir shall be 150 feet horizontally from the reservoir boundary, with the exception of city facilities. The buffer zone around the reservoir is located entirely within land owned either in whole or in part by the city. 
(b)  Buffer zones that are cleared of trees and shrubs should be planted with native trees and shrubs. The city is encouraged to maintain buffer vegetation without the use of chemical fertilizers or pesticides of any type. 
(c)  Where buffer areas are also wetlands, the city must approve any land disturbing activity; and the proper permit from the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers under section 404 of the Clean Water Act must be obtained prior to the initiation of such activities. In areas designated as wetland restoration and/or preservation areas by the Corps, no disturbance generally will be permitted. 
(d)  The city reserves the right to expel persons engaged in unlawful, dangerous, or disruptive activities on reservoir properties. In addition, any violation of this chapter shall be punishable as for a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 2005-4, 8-1-2005; Ord. No. 2005-4, Amend. No. 1, 10-2-2006) 
Chapter 123 - SIGNS 

Sec. 123-1. - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Sign Ordinance of the City of Dahlonega." 
(Ord. No. 2008-04, art. 1, 9-17-2015) 
Sec. 123-2. - Purpose and scope. 
(a)  The mayor and city council find that adoption of sign regulations serves the following purposes: 
(1)  The public health, safety and general welfare of the city is enhanced by ensuring the prohibition and removal of dangerous and unsafe signs. 
(2)  Pedestrian and motorist safety is promoted by reducing and limiting the number and area of signs, which can unduly distract motorists and pedestrians, create traffic hazards, confuse motorists when such signs are similar to traffic signs, and reduce the effectiveness of signs needed to direct the public. 
(3)  This chapter is intended to promote attractive signs which clearly present the visual message in a manner that is compatible with its surroundings. The appearance, character and quality of the city are affected by the location, size, construction and graphic design of its signs. 
(4)  The mayor and council find that development in the B-3, historical business zoning district, and CBD, the central business zoning district, is unique from other areas of the city due to its history, architecture, cultural heritage and integrity; its substantial contribution to the economic vitality of the city; the compactness of buildings and businesses in the districts; the geometry of public road intersections; and the special mixture of pedestrian and slower speed vehicular traffic. 
(5)  The economic well-being of the city is enhanced by allowing individual businesses to identify themselves and the goods and services offered in a clear and distinctive manner, by creating a more attractive district to tourists, and by preserving and improving the appearance of the historic downtown and surrounding area, thereby ensuring that signs are properly integrated with and harmonious to the buildings and sites in the historic downtown. 
(6)  The purpose of the city's elimination of mobile signs and billboards is to promote the safe movement of vehicular traffic, to reduce vehicular traffic, to reduce air pollution, and to improve the aesthetic appearance of the city. 
(b)  By enacting this chapter, the city intends: 
(1)  To balance the rights of individuals, businesses, and government to convey their messages through signs and the right of the public to be protected against the unrestricted proliferation of signs; 
(2)  To afford the business community equal and fair opportunity to advertise and promote its products and services without discrimination; 
(3)  To preserve and promote the public health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the city; 
(4)  To improve traffic and pedestrian safety; 
(5)  To maintain and enhance the visual environment, and preserve the right of citizens and visitors to enjoy the city's scenic beauty; 
(6)  To protect property values of nearby public and private property by minimizing possible adverse effects and visual blight caused by signs; 
(7)  To avoid the harmful aspects of the unrestricted proliferation of signs; 
(8)  To promote economic development; 
(9)  To enable the fair and consistent enforcement of sign regulations; and 
(10)  To promote the purposes stated in this chapter by regulating signs based on objective standards, including, but not limited to, height and size, and without regard to the content of the sign message. 
(c)  This chapter is adopted under the authority of the city in furtherance of the more general purposes set forth in the zoning ordinance. This chapter is adopted and hereafter amended pursuant to article IX, section II, paragraph IV of the constitution of the State of Georgia and the Georgia Planning Act of 1989. 
(Ord. No. 2008-04, art. 2, 9-17-2015) 
Sec. 123-3. - Statement of findings. 
(a)  The city finds that signs provide an important medium through which individuals, businesses, and government may convey a variety of messages. Left unregulated, however, signs can become a threat to the public health and safety as a traffic hazard and a detriment to property values and the overall economic growth of the city as an aesthetic nuisance. See, e.g., Scenic America, Billboards & Sign Control available at http://www.scenie.org; Jerry Weitz, Ph.D., AICP, The Public Purpose of Rowell's Sign Ordinance and the Implications of Doing Without It: A Position Paper, (December 7, 1999) available at http://roswellgov.com; Street Graphics and the Law, 2004 Revised Edition, Daniel Mandelker, Andrew Bertucci, and William Ewald, in particular, based on the cited materials and the studies referenced therein, as well as other related studies included in the city's file, the city finds that unregulated signs: 
(1)  Can be a safety hazard to drivers and pedestrians; 
(2)  Can create unsafe, cluttered and aesthetically blighted thoroughfares throughout the city; 
(3)  Can hamper economic growth; 
(4)  Can lower property values; 
(5)  Can adversely impact public investments; 
(6)  Can degrade the utility of public safety signs; and 
(7)  Can adversely impact the aesthetic quality of the community and surrounding environment. 
(b)  The city also finds that there is a substantial difference between signs erected by public authority and signs erected by private citizens or businesses. Signs erected by public authority are virtually all erected for the purpose of maintaining the public safety either through direct control of traffic or through provision of such types of signage as street signs which enable the traveling public to know where they are located and to find where they are going. As such, virtually all government signs are erected purely for public safety purposes. Moreover, their use in the public right-of-way is necessary to ensure their visibility to the motoring public. The city finds that public utility signs are frequently of the same nature as those signs erected by governmental entities in that they provide necessary information to safeguard the public from traffic hazards such as downed power lines and from street excavations. Even where signs serve a propriety purpose, such as identifying marks on utility poles, those signs are marked primarily for the purpose of benefiting the public generally through identification of locations where there may be temporary losses of power. 
(c)  Some signage has a single targeted function and identification of such signage by description is impossible without referring to its function. For instance, address numerals are used for the sole purpose of locating addresses, which is of benefit to persons looking for those addresses and is essential to public safety personnel responding to emergencies. While such signage is referenced based upon the function it serves within the context of this chapter, the provisions of this chapter are unrelated to the content of the speech provided and allow maximum expressive potential to sign owners. 
(Ord. No. 2008-04, art. 3, 9-17-2015) 
Sec. 123-4. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
A-frame sign means any portable sign or structure no greater in size than two feet wide by three feet high and composed of up to two sign faces mounted or attached back to back in such a manner as to form a triangular vertical cross section through the faces. 
Abandoned sign means any sign that contains or exhibits broken panels, visible rust, visible rot, damaged support structures, or missing letters or which is otherwise dilapidated, unsightly, or unkempt, and for which no person accepts maintenance responsibility. 
Alterations means change or rearrangement in the structural parts or its design, whether by extending on a side, by increasing in area or height, or in moving from one location or position to another. 
Area of sign means the entire area including any type of perimeter or border which may enclose the outer limits of any writing, representation, emblem, figure, or character. The area of the sign having no perimeter or border shall be computed by enclosing the entire area within a parallelogram, circle, or triangle of the smallest size sufficient to cover the entire area of the sign and computing the area of the parallelogram, circle or triangle. If the sign has two faces that are not more than two feet apart the area of the sign shall be one-half the area of the two faces, and shall be considered as one sign. 
Awning means a cloth, plastic, or other nonstructural covering that either is permanently attached to a building or can be raised or retracted to a position against the building when not in use. 
Banner means a sign, other than a flag, with or without characters, letters, illustrations or ornamentation applied to cloth, paper, or fabric that is intended to be hung without a frame. Neither flags nor canopy signs are considered banners. 
Building means any enclosed or open structure that is a combination of materials to form a construction for occupancy and/or use for human or animal habitation and is permanently affixed to the land, including manufactured homes. 
Building face or wall means all window and wall area of building in one plane or elevation. 
Building official means the code enforcement officer for the city. 
Canopy means a structure constructed of fabric or other material other than an awning placed so as to extend outward from a building providing a protective shield for doors, windows, and other openings, supported by the building or supports extended to the ground directly under the canopy or cantilevered from the building. 
Changeable copy sign means any sign that incorporates changing lights, lettering, or images to form a sign message, whether such changes are accomplished electronically or manually. 
Developed lot means any lot on which a building is located. The building must be occupied or in such a physical condition that it is capable of being occupied. 
Flag means any unframed fabric or bunting typically containing colors, patterns, or symbols sometimes used as a symbol of a government or other entity or organization. 
Freestanding sign means a sign which is supported by one or more uprights or braces which are fastened to, or embedded in the ground or a foundation on the ground. A permanently affixed sign which is wholly independent of a building for support. 
Grandfathered sign means the same as definition of the term "nonconforming.". 
Hanging sign means a sign that is suspended parallel, or perpendicular from a building, wall, roof, facade, canopy, marquee, or porch by means of brackets, hooks or chains and the like. 
Height of sign means the vertical distance measured from the normal grade at the base of the sign to the highest point of the sign, including the air space between the ground and the sign. The height of any monument sign base or other structure erected to support or adorn the sign is measured as part of the sign height. 
Historic district means the city's zoning districts historical business district (B-3) and central business district (CBD), as established in the zoning ordinance of the city ordinance 91-9, as amended, and as such boundaries are established on the official zoning map, as may be amended from time to time. 
Inflatable sign means a sign that holds its shape by receiving a one-time or continuous supply of air or other gas. Inflatable signs include balloons. 
Informational signs means a sign with an area not greater than six square feet for residential districts and 16 square feet for nonresidential districts with a sign face made for short term use, containing no reflecting elements, flags, or projections which, when erect, stands at a height no greater than three feet from the normal grade in residential districts and five feet from the normal grade in nonresidential districts at the base of the sign to the highest point on the sign. 
Mansard sign means a sign attached to a sloped roof or roof-like facade architecturally comparable to a building wall. 
Marquee sign means a sign attached to any permanent roof-like structure projecting beyond a building or extending along and projecting beyond the wall of the building, generally designed and constructed to provide protection from the weather. 
Mobile sign means a sign on any vehicle or wheeled conveyance which carries, conveys, pulls, or transports any sign or billboard for the primary purpose of displaying commercial and/or noncommercial messages. 
Monument sign means a sign supported entirely by a base structure. The base structure shall be a minimum of two feet by four feet in size, entirely enclosed or solid with no visible open space and permanently affixed to the ground. A monument sign shall not be mounted on a pole. 
Neon sign means luminous-tube signs that contain neon or other inert gases at a low pressure. 
Nonconforming signs (also known as grandfathered sign) means any sign which was lawfully erected and maintained prior to such time as it became illegal under purview of this chapter. 
Out-of-store marketing device means any facility or equipment which is located outside of a primary building on a site zoned for nonresidential uses, which is used for the primary purpose of providing a product or service without the owner's or agent's immediate presence, and which is manufactured to include a color, form, graphic, illumination, symbol, and/or writing thereon to communicate information regarding the product or service provided thereby to the public. Examples of out-of-store marketing devices include: fuel pumps, bank ATM units, vending machines, newspaper racks, drink machines, ice boxes, and phone books. 
Portable sign means a sign which is not intended to be anchored or secured to a building or to the ground. 
Projecting sign means a sign attached to and projecting from the wall or overhang of a building that has a plane that is at a 90-degree angle from the wall. 
Public property means any property owned by a governmental entity. 
Rope lighting means lighting made up of tiny lights, usually incandescent bulbs or light emitting diodes (LEDs), which are spaced about an inch apart and covered in heavy-duty plastic tubing. 
Sign means every advertising message, announcement, declaration, demonstration, illustration, insignia, surface or space erected or maintained in view of the observer thereof for identification, advertisement, or promotion of the interest of any person, entity, product, or service. The definition of sign shall also include the sign structure, supports, lighting system, and any attachments, ornaments or other features used to draw the attention of observers. 
Sign, internally lit, means any sign lighted by a source which is inside of or behind an enclosed sign or sign face made of translucent material. 
Signage plan means a plan designed to show the relationship of signs for any cluster of buildings or any single building housing a number of users or in any arrangement of buildings or shops which constitute a visual entity as a whole. 
Structure means the supports, uprights, bracing, guy rods, cables, and framework of a sign or outdoor display. 
Wall sign means a sign with messages or copy erected parallel to and attached to or painted on the outside wall of a building or mansard and extending not more than six inches from the wall. 
Window sign means a sign adjacent to or installed upon a window for the purpose of being viewed from outside of the premises. Signage that is located inside the building within three feet of the window that is intended to be viewed from the outside is considered a window sign for purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2008-04, art. 4, 9-17-2015; Ord. No. 2008-04, Amend. 3, art. 4, 9-17-2015) 
Sec. 123-5. - Applicability, authority, interpretation and enforcement. 
(a)  Applicability. This chapter shall apply to all properties within the corporate limits of the city. Signs that are not visible from a public right-of-way and are not intended to be viewed from a public right-of-way are not regulated. 
(b)  Historic commission authority. The historic commission, as established in the zoning ordinance of the city, shall have the authority given it by this chapter to review and make a recommendation to the city council as to variance requests for the erection of signs and other advertising devices within B-3 and CBD, as established in the zoning ordinance of the city, ordinance 91-9, as amended, and as such boundaries are established on the official zoning map, as may be amended from time to time. 
(c)  Interpretation and enforcement. The zoning administrative officer (zoning administrator) shall be responsible for the interpretation of the provisions of this chapter and for enforcement of this chapter, except to the extent such responsibility is delegated to the city council, zoning board of appeals, or historic commission by this chapter. A violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor. Violations shall be enforced in the same manner as violations of the zoning ordinance. 
(d)  Construction standards. All signs permitted under this chapter shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with the applicable city building codes. 
(Ord. No. 2008-04, art. 5, 9-17-2015) 
Sec. 123-6. - Design and location standards. 
(a)  Area of sign. The area of a sign shall consist of the entire area of the sign, including any type border which may enclose the outer limits of any writing, representation, emblem, figure, or character. The area of the sign having no perimeter or border shall be computed by enclosing the entire area within a parallelogram, circle, or triangle of the smallest size sufficient to cover the entire area of the sign and computing the area of that parallelogram, circle, or triangle. If the sign has two faces that are parallel (not more than two feet apart) the size of the sign is one-half the area of the two faces, and shall be considered one sign. 
(b)  Sign materials. In B-3 and CBD, the exposed surfaces of all sign structures and supports shall be constructed using natural materials and should match local architectural styles. Natural materials include, but are not limited to, concrete, stucco, natural and painted wood, brick, stone or manmade materials such as metal and glass with similar texture and appearance that are considered appropriate to maintain the character of the existing building and structures on the property on which the sign is located. 
(c)  Illumination. 
(1)  Externally illuminated signs. 
a.  Light fixtures for externally illuminated signs must be simple in form and mounted so they do not obscure building ornamentation. The light fixtures should emphasize the continuity of the building surface and should not clutter the building in an unorganized manner. Spot lights and flood lights shall be directed only at the sign surface. Light shall not be directed off the property. 
b.  No exposed light sources are allowed, and all light sources must be shaded to contain light rays to the sign. Colored lighting is prohibited. 
(2)  Illumination restrictions. No sign shall be internally lit, except as noted in the provisions of this chapter dealing with certain window signs. 
(d)  Type styles. In B-3 and CBD, type styles are limited to those found in the the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, or a style substantially similar. 
(Ord. No. 2008-04, art. 6, 9-17-2015) 
Sec. 123-7. - Sign types requiring a permit. 
The following signs require a permit: 
(1)  Freestanding signs. 
a.  Height limit. 
1.  B-3 and CBD: signs may not exceed a height of five feet at the highest point anywhere on the sign. 
2.  All other nonresidential property: signs may not exceed a height of ten feet at the highest point anywhere on the sign. 
b.  Design. 
1.  Freestanding signs are required to be monument signs in all districts. A monument sign is a sign supported entirely by a base structure. The base structure shall be a minimum of two feet by four feet in size, entirely enclosed or solid with no visible open space and permanently affixed to the ground. A monument sign shall not be mounted on a pole. 
2.  There shall be no graphics located on the vertical support structures of a freestanding sign. 
c.  Size. Freestanding signs shall be limited to a maximum of 32 square feet in area. 
d.  Number of signs. A nonresidential building with at least 50 feet of road frontage may have one freestanding sign. The building must be occupied or in such a physical condition that it is capable of being occupied for its intended purpose. Nonresidential buildings with more than 100 feet of continuous frontage and with more than one entrance may install a freestanding sign at each entrance, provided that the combined square footage of all freestanding signs does not exceed 64 square feet (i.e., two 32-square-foot signs). Where there is frontage on more than one street, each frontage is treated independently provided that no two signs may be closer than 100 linear feet to one another. Signage area may not be transferred from one frontage to another. 
e.  Location and orientation. 
1.  B-3 and CBD. Signs shall be located outside of the right-of-way. No sign or sign structure or support shall be placed onto or obscure or damage any significant architectural feature of a building, including, but not limited to, a window or a door frame, cornice, molding, ornamental feature, or unusual or fragile material. 
2.  All other locations. 
(i)  Signs shall be located at least two feet outside of the right-of-way. 
(ii)  No freestanding sign may be within 50 feet of another freestanding sign (including signs outside city limits), other than as allowed by subsection (d) of this section, however, within the B3 and CBD zones, freestanding signs may be located within 20 feet of one another. 
f.  Wall and mansard signs. Wall and mansard signs shall be permitted on the wall or mansard of a building facing a public street. If a building has public street frontage on more than one side, a wall or mansard sign may be allowed on either the main entrance or any side facing a public street. Or alternatively, the allowed square footage for the signage may be divided equally between the main entrance and an adjacent side of the building which also faces a public street. These signs are subject to the following: 
1.  Wall and mansard signs are allowed in all nonresidential zoning districts. 
2.  If a structure is located on a lot that has no street frontage, wall or mansard signs shall be permitted on any single facade. 
3.  Wall or mansard signs attached flat against the exterior surface of a building may extend not more than six inches from the wall. 
4.  The total area for wall or mansard signage shall not exceed ten percent of the area of the building wall. 
5.  A directory sign is a wall sign. 
6.  For buildings with multiple tenants having store fronts only, the facade rented by the tenant shall be considered as the wall area for a sign area calculation. 
7.  No part of a wall or mansard sign shall be located more than 25 feet above the existing level of the ground. 
8.  Wall or mansard signs shall not extend above the eave line or top of a parapet on the wall to which it is attached. 
g.  Projecting and hanging signs. One projecting or hanging, non-illuminated sign per business shall be allowed, provided the following: 
1.  The sign is located in a nonresidential zoning district; 
2.  The sign is located over a public door entrance to an occupied building; 
3.  The sign is no more than nine square feet in area; 
4.  The sign may not project more than 36 inches from the wall; 
5.  The sign is uniform in size, material, color and shape and is placed in an equivalent location to other such signs located on the same building; 
6.  The sign is suspended from the eave or soffit of the building or extends from the wall; 
7.  The sign maintains a minimum of eight feet clearance between the bottom of the sign and the walkway below; and 
8.  The sign shall not extend vertically beyond the window sill of the second story. 
h.  Banners. 
1.  Banners are allowed: 
(i)  On developed lots in nonresidential zoning districts; and 
(ii)  Residential zoning districts on developed lots that are used for nonresidential purposes. 
2.  One banner per business may be erected for no more than ten days during any 120-day period. The ten days do not have to be consecutive. 
3.  The maximum size of the banner shall not exceed 35 square feet and the height shall not exceed five feet. 
4.  The minimum front setback shall be 15 feet from the edge of the pavement or outside of the right-of-way, whichever is greater and ten feet from the side and rear lot lines. However, in no case will a banner be allowed to obscure vision at a street or driveway intersection, or railway crossing. For traffic safety, signs shall not be located within the triangular area on a corner lot formed by measuring 20 feet along both street-side property lines from their intersection. 
i.  A-frame signs. Any portable sign or structure composed of up to two sign faces mounted or attached back to back in such a manner as to form a triangular vertical cross section through the faces, provided that the A-frame sign is no greater than two feet wide and three feet high and that the A-frame sign is located on a public or private sidewalk and shall not encroach into a minimum of 60 inches of unobstructed pedestrian access along said sidewalk. Said sign must be located in front of the business served and no greater than 12 feet from the main entrance to the business served. Should a permit for an A-frame sign be denied by the city because of a lack of sufficient unobstructed pedestrian access, then the denied business may add a wall sign not to exceed a size limit of two feet wide by three feet high or a window sign which may not exceed two feet by three feet. Neither the wall nor window sign, however, shall exceed other applicable signage restrictions in this chapter. 
j.  Signage during construction. Two additional signs shall be allowed during construction of a residential or nonresidential subdivision. The signs shall not be internally illuminated. 
1.  Duration. The signs shall be allowed beginning with the issuance of a land disturbance permit and ending with the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or installation of a permanent sign at the subdivision entrance, whichever comes first. 
2.  Size. The sign shall not exceed 16 square feet in area and five feet in height in the historic district and seven feet in height in all other areas. 
3.  Location. The minimum front setback shall be 15 feet from the edge of the pavement or outside of the right-of-way, whichever is greater and ten feet from the side and rear lot lines. However, in no case will a sign be allowed to obscure vision at a street or driveway intersection, or railway crossing. For traffic safety, signs shall not be located within the triangular area on a corner lot formed by measuring 20 feet along both street side property lines from their intersection. 
k.  Residential subdivision entrance. No more than two freestanding monument signs shall be allowed to be placed at each entrance of a residential subdivision, including multi-family complexes subject to the following: 
1.  These signs must be placed on common property under the ownership of the developer, home owners' association (HOA) or apartment complex owner. 
2.  The sign face shall not exceed 32 square feet in area and seven feet in height. 
3.  If the sign or sign structure is attached to a decorative wall or fence, the decorative wall or fence shall not exceed eight feet in height. The post and/or columns of the decorative wall or fence shall not exceed ten feet in height. 
4.  Such signs shall not be internally illuminated. 
5.  The permit shall not be issued until after the final plat is recorded. 
6.  The minimum front setback shall be 15 feet from the edge of the pavement or at least two feet outside of the right-of-way, whichever is greater and ten feet from the side and rear lot lines. However, in no case will a sign be allowed to obscure vision at a street or driveway intersection, or railway crossing. For traffic safety, signs shall not be located within the triangular area on a corner lot formed by measuring 20 feet along both street side property lines from their intersection. 
(Ord. No. 2008-04, art. 7, 9-17-2015) 
Sec. 123-8. - Signs subject to a general permit. 
(a)  Purpose of a general permit. A general permit is hereby granted for the following types of signs in any zoning district other than lots covered by a master sign plan, provided that such signs are erected and maintained in compliance with all applicable provisions of this chapter: 
(1)  Traffic control signs; 
(2)  Official notices issued by any court with competent jurisdiction or authorized public agency, department or official; 
(3)  Flags. Any flag provided that: 
a.  No more than two flagpoles are permitted per developed lot; 
b.  Flags may be set in the ground or attached to a structure; 
c.  No more than three flags are permitted per flagpole; 
d.  The maximum dimension of the hoist side of each flag shall not exceed 20 percent of the height of the flagpole; 
e.  All flagpoles shall be set back from each property boundary a distance equal to the height of the flagpole or 15 feet from the edge of the pavement or outside of the right-of-way, whichever is greater and ten feet from the side and rear lot lines, whichever is greater. However, in no case will a flag be allowed to obscure vision at a street or driveway intersection, or railway crossing. For traffic safety, flags shall not be located within the triangular area on a corner lot formed by measuring 20 feet along both street side property lines from their intersection; 
f.  All flagpoles shall be maintained in good repair, so as not to constitute a threat to public safety; 
g.  On officially designated county, state, and federal holidays, there shall be no restriction as to maximum flag size or number of flags on display in residential districts. 
h.  In nonresidential districts, flagpoles shall not exceed the allowed height provided for a structure or building in the applicable zoning district, or 50 feet, whichever is less. Flagpoles in residential districts shall not exceed 25 feet in height or the height of the primary structure on the lot, whichever is less. 
(b)  Window signs. 
(1)  Allowed in all zoning districts in windows of occupied structures. 
(2)  Area of window sign. The maximum area of the window sign shall be ten percent of the available glass area. Based on the definition of window sign, signage that is located inside the building within three feet of the window that is intended to be viewed from the outside is considered to be included in the window sign limitation. Available glass area shall be measured by considering an entire window unit exclusive of any mullions. In commercial zones other than B3 and CBD, one lighted window sign shall be allowed and may include neon or similar type signage. Said lighted window sign cannot be a sign which changes copy electronically using switches and electric lamps, or any other electronic means, or which flashes, blinks or scrolls. However, this sign may be a fiber optic, neon or light-emitting diodes (LED) sign. This sign shall not be greater in size than 324 square inches. 
(3)  No window signs are allowed above the first floor unless the building is a multi-tenant office or commercial structure wherein second floor tenants have primary direct access from their space to the outside from the second-floor level. The access must include outside walkways and stairways properly designated for public use. 
(4)  In no case shall any window signs be installed above the level of the second-floor windows. 
(c)  Informational signs. In addition to any other sign permitted by this chapter, two informational signs are allowed on a single lot, subject to the following: 
(1)  Size limitation. 
a.  For residential lots, a maximum size of six square feet of sign area, with a cumulative square footage of 12 square feet. Maximum height of any sign is three feet to the top of the sign. 
b.  For all nonresidential lots, signs shall be a maximum size of 16 square feet of sign area, with a cumulative square footage of 16 square feet. The maximum height of any sign is five feet to the top of the sign. 
(2)  Location. All signs shall have a minimum setback of ten feet rear and side from side property lines. For front setback, the sign must be at least two feet outside of the right-of-way. However, in no case will a sign be allowed to obscure vision at a street or driveway intersection, or railway crossing. For traffic and pedestrian safety, signs shall not be located within the triangular area on a corner lot formed by measuring 20 feet along both street side property lines from their intersection. 
(3)  Function. 
a.  These signs are limited to a display of noncommercial speech or commercial speech that pertains to a commercial enterprise located on the property, such as a for sale sign, a sign reflecting the property's home occupation, a campaign sign, a political sign, or a yard sale sign, by way of examples. 
b.  In the event that a court should adjudge any part of this subsection of the chapter a violation of the Georgia or United States Constitutions or any other provision of law, it is the specific intent of the city council that this provision referencing a limitation to noncommercial speech or commercial speech that pertains to a commercial enterprise located on the property be omitted from the chapter and the remainder of the chapter stay in effect to regulate signs on property within the city. This severance section is in addition to the legislative intent expressed elsewhere in this chapter. 
(4)  Mounting devices. Informational signs shall be mounted on metal frames that do not exceed ¼ inch in diameter or when mounted on frames of other material cannot exceed three-fourths inch by 1½ inch in size. No message may be written on the mounting hardware, so that the entire message area of the sign is contained on the sign face itself. 
(5)  Lighting prohibited. Informational signs may not be illuminated in any manner. 
(d)  Numerals displayed for the purpose of identifying property location affixed to a structure such as a mailbox or house, or placed on the ground, not to exceed eight inches in height. 
(e)  Door signs not to exceed one square foot and not more than one sign per door. 
(f)  Holiday lighting. In the B-3 and CBD, only holiday lighting in the form of white/clear only UL approved outdoor "Christmas" type lighting is permitted without historic commission review and approval. However, the period of display is limited to the two-month time period of the Friday preceding Thanksgiving Day through and including January 15, of the next succeeding year. Also prohibited are letters and/or words and/or phrases spelled and exhibited through the use of holiday lighting. This applies exclusively to outdoor lighting and not lighting inside the business premises itself as long as the lighting is at least three feet away from the window. There is no restriction on holiday lighting outside of the historic district. 
(g)  Out-of-store marketing devices. Out-of-store marketing devices are allowed in nonresidential districts provided that they are too small to be legible to the traveling public on neighboring rights-of-way and are otherwise non-removable without damage to the equipment's surface, they do not require a permit and are not subject to overall sign limitations for the lot on which they appear. The minimum front setback shall be 15 feet from the edge of the pavement or outside of the right-of-way, whichever is greater and ten feet from the side and rear lot lines. In no case, however, will an out-of-store marketing device be allowed to obscure vision at a street or driveway intersection, or railway crossing. For traffic safety, out-of-store marketing devices shall not be located within the triangular area on a corner lot formed by measuring 20 feet along both street side property lines from their intersection. 
(h)  Handheld and portable signs. Handheld and portable signs not exceeding four square feet. A staff or pole attached or otherwise associated with a sign must be blunt at both ends. Such signs must be held at all times and may not be left unattended. Persons with handheld or portable signs may not display the signs in the right-of-way or on private property without the property owner's written consent. A person must be able to produce the written consent of the property owner if requested during the time of the display of the handheld or portable sign. Persons with handheld or portable signs shall not disrupt, block, obstruct or interfere with pedestrian or vehicular traffic or the free passage of pedestrian or vehicular traffic into any driveway, pedestrian entrance, or other access to buildings, which abut the public sidewalks. 
(Ord. No. 2008-04, art. 8, 9-17-2015) 
Sec. 123-9. - Prohibited signs and devices. 
The following signs or devices are prohibited: 
(1)  Signs creating traffic hazards. No sign shall be erected at or near any public street or the intersection of any streets in such a manner as to create a traffic hazard by obstructing vision or at any location where it would interfere with, obstruct the view of, or be confused with any authorized traffic sign. 
(2)  Hazardous signs. No sign shall be erected or maintained which, due to structural weakness, design defect, or other reason, constitutes a threat to the health, safety and welfare of any person or property. 
(3)  Signs resembling traffic signals or signs. No sign shall be constructed, erected or maintained which purports to be or resembles an official traffic sign or signal except those signs officially authorized by the city or other governmental entities. 
(4)  Flashing signs or lights. Any sign which contains an intermittent or flashing light source, or which includes the illusion of intermittent or flashing light by means of animation, or an externally mounted intermittent light source. 
(5)  Rope lights. In nonresidential districts, rope lights may not be used on the exterior of a structure or anywhere on the property other than use upon stairways for illumination purposes. An occupant may use rope lights in the interior of a building, as long as the rope lights are more than three feet from the windows and are not intended to be viewed from outside. 
(6)  Electronic message signs. A sign which changes copy electronically using switches and electric lamps, or any other electronic means, or which flashes, blinks or scrolls. This prohibition includes, but is not limited to, fiber optics, neon and light-emitting diodes (LED), unless otherwise provided for herein. 
(7)  Signs with dynamic display. Signs that appear to have movement or appear to change, caused by any method other than physically removing and replacing the sign or its components, including, but not limited to, electronic messaging signs, except as provided herein. 
(8)  Roof signs. 
(9)  Animated signs. A rotating or revolving sign, or signs where all or a portion of the signs move in some manner are prohibited. 
(10)  Wind signs. Any propeller, whirling, or similar device which is designed to flutter, rotate, or display other movement under the influence of the wind. This shall include flags, except as specifically allowed in this chapter. 
(11)  Bench signs. Any outdoor bench or furniture with signage. 
(12)  Mobile signs. Mobile signs operated upon any street, or other public place within the city in which the public has a right of travel. 
(13)  Vehicle signs. Roof or trunk mounted signs on automobiles except that vehicles may have one sign that is no greater than three square feet on a face, with a maximum length of one foot wide, one foot high, and three feet long. Vehicle signs may be allowed on the sides of vehicles if completely flat and painted upon or applied directly to the original body of the vehicle or if attached magnetically. Signs attached to or painted on vehicles parked adjacent to and visible from a street for the sole purpose of advertising onto the street are prohibited. 
(14)  Video signs. Animated visual messages which are projected on-screen. 
(15)  Outdoor displays. Outdoor display of merchandise is considered advertisement and is permitted only on the property in which the owner of the merchandise has a property interest. 
(16)  Signs on trees, utility poles, telecommunication towers or water towers. 
(17)  Signs in the right-of-way and public sidewalk. Signs in a public right-of-way or public sidewalk, other than those belonging to a government or public service agency, except certain A-frame signs as provided for herein. 
(18)  Marquee signs. 
(19)  Awning and canopy signs. 
(20)  Inflatable signs. 
(21)  Signs not otherwise allowed by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2008-04, art. 9, 9-17-2015) 
Sec. 123-10. - Sign permit applications. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to provide a timely and standardized mechanism for reviewing applications for sign permits to ensure signs within the city comply with the objective standards of this chapter, including, but not limited to, the height and size provisions. 
(b)  Authority. The zoning administrator is authorized to review and approve or disapprove an application for a sign permit pursuant to the procedures of this section and the standards of this chapter. 
(c)  Applicability. No sign, except those specified in this chapter, shall be erected, placed, reconstructed or structurally altered without the sign owner having first obtained a sign permit from the zoning administrator pursuant to the procedures in this section and the standards of this chapter. 
(d)  Permitted signs by chapter. Pursuant to section 123-8, a general permit has been granted for those signs listed therein, and no application for a sign permit is required so long as all applicable standards of this chapter are met. 
(e)  Procedure. The following procedure shall govern the application for, and the issuance of, all sign permits under this chapter. Application for a sign permit shall be made on the form provided by the zoning administrator as required by the city. An application will only be deemed as complete when all required information and accompanying documents are received. The following information will be required at that time: 
(1)  Name, address and telephone number of the party erecting the sign and of the sign owner. 
(2)  The value of the sign. 
(3)  For a freestanding sign, a survey to scale showing the street address of the property upon which the subject sign is to be located, the proposed location of subject sign on the property and the distance of the proposed sign from the property's boundaries. This survey shall be signed by a licensed surveyor. For all other signs, a site plan drawn to scale may be substituted for a survey. 
(4)  The square foot area per sign. 
(5)  The name and address of the owner of the real property upon which the sign is to be located. 
(6)  Written consent of the owner of the property, or his agent, granting permission for the placement, maintenance, size and height of the sign to be placed on the property if the applicant is someone other than the property owner. 
(7)  For wall signs, a sketch to scale drawing of the elevation of the building wall upon which the sign will be mounted or installed. 
(8)  Prints or drawings of the plans and specifications for the proposed sign, together with structural details for construction and attachment to a building or placement in the ground. A single submission may be permitted for standardized signs. 
(9)  Any electrical permit required and issued for such sign. 
(f)  Action by the zoning administrator. 
(1)  Within five working days of submission, the zoning administrator shall inform the applicant of any information or documents necessary for completion of an application. Until such time as the application is complete, the city will not consider the application properly filed. 
(2)  Within 20 working days after the application is determined complete, the zoning administrator shall review the application in accordance with this section and determine whether the application complies with the standards in this chapter. 
a.  Approval. If the zoning administrator finds that the application complies with the standards of this ordinance, the zoning administrator will issue the sign permit. Sign applications for which no action has been taken after 20 working days after the application is complete shall be deemed approved. 
b.  Fails to comply. If the zoning administrator determines the application fails to comply with the standards of this chapter, the applicant shall be provided a written notification with an explanation of why the application has been denied. If the applicant resubmits the application within 60 days of the written notification of denial, the resubmitted application does not require payment of the fee. The time for resubmission may be extended an additional 30 days for good cause, if requested of the zoning administrator prior to the original deadline for re-submittal. 
c.  Re-submittal. A revised application shall be resubmitted to the zoning administrator and reviewed in the same manner as an original application. 
d.  Criteria. A sign permit shall be approved upon a finding that the applicant has demonstrated that the application complies with the standards of this chapter. 
e.  Expiration. A sign permit shall become null and void if the sign for which the permit was issued has not been installed and completed within 60 days after the date of issuance; provided, however, that when an applicant can demonstrate that a commercial entity was timely engaged to construct the permitted sign, but the fabrication has not yet been completed, the zoning administrator may grant one 30-day extension. No refunds will be made for permit fees paid for permits that expired due to failure to erect a permitted sign. If, later, an individual desires to erect a sign at the same location, a new application must be submitted and another fee paid in accordance with the fee schedule applicable at such time. 
(g)  Amendments. A sign permit may be amended, extended, or modified only in accordance with the procedures established for its original approval. 
(h)  Maintenance of permit. The owner or lessee of a lot containing signs requiring a permit under this chapter shall, at all times, maintain in force a sign permit for such property. Sign permits shall be issued to the owner of a sign for each individual sign and are not transferable. 
(i)  Identification labels. With each permit the city shall issue a sticker bearing the same number as the permit with which it is issued. It shall be the duty of the permittee or his agent to affix such sticker to the sign in the lower right hand area so it will be easily seen. The absence of a proper sticker shall be prima facie evidence that the sign has been, or is being, erected or operated in violation of the provisions of this chapter. 
(j)  Vested rights. No person applying for a sign permit or erecting a sign under this chapter shall acquire any vested rights to continue maintenance of such signs. 
(k)  Non-transferability. Sign permits issued pursuant to this chapter are not transferable. 
(l)  Appeals. The following procedure shall govern the appeal of any decision regarding an application for a sign permit under this chapter: 
(1)  Any applicant or person aggrieved or affected by the denial or grant of an application for a sign permit may appeal the determination to the city council by filing a written notice of appeal with the building administrator within 30 days following the decision. The appeal shall be heard within 30 working days of the filing of the written notice of appeal. 
(2)  The city council shall have 30 days following the hearing to issue a written decision. 
(3)  Any party aggrieved or affected by the decision of the city council may appeal the decision by filing a writ of certiorari with the superior court pursuant to O.C.G.A. title 5, ch. 4 (O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1 et seq.). 
(Ord. No. 2008-04, art. 10, 9-17-2015) 
Sec. 123-11. - Master sign plans. 
(a)  Approval required. Any new construction or re-development of a nonresidential project including more than one freestanding building shall obtain approval of a master sign plan from the zoning administrator as part of the development review process prior to any signs being erected other than signs permitted during construction. All signs erected or maintained shall conform at all times to the approved master sign plan. The signs approved through the master sign plan are the only signs allowed other than those allowed in section 123-8(c); any deviations from an approved master sign plan shall be unlawful unless and until a revised master sign plan is approved. 
(b)  Master sign plan application. An application for a master sign plan shall include the following information: 
(1)  Accurate site plan, including location of buildings, parking lots, driveways, and landscaped areas; 
(2)  One set of drawings showing details of a construction and foundation of proposed signs; 
(3)  An accurate indication of the location of each present and proposed future sign of any type, whether requiring a permit or not; 
(4)  An elevation drawing or photo depicting the proposed location of signs on buildings, or walls; 
(5)  A scaled drawing showing the size, shape, design, colors, materials, lighting and letter styles of proposed signs; 
(6)  Master sign plans must be signed by all owners or their authorized agents; 
(7)  Any other maps, drawings, or materials as required by the planning department to adequately describe the sign proposal. 
(c)  Master sign plan review. An application for a master sign plan shall be reviewed as part of the development review process and shall follow all procedures thereof, unless contradicted by this section. 
(d)  Individual sign permits. Individual sign permits are required for all signs contained within an approved master sign plan. 
(e)  Amendments. A master sign plan may be amended by filing a new master sign plan application that conforms to all requirements in this section. 
(f)  Maximum number of signs. 
(1)  One main entrance monument sign. The maximum sign area shall be 40 square feet with a maximum height of ten feet. 
(2)  Secondary entrance signs. Each additional entrance, may have a sign not greater than 20 square feet with a maximum height of eight feet, provided that the secondary entrance sign is at least 500 feet from any other sign. 
(3)  Internal signs. One sign shall be allowed at each intersection of internal streets. The signs shall not exceed ten square feet in area and three feet in height. 
(4)  Monument signs. One monument sign is permitted for each separate building which is identified on the approved site plan. 
a.  The maximum sign area of the sign shall be 32 square feet for multiple buildings lots and 20 square feet for single user buildings. Maximum sign areas shall apply to each face separately, but no freestanding sign shall have more than two faces. Where two sign faces are located in a "V" formation, the angle between the two sign faces shall not be greater than 60 degrees. 
b.  The maximum height of the sign is eight feet. 
(5)  Wall signs. Wall signs shall be permitted on the wall facing an internal street subject to the following: 
a.  Wall signs attached flat against the exterior surface of a building may extend not more than six inches from the wall. 
b.  The total area for wall signage shall not exceed ten percent of the total area of the one building facade upon which the signage is placed or 100 square feet, whichever is less. A directory sign is a wall sign. 
c.  No part of a wall sign shall be located more than 25 feet above the existing level of the ground. Additionally, no wall sign shall be installed on any wall over the level of the bottom of any second story windows on that wall unless the building is a multi-tenant structure where tenants have direct access from their second floor space to the outside. This direct access must include outside walkways and stairways properly designed for public use. 
d.  Wall signs shall not extend above the eave line or top of a parapet on the wall to which it is attached. 
(g)  Location of entrance sign. The minimum front setback shall be 15 feet from the edge of the pavement or outside of the right-of-way, whichever is greater and ten feet from the side and rear lot lines. However, in no case will a sign be allowed to obscure vision at a street or driveway intersection, or railway crossing. For traffic safety, signs shall not be located within the triangular area on a corner lot formed by measuring 20 feet along both street side property lines from their intersection. 
(h)  Aesthetic considerations. The master sign plan must be designed so that it establishes a common theme or design, uses similar construction methods, has compatible colors, lettering, lettering style, symbols, scale and size of signs and/or identical background. 
(Ord. No. 2008-04, art. 11, 9-17-2015) 
Sec. 123-12. - Variances. 
(a)  Authority. The board of appeals is authorized to consider applications for variances to the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Limitations. The board of appeals is only authorized to increase the size or height of a sign by a maximum of 25 percent of the standards set forth herein. 
(c)  Procedure. The procedure for filing and hearing variance applications shall be the same as for variances to the zoning ordinance, as provided in article XXIV of the zoning ordinance. 
(d)  Standards. The board of appeals shall consider the following when voting on a variance application under this chapter: 
(1)  Whether the natural features of the subject property on which the sign is located or is to be located, or of the land immediately adjacent to the subject property, impair the visibility of the sign such that it cannot be seen; 
(2)  Whether there exist extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the property in question resulting from its size, shape, or topography that are not applicable to other lands or structures in the area; 
(3)  Whether a literal interpretation of the provisions of the sign chapter would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other similar properties; 
(4)  Whether granting a variance requested would confer upon the property of the applicant any significant privileges that are denied to other similar properties; 
(5)  Whether the requested variance will be in harmony with the purpose and intent of these regulations and will not be injurious to the neighborhood or to the general welfare; 
(6)  Whether the special circumstances are the result of actions of the applicant; 
(7)  Whether granting the variance would result in allowing a sign that interferes with road or highway visibility or obstructs or otherwise interferes with the safe and orderly movement of traffic; 
(8)  Whether the variance requested is the minimum variance, which will make possible the logical use of the land and sign; and 
(9)  Whether the mere existence of a nonconforming sign or advertising device shall not constitute a valid reason to grant a variance. 
(e)  Appeals. Any applicant or person aggrieved or affected by the denial or grant of a variance application may appeal the determination to the superior court by filing a writ of certiorari with the superior court pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1 et seq. within 30 days following the decision. 
(Ord. No. 2008-04, art. 12, 9-17-2015) 
Sec. 123-13. - Removal of signs. 
(a)  Procedure for removal of unsafe, unlawful and abandoned signs. In case any sign is installed, erected or constructed in violation of any of the terms of this ordinance, is unsafe, or is abandoned, the zoning administrator shall notify by certified mail or written notice served personally, the owner or lessee thereof to alter such sign, secure the necessary permit, make required alterations or remove the sign. If such order is not completed within ten working days from the time of notice being received, the sign shall be removed under instruction of the appropriate official at the expense of the owner or lessee thereof. 
(b)  Nonconforming signs. 
(1)  Findings. The city finds that nonconforming signs may adversely affect the public health, safety and welfare. Such signs may adversely affect the aesthetic characteristics of the city and may adversely affect public safety due to the visual impact of these signs on motorists and pedestrians. Furthermore, nonconforming signs frustrate the purpose of adoption of this chapter as expressed in section 123-2. 
(2)  Continuation of nonconforming signs. A nonconforming sign that is permanently affixed to the ground or to a building may continue to be used, except that the nonconforming sign: 
a.  Shall not be enlarged or altered except in conformance with this chapter, but it may be repaired to the extent necessary to maintain it in a safe condition; 
b.  Shall not be replaced, expanded or modified by another nonconforming sign, except that the substitution or interchange of poster panels, painted boards or dismountable material on nonconforming signs shall be permitted, as long as the business located on the property does not change ownership; however, if a nonconforming sign is replaced or modified by interchanging poster panels, painted boards or dismountable material, the replaced or modified sign shall not be internally lit; 
c.  Shall not be allowed to be increased in height, size or relocated on the property, but may be decreased in height or size; 
d.  Is subject to removal if it has deteriorated to a point of making it a hazard, or unsightly; 
e.  Shall be removed if the property on which the sign is located becomes vacant, or has been unoccupied for a period of at least 90 consecutive days. An intent to abandon is not required as the basis for removal under this subsection; 
f.  Shall be removed if there is a change in use of the premises on which the nonconforming sign is located; 
g.  Shall be removed within 60 days if there is a change in ownership of the business; 
h.  Shall not be repaired or restored after having been damaged to the extent of more than 50 percent of its value immediately prior to the event causing the damage or destruction; and 
i.  To the extent any portion of this chapter conflicts with O.C.G.A. § 32-6-83 or Ga. Const. art. 3, § 6, ¶ 4(a) in application, this section shall be deemed to provide effected parties the minimum protections provided by O.C.G.A. § 32-6-83 or Ga. Const. art. 3, § 6, ¶ 4(a), as amended from time to time. In no event is it the city's intent to obligate itself to pay any compensation related to the removal of any nonconforming sign. 
(c)  Discontinuation of business. If a sign advertises an activity, product, business, service or other use which has ceased or the sign user has vacated the premises, the sign shall be removed or the sign text shall be covered up in such a way as to render the text unreadable. The owner of the property on which the sign is located shall be responsible for removal (or covering) of the sign within 60 days of discontinuation of the business or service. 
(Ord. No. 2008-04, art. 13, 9-17-2015) 
Sec. 123-14. - Enforcement and maintenance. 
(a)  Enforcement officer. The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the building official. 
(b)  Maintenance. 
(1)  The area on private property around the sign on which it is erected shall be properly maintained clear of brush, trees, and other obstacles so as to make signs readily visible; 
(2)  All burned out bulbs or damaged panels must be replaced; 
(3)  All sign copy shall be maintained securely to the face and all missing copy must be replaced; 
(4)  All signs shall be maintained in good structural condition at all times so that the public and traffic safety are not compromised; 
(5)  All signs shall present a neat and orderly appearance, without rust or holes on or in the sign or sign structure, or broken, missing, loose or bent parts, faded, or flaking paint, nonoperative or particularly nonoperative illuminating or mechanical devices or missing letters in sign copy; and 
(6)  It shall be the joint responsibility of the sign owner and property owner to maintain and ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  Penalties. A violation of this chapter shall result in the sign permit being revoked. Additionally, any person violating this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in section 2706 of the city zoning ordinance, same being ordinance No. 91-9. If found guilty, a person violating this chapter may be fined up to $1,000.00 for each violation. Each day an illegal sign remains beyond the period of time the building official gives the person responsible for maintaining the sign to correct the illegality shall be considered a separate violation. 
(d)  Public nuisance. Any violation of this chapter is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. 
(e)  Notice. The building official shall give the sign permittee, the sign owner, and the property owner ten to 30 days' written notice, based on the practical considerations of completing measures to comport with the standards of this ordinance, to correct the deficiencies or to remove the sign which is in violation of this chapter. If the permittee refuses to correct the deficiencies or remove the sign, the city may have the sign removed at the expense of the permittee. 
(f)  Removal. 
(1)  The city may order the removal of any sign in violation of this chapter by written notice to the permit holder, sign owner and property owner. If a permit has been issued, such notice shall operate to revoke the permit. 
(2)  If the sign is not removed within the time required by the city (or the date any appeal becomes final), the city shall remove or cause to be removed the sign and collect the costs thereof through appropriate legal proceedings. 
(3)  The city shall have removed any sign in violation of this chapter, without giving notice to any party if: the sign is upon the public right-of-way or upon other public property or if the sign poses an immediate safety threat to the life or health of any member of the public, or injury to property. 
(4)  Signs removed by the city will be destroyed after 14 days if they are not claimed, however, this holding period shall not apply to signs which were removed from any public right-of-way. 
(g)  Appeal. Any violator may appeal the determination of the building official to the zoning board of appeals in accordance with the procedures of section 2404 of the zoning ordinance. Any appeal shall act as a supersedes of the city's enforcement of this chapter, except to the extent that violation of this chapter is deemed to present a safety hazard to the public. 
(h)  Legal proceedings. The city, upon a finding that any provision of this chapter is being violated, is authorized to institute legal proceedings to enjoin violations of this chapter. The violator shall be liable for court costs and reasonable attorney fees incurred by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2008-04, art. 14, 9-17-2015) 
Sec. 123-15. - Legal status provisions. 
(a)  Amendment. This chapter may be amended by the city council. 
(b)  Conflict with other laws. Whenever the provisions of this chapter impose more restrictive standards than are required in or under any other statute, the provisions of this chapter shall govern. Whenever the provisions of any other statute require more restrictive standards than are required by this chapter, the provisions of such statute shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 2008-04, art. 15, 9-17-2015) 
Chapter 125 - TREE PROTECTION 

Sec. 125-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Basal area means the cross-sectional area of a tree trunk at diameter breast height (dbh) expressed herein in terms of units per acre. 
Buffer means landscaped open space area and/or screen for buffering incompatible uses, as defined in section 680 of the zoning ordinance. 
Buildable area means the portion of a lot which is not located within any minimum required yard, landscape strip/area or buffer; that portion of a lot wherein a building or structure may be located. 
Caliper means a forest standard of tree trunk measurement for understory or replacement trees. Caliper of the trunk shall be taken at six inches above the ground for trees up to and including four inch caliper size, and 12 inches above the ground for trees larger than four-inch caliper. 
Critical root zone (CRZ) means the minimum area beneath a tree which must be left undisturbed in order to preserve a sufficient root mass to give a tree a reasonable chance of survival. The CRZ will typically be represented by a concentric circle centering on the tree's trunk with a radius equal in feet to one and one-half times the number of inches of the trunk diameter. Example: The CRZ radius of a 20-inch diameter tree is 30 feet. 
DBH (Diameter breast height) means the standard measure of tree size for those trees existing on a site that are at least four-inch caliper at a height of 4½ feet above the ground. If a tree splits into multiple trunks below 4½ feet, then the trunk is measured at its most narrow point beneath the split. 
Density factor means a unit of measure used to prescribe the calculated tree coverage on a site. Site density factor for areas within the corporate limits of the city is 20 units per acre. (See density factor analysis, the Dahlonega tree ordinance appendix A). 
Development activity means any alteration of the natural environment which requires the approval of a development or site plan and issuance of a development permit. The term "development activity" shall also include the "thinning" or removal of trees from any undeveloped land, including that carried out in conjunction with a forest management program, and the removal of trees incidental to the development of land or to the marketing of land for development. 
Development permit means an official authorization issued by the zoning director in accord with this chapter. 
Drip line means an imaginary perpendicular surface from a tree's branch tips down to the ground. The circular area of land surrounding the tree front the trunk to the outermost branches. This area is not to be confused with critical root zone. 
Hardwood tree means any leaf bearing (not needle-bearing) tree that is not coniferous (cone bearing). This definition is based on the colloquialism, and does not reflect any true qualities of the tree. 
Inspector means the zoning director or his designee responsible for administering the provisions of this chapter. 
Overstory trees means those trees that compose the top layer or canopy of vegetation and will generally reach a mature height of greater than 40 feet. 
Revegetation means the replacement of trees and landscape materials into the minimum required landscape areas, as determined by the zoning ordinance, conditions of zoning approval, or the provisions of this chapter. 
Softwood trees means any coniferous (cone bearing) tree, such as pine, fir, hemlock, cedar, etc. This definition is based on the colloquialism, and does not necessarily reflect any true qualities of the tree. 
Specimen tree or stand means any tree or collective group of trees which qualifies for special consideration for preservation due to size, type and condition. See section 125-5 for general criteria regarding specimen trees or stands. 
Tree means any self-supporting, woody perennial plant usually having a single trunk diameter of three inches or more which normally attains a mature height of a minimum of 15 feet. 
Tree area means an area designated for the purpose of meeting tree density requirements, saving natural trees, preserving the root system of natural trees and/or preserving normal buffers. 
Tree bank means an account, maintained by the finance department of the city, of funds contributed from developers as a form of alternative compliance to the Dahlonega Tree Ordinance. Funds from the tree bank are to be used solely for the purchase and planting of trees on public sites within the city as authorized by the zoning director. 
Tree protection zone means all lands that fall outside the buildable area of a parcel required to remain in open space, or all areas required as landscaping strips or buffers according to the city zoning ordinance, conditions of zoning approval or provisions of this chapter. 
Tree removal permit means a formal letter or permit issued by the inspector allowing for the removal of said tree on a property. 
Tree species selection list means the recommended species of trees in the Dahlonega Tree Ordinance appendix B. 
Understory tree means those trees that grow beneath the overstory, and will generally reach a mature height of under 40 feet. 
(Ord. No. 2001-8, Amend. 1, App. A, 10-4-2004) 
Sec. 125-2. - Applicability. 
(a)  The terms and provisions of the tree protection chapter and these standards shall apply to any activity which requires the issuance of a development permit. No development permit or grading permit shall be issued until it is determined that the proposed development is in conformance with the provisions of the chapter. 
(b)  This chapter applies to: 
(1)  All public properties and rights-of-way; 
(2)  Zones for which no tree protection and preservation has been approved; 
(3)  An approved tree protection and preservation plan which is modified; 
(4)  Any activity which requires the issuance of a development permit. 
(c)  This chapter does not apply to: 
(1)  Tracts upon which zoning ordinances impose no yard requirements and permits 100 percent coverage of the lot by buildings; 
(2)  Property already occupied by an owner as a single-family residence; 
(3)  Public utilities and government agencies conducting activities to ensure uninterrupted utility and government services and unobstructed passage on public streets because of an emergency (submission of a tree plan by the utility or government agency is desirable when possible); 
(4)  Tree farms; 
(5)  Approved public recreation areas or private recreation areas which have been issued a business license. 
(Ord. No. 2001-8, Amend. 1, § 1, 10-4-2004) 
Sec. 125-3. - Exemptions. 
(a)  The following shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter: 
(1)  The removal of trees from an owner occupied, single-family or duplex. 
(2)  The removal of trees from horticultural properties such as farms, nurseries or orchards. This exception shall not be interpreted to include timber harvesting incidental to development of the land. 
(3)  The necessary removal of trees by a utility company within dedicated utility easements. 
(4)  The removal of trees on public rights-of-way conducted by, on behalf of, or for any activity to be dedicated to a federal, state, county, municipal or other government agency in pursuit of its lawful activities or functions in the construction or improvement of public rights-of-way. 
(5)  The removal of trees, other than specimen trees from detention ponds and drainage easements. 
(6)  The removal of any tree which has become or threatens to become a danger to human life or property. 
(7)  The removal of trees from recreation areas such as public or private playgrounds, ball fields, golf courses and other such uses. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, all reasonable efforts shall be made to save specimen trees. 
(Ord. No. 2001-8, Amend. 1, § 2, 10-4-2004) 
Sec. 125-4. - General criteria for the determination of specimen trees or stands of trees. 
(a)  Specimen tree: 
(1)  Any tree in fair or better condition which equals or exceeds the following diameter sizes. 
a.  24 inches dbh—Large hardwoods such as oaks, hickories, yellow poplars, sweetgums, etc. 
b.  30 inches dbh—Large softwoods such as pines, deodar cedars, etc. 
c.  4 inches dbh—Small trees such as dogwoods, redbuds, sourwoods, etc. 
(2)  A tree in fair or better condition must meet the following minimum standards: 
a.  A life expectancy of greater than 15 years. 
b.  A structurally sound trunk, not hollow and having no extensive decay, and less than 20 percent radial trunk dieback. 
c.  No more than one major and several minor dead limbs (hardwoods only). 
d.  No major insect or pathological problem. 
(3)  A lesser sized tree can be considered a specimen tree if it is a rare or unusual species, of exceptional or unique quality, or of historical significance. 
(4)  A lesser size tree can be considered a specimen tree if it is specifically used by a builder, developer, or design professional as a focal point in a landscape project. 
(b)  Specimen tree stands. A contiguous grouping of trees which has been determined to be of high value in the opinion of the inspector. Determination is based upon the following criteria: 
(1)  A relatively mature, even-aged stand. 
(2)  A stand with purity of species composition or of a rare or unusual nature. 
(3)  A stand of historical significance. 
(4)  A stand with exceptional aesthetic quality. 
(Ord. No. 2001-8, Amend. 1, § 3, 10-4-2004) 
Sec. 125-5. - Minimum tree density requirements for developers. 
(a)  A basic condition of this tree chapter is that all applicable sites maintain an average minimum tree density of 20 units per acre. The term "unit" is an expression of basal area, and is not synonymous with the term "tree." The density requirement must be met whether or not a site had trees prior to development or the issuance of a development permit. 
(1)  The density may be achieved by counting existing trees to be preserved, by planting new trees according to the minimum standards in this chapter or by a combination of the two. 
(2)  Minimum tree density shall be calculated and established pursuant to the formula and analysis set forth in appendix B to this chapter. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, it is required that all reasonable efforts be made to save specimen trees. Reasonable efforts shall include, but not be limited to, alteration of building design, alternate location of buildings, parking area, water retention, drainage pipes, or relocation of utilities. 
(c)  Only 20 percent of trees included in the density requirements may be softwoods (section 125-4(a)(1)b.). 
(d)  Tree requirements, as noted in design plans may be amended by the city council in cases where minimum tree densities are not evenly distributed on the net site area where aesthetic appearances are an issue. 
(Ord. No. 2001-8, Amend. 1, § 4, 10-4-2004) 
Sec. 125-6. - Application requirements. 
When a person applies for a development permit, such person shall also file an application for a tree removal permit providing the following information: 
(1)  A complete tree protection plan, as specified in section 125-8. This plan shall be an integrated site plan showing specimen trees, the tree protection areas, those trees to be saved, and utilities to be installed, grading, the approximate location of all structures, driveways and curb cuts, proposed tree planting and other landscaping. 
(2)  A complete tree replacement plan as specified in section 125-9. Replacement trees used in density calculation must be ecologically compatible with the intended growing site. A list of acceptable replacement trees is provided in this tree chapter, appendix C, tree species selection list. 
(3)  Minor additions to existing developments require that a sketch showing proposed changes be submitted to the inspector designated by the city, hereafter known as the inspector, in this document for review and approval. 
(Ord. No. 2001-8, Amend. 1, § 5, 10-4-2004) 
Sec. 125-7. - Tree survey inspection. 
Following the receipt of the completed tree removal application, tree survey plan and supporting data, the inspector shall schedule and conduct an inspection of the proposed development site within ten working days. The applicant or his designee shall be advised as to the date and time of the inspection and given an opportunity to participate. Following inspection, the inspector, consistent with the purposes of this chapter, shall advise the applicant of any recommended changes in the applicant's proposed tree removal, protection or replanting plans. 
(Ord. No. 2001-8, Amend. 1, § 6, 10-4-2004) 
Sec. 125-8. - Tree protection plan; documents required. 
(a)  Before the commencement of any alteration, defoliation or land disturbing activity which requires the issuance of a development permit, a tree protection plan is required. 
(b)  The tree protection plan shall be a detailed plan designed to protect and preserve trees before, during and for a period of two years after construction. 
(c)  Required specification for a tree protection plan include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  The identity of the tract of land upon which trees sought to be removed are located. 
(2)  The name, address and phone number of the owner of the land and the name, address and phone number of any tenant of the property. 
(3)  The type, location and size as measured at the diameter breast height of the tree constituting those to be protected. Only trees designated on the tree protection plan will be counted toward density requirements. 
(4)  Location of all specimen trees and their critical root zones (CRZs). Indicating those specimen trees proposed for removal or for preservation. Removal of specimen trees is subject to approval by the inspector. Any specimen tree proposed for removal is to be identified in terms of exact location, size and species. 
(5)  Indication of staging areas for parking, including buffer areas, material storage, concrete washout, debris burn and burial holes and other areas where tree protection may be affected. 
(6)  A delineation of tree save areas in which trees have been inventoried for density calculation. 
(7)  Location and details for all permanent tree protection measures (tree wells, aeration systems, permeable paving, retaining walls, bollards, etc.). 
(8)  Trees and shrubs for overhead utility easements. The heights of utility lines vary. Select large shrubs and small trees with mature heights which are less than the line height. Suggestion list available. 
(Ord. No. 2001-8, Amend. 1, § 7, 10-4-2004) 
Sec. 125-9. - Tree replacement plan; standards and revegetation. 
(a)  A separate tree replacement plan, indicating the location of all proposed trees for revegetation is required. This plan will be included as a part of the tree protection plan. 
(b)  The tree replacement plan is to include planting schedules with proposed tree names (botanical and common), quantity, size, spacing and any special planting notes. 
(c)  The use of flowering ornamental trees or plants classified as large shrubs may be included in the tree replacement plan, but shall not be used for the purpose of meeting density calculations for the site unless approved by the inspector. 
(d)  All replanted overstory trees shall be a minimum of eight feet tall and have a trunk of not less than 2½ caliper inches. All replaced understory trees shall be a minimum of six feet tall and have a trunk of not less than 1½ inches. In order to provide sufficient growing area for planted trees, the following minimum criteria must be observed unless otherwise approved by the inspector. Overstory trees, 200 square feet of pervious root zone. Understory trees, 75 square feet of pervious root zone (however, up to 30 percent of root zone may be impervious area). 
(e)  Planting and staking details are to be provided on the plan. 
(f)  Trees must be relocated or replaced on-site in accordance with the provisions of this chapter as well as section 2100 et seq. of the zoning ordinance. 
(g)  Debris removed. All debris from trees cut or substantially damaged shall be removed from the site in a timely fashion including the removal of any portion of the tree stump above the original natural grade or elevation of land unless excepted by the inspector for a specific reason such as, but not limited to, unusually large size or age. 
(Ord. No. 2001-8, Amend. 1, § 8, 10-4-2004) 
Sec. 125-10. - Permit procedures. 
(a)  Prior to the issuance of a development permit, a tree protection plan must be submitted to the inspector. 
(b)  All tree protection plans and related documentation shall be reviewed by the inspector for conformance to the provisions of this chapter and either approved, returned for revision, or denied. If denied, the reasons for denial shall be annotated on the tree protection plan or otherwise stated in writing. 
(c)  All tree protection measures shall be installed prior to any land disturbance, and the inspector shall be contacted for a pre-construction conference prior to land disturbance. Land disturbance may proceed only after a permit is obtained and tree protection measures have been approved by the inspector. 
(d)  After completion of a development, the inspector will conduct an on-site inspection of the site to ensure compliance with the tree protection plan and design plans. 
(e)  The inspector shall make unscheduled inspections before and during development to ensure protection of trees, critical root zones and buffer zones. 
(f)  All single-family uses and properties within the historic district shall require approval by the historic preservation commission. 
(Ord. No. 2001-8, Amend. 1, § 9, 10-4-2004) 
Sec. 125-11. - Removal of trees; conditions and exceptions. 
(a)  Tree removal shall be disallowed in the following circumstances: 
(1)  Soil erosion or runoff problems will result due to topography, soil type, or proximity to floodplain or river protection areas; and the removal will substantially alter the existing soils adversely with regard to runoff and erosion. Information submitted by the city engineer or other environmental specialists may be used by the inspector in his evaluation. 
(2)  Specimen trees are located on-site and cannot be adequately protected or replaced. Additionally, removal may be disallowed if reasonable accommodations can be made to alter the proposed project to save specimen trees and have not been made. 
(3)  Property degradation. The removal will have a significant adverse effect on property values of any adjoining property. 
(4)  Pruning. Any substantial amount of pruning which results in unsightly appearance or predisposing the tree to pathogens, reducing the health and vigor of the tree. 
(b)  Exceptions. Tree removal from a site may be allowed if: 
(1)  The tree is located in an area where a structure or improvement will be placed and the tree cannot be relocated on the site because of age, type or size of tree. 
(2)  The tree interferes with existing utility service. 
(3)  The tree creates an unsafe vision clearance for vehicular movement. 
(c)  Trees must be relocated or replaced on-site in accordance with the provisions of this chapter as well as section 2100 et seq. of the zoning ordinance. Prior to approval of the tree protection plan, the inspector shall require relocation or replacement of each tree being moved or removed on the site to be supplemented with additional trees to establish within the tree protection zone a minimum of one tree per 500 square feet of minimum required open space per the zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2001-8, Amend. 1, § 10, 10-4-2004) 
Sec. 125-12. - Tree protection during construction. 
(a)  No person in the construction of any structure or improvement or any activity shall encroach or place solvents, material, construction machinery or temporary soil deposits with six feet of the area outside the drip line, as defined herein, of any specimen tree or any tree within a tree protection zone. 
(b)  Before development, land clearing, filling or any land alteration, the developer shall be required to erect suitable protective barriers as required by the inspector, including tree fences, tree protection signs, and erosion barriers until completion of site landscaping. Authorization to remove the protective devices shall be in writing by the inspector or by the issuance of a final certificate of occupancy. Inspection of tree protection barriers is required prior to any land disturbance or development. The inspector shall be contacted to schedule an inspection time. 
(c)  Materials for active tree protection shall consist of chain-link, orange laminated plastic, wooden post and rail fencing or other equivalent restraining material. In addition to fencing, where active tree protection is required, each tree to be saved shall be marked at the base of the trunk with blue colored water-based paint. 
(d)  Materials for passive tree protection shall consist of heavy mil, plastic flagging, a minimum of four (40 inches wide with dark letters reading "Tree Protection Area - Do Not Enter,") or equivalent signage on a continuous, durable restraint. 
(e)  All tree protection devices must remain in functioning condition until the certificate of occupancy is issued. 
(Ord. No. 2001-8, Amend. 1, § 11, 10-4-2004) 
Sec. 125-13. - Tree damage. 
Any tree, designated in the plan to be saved, which is damaged during construction or as a result of construction, as determined by the inspector, shall be treated according to accepted National Arborist Association Standards, or replaced with a tree or trees equal to the unit value of the tree removed. However, any specimen tree damaged as described above shall be replaced with trees equal to two times the unit value of the tree removed or damaged. 
(Ord. No. 2001-8, Amend. 1, § 12, 10-4-2004) 
Sec. 125-14. - Emergencies. 
In case of emergencies, such as hurricane, windstorm, flood, freeze or other disaster, the requirements of these regulations may be waived by the inspector or other designated official, upon a finding that such waiver is necessary so that public or private work to restore order in the city will not be impeded. 
(Ord. No. 2001-8, Amend. 1, § 13, 10-4-2004) 
Sec. 125-15. - Appeal. 
Any person adversely affected by a decision of the inspector in the enforcement or interpretation of any of the terms or provisions of this chapter may appeal such decision to the city council. Such appeal shall be taken by filing written notice thereof with the zoning director within ten days after the decision of the inspector or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 2001-8, Amend. 1, § 14, 10-4-2004) 
Sec. 125-16. - Withholding of certificate of occupancy. 
The inspector may withhold the issuance of the required certificate of occupancy, or permits and inspections, for any development as required until the provisions of this chapter have been fully met. 
(Ord. No. 2001-8, Amend. 1, § 15, 10-4-2004) 
Sec. 125-17. - Tree removal and construction companies. 
(a)  All provisions of this chapter shall apply to any person removing trees on behalf of any other person, including all tree removal companies, utility companies or persons in the business of removing trees or construction. It shall be unlawful for any person or company to remove or cause to be removed any tree, or undertake any work for which a development permit is required pursuant to this chapter, unless a valid permit therefor is in effect and is displayed in accordance with the provisions of section 125-18 If any such work or removal is performed without the permit being displayed as required in section 125-18, such removal or work shall constitute a violation of this chapter and shall subject the person or company violating this chapter to all penalties provided herein. However, utility companies may provide emergency work without formal approval; provided, however, that emergency actions are reported in writing to the inspector within three working days after completion of all emergency services. Further, the permit taken by any person, company or utility under this section may include defined areas of tree cutting and trimming under one permit. 
(b)  All tree removal companies, utility companies or persons in the business of removing trees or construction shall remove from the site any trees, stumps, limbs or debris caused by activities allowed by the issuance of a permit under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2001-8, Amend. 1, § 16, 10-4-2004) 
Sec. 125-18. - Display of permit and inspections. 
The applicant shall prominently display on the site, the permit issued. Such permit shall be displayed continuously while trees are being removed or replaced or work done as authorized on the permit. As a condition for the issuance of a permit, the applicant shall agree in writing to entry onto his premises by representatives of the city as designated by the inspector to inspect the permit and activities at any time, and such entry shall be lawful. Failure to allow such entry shall be unlawful and shall constitute failure to display the permit as required under this section. 
(Ord. No. 2001-8, Amend. 1, § 17, 10-4-2004) 
Sec. 125-19. - Fees. 
(a)  Each new applicant requesting a permit shall pay a fee to be determined by the city council. 
(b)  Fee amount for plan review is as established by the city. 
(c)  No fees shall be charged on any application filed solely within a public right-of-way. 
(d)  No fee shall be charged on any application where the inspector determines that the trees meet the exception criteria contained in section 125-11. 
(Ord. No. 2001-8, Amend. 1, § 18, 10-4-2004) 
Sec. 125-20. - Penalty. 
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this chapter shall be punished as described in section 1-7, and in addition thereto, may be enjoined from continuing the violation. Each tree cut, damaged or poisoned shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2001-8, Amend. 1, § 19, 10-4-2004) 
Sec. 125-21. - Tree committee. 
(a)  A tree committee consisting of five members shall be appointed by the city council. The committee will elect a chairperson from its membership. 
(b)  It will be the responsibility of the committee to advise the council concerning the enforcement of the tree ordinance and to advise the council concerning the effectiveness of the tree ordinance. 
(c)  The tree committee may recommend amendments to the council as they see fit. 
(d)  The tree committee shall hear any requests for a variance to the ordinance from any and all parties. The tree committee will not have the authority to grant variances. 
(e)  The tree committee will report to the city council on an as needed basis concerning their activities and the activities of the city official charged with permitting based on the tree ordinance. This report to the council will be in writing. 
(Ord. No. 2001-8, Amend. 1, § 20, 10-4-2004) 
Sec. 125-22. - Density factor analysis. 
(a)  A basic condition of the tree protection requirements is that all applicable sites maintain a minimum tree density of 20 units per acre. The term "unit" is an expression of basal area and is not synonymous with the term "tree." 
(b)  The density requirement must be met whether or not a site had trees prior to development. The density may be achieved by counting existing trees to be preserved, planting new trees, or some combination of the two. 
(c)  For density factor analysis, the following formula shall apply: 
SDF = EDF + RDF 
Where: 
SDF (Site Density Factor) The minimum tree density required to be maintained on a developed site (20 units per acre). 
EDF (Existing Density Factor) Density of existing trees to be preserved on a site. 
RDF (Replacement Density Factor) Density of new trees to be planted on a site. 
(d)  Procedure for calculating the required tree replacement: 
(1)  Step 1. Calculate the site density factor (SDF): The SDF is calculated by multiplying the number of site acres by 20. 
Example: A 2.2-acre site has a SDF of 2.2 x 20 44. 
(2)  Step 2. Calculate the existing density factor (EDF): The existing density factor, EDF, is determined by converting the diameter breast height (dbh) of individual trees to density factor units as shown in the following Table 1. These units are totaled to determine the EDF for the site. 
Example: A total of eight trees will remain on the 2.2-acre site in Step 1. These trees include: 
3.14-inch pines 
3.18-inch oaks 
0.20-inch hickory 
0.30-inch oak 
When converted to density factory units using Table 1, we arrive at the following values: 

 
31.8 units total. The total units. 31.8, is the EDF (existing density factor). 
Table 1. Converting Existing Tree Diameters to Density Units 

 
(3)  Step 3. Calculate the replacement density factor (RDF): 
a.  Replacement density factor (RDF) is determined by subtracting the EDF from the SDF. 
Example: 44 (SDF) -31.8 (EDF)= 12.2. 
b.  This means that 12.2 tree units are required as replacements for the total site to meet the requirement of 20 units per acre. 
c.  The density factor credit for each caliper size of replacement (new) trees is shown in the following Table 2. 
Table 2. Converting Replacement Trees to Density Units 

 
A seven-gallon container grown pine tree is given replacement credit of 0.3 units. 
d.  For tree relocation, replacement units will be granted to trees relocated on site. Tree relocation is subject to inspector approval. 
Table 3 Circumference vs. dbh 

 
(Ord. No. 2001-8, Amend. 1, App. B, 10-4-2004) 
Sec. 125-23. - Tree species selection list. 

 
(Ord. No. 2001-8, Amend. 1, App. C, 10-4-2004) 
Chapter 127 - WATERSHED PROTECTION 

Sec. 127-1. - Watershed protection areas. 
Buffer means a natural or enhanced vegetated area with no or limited minor land disturbances, such as trails and picnic areas. 
Corridor means all land within the buffer areas and other setback areas. 
Impervious surface means a manmade structure or surface which prevents the infiltration of stormwater into the ground below the structure or surface. Examples are buildings, paved roads, paved driveways, paved parking lots, swimming pools, or patios. 
Large water supply watershed means a watershed area which is greater than 100 square miles as defined by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources Environmental Protection Division. 
Nitrification field means any system for the on-site disposal of wastewater. 
Perennial stream means a stream that has normal stream flow consisting of base flow (discharge that enters the stream channel mainly from groundwater) or both base flow and direct runoff during any period of the year. 
Reservoir means an existing or future impoundment of water for water supply purposes as identified by resolution of the city council. 
Small water supply watershed means a watershed area which is less than 100 square miles as defined by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources Environmental Protection Division. 
State water means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, homeowners association, partnership, or corporation. For purposes of this chapter, the county engineer shall make state water determinations. Recorded drainage easements and ditches/swells used for conveying wet weather flows (i.e., no base flow) shall not be considered state waters. 
Stream bank means the uppermost part of the bank marked by a break in slope (as defined by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources Environmental Protection Division). Stream bank is not necessarily the water's edge. 
Tributaries and streams means tributaries and streams, whether named or unnamed, that continuously flow to major water supply streams. 
Utility means a public or private water or sewer piping system, water or sewer pumping station, electric power line, fuel pipe line, telephone line, road, driveway, bridge, river/lake access facility, stormwater system and/or railroad 
Water supply reservoir means a governmentally-owned impoundment of water for the primary purpose of providing water to one or more governmentally-owned public drinking water systems. This excludes the multipurpose reservoirs owned by the Army Corps of Engineers. 
Water supply watershed means the area of land upstream of a governmentally owned public drinking water intake. 
(Ord. No. 2009-10, § 1, 12-7-2009) 
Sec. 127-2. - Applicability. 
(a)  Exemptions (grandfather provisions). This chapter shall not apply to the following activities: 
(1)  Work consisting of the repair or maintenance of any lawful use of land that is zoned and approved for such use on or before the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
(2)  Existing development and on-going land disturbance activities, including, but not limited to, existing agriculture, silviculture, landscaping, gardening and lawn maintenance, except that new development or land disturbance activities on such properties will be subject to all applicable buffer requirements and with best management practices available. 
(3)  Any land development activity that is under construction, fully approved for development or scheduled for permit approval. 
(4)  Land development activity that has not been submitted for approval, but that is part of a larger master development plan designed using best management practices, such as for an office park or other phased development that has been previously approved within two years of the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
(5)  The project consisting of approximately 2½ miles of recreational surface trails between four and eight feet in width encircling the Yahoola Creek Reservoir. The project also includes a pavilion, comfort station and informational kiosks at each end of the trail. (Agreement for Project Grant No. NRT-03(17) dated March 4, 2004.) 
(b)  Exemptions. The following specific activities are exempt from this chapter. Exemption of these activities does not constitute an exemption for any other activity proposed on a property. 
(1)  Utility lines paralleling the creek provided that: 
a.  The utilities to be located in the buffer or setback areas cannot feasibly be located outside these areas; 
b.  The utilities are located as far from the stream bank as reasonably possible; 
c.  The installation and maintenance of the utilities are such to protect the integrity of the buffer and setback areas as best as reasonably possible; and 
d.  The utilities do not impair the quality of the drinking water stream. 
(2)  Within an easement of any utility existing at the time this chapter takes effect or approved under the terms of this chapter, land disturbance activities and such impervious cover as is necessary for the operation and maintenance of the utility, including, but not limited to, manholes, vents and valve structures. 
(3)  Emergency work necessary to preserve life or property; provided however, when emergency work is performed under this section, the person performing it shall report such work to the city on the next business day after commencement of the work. Within ten days thereafter, the person shall apply for a permit and perform such work within such time period as may be determined by the city to be reasonably necessary to correct any impairment such emergency work may have caused to the water conveyance capacity, stability or water quality of the protection area. 
(4)  Forestry and silviculture activities on land that is zoned for forestry, silvicultural or agricultural uses and that are not incidental to other land development activity provided that: 
a.  The activity is consistent with best management practices established by the Georgia Forestry commission or the Georgia Department of Agriculture; and 
b.  The activity does not impair the quality of the drinking water stream. 
(c)  Application to watersheds. The following large and small water supply watersheds, designated major water supply streams, named tributaries, minor unnamed streams, and state waters located in and out of the large and small water supply watersheds shall be governed by this chapter. 
(1)  Large water supply watersheds: Not applicable. 
(2)  Small water supply watersheds: Yahoola Creek Basin. 
(3)  Designated major water supply streams: Yahoola Creek. 
(4)  Tributaries to water supply streams: Ward Creek. 
(5)  Any and all minor unnamed streams which are indicated as perennial on the 1963 (photo revised 1982) U.S.G.S. quad sheets. 
(6)  State waters. 
(Ord. No. 2009-10, § 2, 12-7-2009) 
Sec. 127-3. - Restrictions. 
Small water supply watershed. 
(1)  The perennial stream corridors of a small water supply watershed within a seven mile radius upstream of a governmentally owned public drinking water supply intake or water supply reservoir are protected by the following criteria: 
a.  A natural buffer shall be maintained of a distance of 100 feet on both sides of the stream as measured from the stream banks; 
b.  Vegetation within a natural buffer area shall not be disturbed except for approved access and utility crossings; 
c.  No impervious surface shall be constructed within a 150 foot setback area on both sides of the stream as measured from the stream banks; 
d.  Septic tanks and septic tank drainfields are prohibited in the setback area of subsection c. above; 
e.  No sewage treatment facility, dumping, discharging, releasing, spraying, distributing of any toxic or other harmful products is allowed onto the land within the natural buffer. 
(2)  The perennial stream corridors within small water supply watersheds and outside a seven mile radius upstream of a governmentally-owned public drinking water supply intake or water supply reservoir are protected by the following criteria: 
a.  A natural buffer shall be maintained for a distance of 50 feet on both sides of the stream as measured from the stream banks; 
b.  Vegetation within a natural buffer area shall not be disturbed except for approved access and utility crossings; 
c.  No impervious surface shall be constructed within a 75 foot setback area on both sides of the stream as measured from the stream banks; 
d.  Septic tanks and septic tanks drainfields are prohibited in the setback areas of subsection c above; 
e.  No sewage treatment facility, dumping, discharging, releasing, spraying, distributing of any toxic or other harmful products is allowed onto the land within the natural buffer. 
(3)  The following criteria apply at all locations in a small water supply watershed. 
a.  New sanitary landfills are allowed only if they have synthetic liners and leachate collection systems; 
b.  New hazardous waste treatment or disposal facilities are prohibited; 
c.  The impervious surface area, including all public and private structures, utilities, or facilities, of the entire water supply watershed shall be limited to 25 percent, or existing use, whichever is greater; 
d.  Facilities located within seven miles of a water supply intake or water supply reservoir, which handle hazardous materials of the types listed in section 312 of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (excluding underground storage tanks) in amounts of 10,000 pounds on any one day or more, shall perform their operations on impervious surfaces and in conformance with any applicable federal spill prevention requirements or requirements of the Standard Fire Code. 
(Ord. No. 2009-10, § 3, 12-7-2009) 
Sec. 127-4. - Penalty for violation. 
Violations of this chapter shall be punishable as a misdemeanor in the municipal court of the city and are subject to a penalty of no less than $1,000.00 per violation per day. Violators shall also be subject to remedial measures at the expense of the violator and jail time at the discretion of the court. 
(Ord. No. 2009-10, § 4, 12-7-2009) 
Appendix A - DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS[1] 
DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS 
CITY OF DAHLONEGA, GEORGIA 
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING IN THEIR ENTIRETY THE CITY OF DAHLONEGA SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE (ORDINANCE 84-3) AND THE CITY OF DAHLONEGA DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE (92-4) AND TO THE EXTENT CONFLICTING, THE CITY OF DAHLONEGA ZONING ORDINANCE (91-9); FOR THE PURPOSE OF ESTABLISHING RULES AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING THE DEVELOPMENT OF LAND WITHIN THE INCORPORATED CITY OF DAHLONEGA, GEORGIA; DEFINING STANDARDS FOR STREET, UTILITIES AND DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENTS; PROVIDING FOR THE METHOD OF ADMINISTRATION AND AMENDMENT; PRESCRIBING PENALTIES FOR THE VIOLATION OF ITS PROVISIONS; AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES. 
THE COMPREHENSIVE DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF DAHLONEGA, GEORGIA 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is Ord. No. 2000-7, adopted December 4, 2000. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original ordinance. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings and catchlines has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

ARTICLE I. - AUTHORITY, TITLE, PURPOSE AND INTENT 
AN ORDINANCE ESTABLISHING RULES AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING THE SUBDIVISION AND DEVELOPMENT OF LAND WITHIN THE INCORPORATED CITY OF DAHLONEGA, GEORGIA; DEFINING STANDARDS FOR STREETS, UTILITIES, AND DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENTS; PROVIDING FOR THE METHOD OF ADMINISTRATION AND AMENDMENT; PRESCRIBING PENALTIES FOR THE VIOLATION OF ITS PROVISIONS; AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES. 

Sec. 1.1. - Authority. 
This Ordinance is adopted under the authority of the Constitution of the State of Georgia and laws enacted pursuant thereto. 
Sec. 1.2. - Short title. 
This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as "The Comprehensive Development Ordinance of the City of Dahlonega, Georgia." 
Sec. 1.3. - Purpose. 
These regulations are intended to serve the following purposes: 
(a)  To protect and promote the health, safety and general welfare; 
(b)  To provide a system for the subdividing of lands and the accurate recording of land titles; 
(c)  To encourage economically sound and orderly land development in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan and other policies and objectives of the City; 
(d)  To ensure the provision of needed open spaces and public facility sites in new land subdivisions through the dedication or reservation of land for public purposes; and 
(e)  To ensure equitable review and approval of all land subdivisions by providing uniform procedures and standards for the subdivider. 
Sec. 1.4. - Intent and application. 
It is the intent of this Ordinance that it will apply to and provide guidance for the subdivision of land and development of land within the incorporated limits of the City of Dahlonega, Georgia. Any land development activity must comply with this Ordinance. 
ARTICLE II. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 2.1. - Use of words and interpretation. 
(a)  For the purposes of this Ordinance, the following shall apply to the use of all words: 
(1)  Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense, 
(2)  Words used in the singular number include the plural and words in the plural number include the singular, 
(3)  Words in masculine gender shall include the feminine and words in feminine gender shall include the masculine, 
(4)  The term "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary, 
(5)  The word "may" is permissive, 
(6)  Use of the word "and" is inclusive and requires that all of the component phrases so connected must be present or fulfilled for sufficiency, 
(7)  Use of the word "or" is not exclusive and requires that at least one of the component phrases so connected must be present or fulfilled for sufficiency. The word "or" may allow more than one component phrase to be present or fulfilled, as in the term, "and/or." 
(b)  In this Ordinance the following shall control the interpretation of words and phrases: 
(1)  Words and phrases defined in this Article shall be interpreted as defined herein without regard to other meanings in common or ordinary use, unless the context of the word indicates otherwise. 
(2)  Words or phrases not defined herein shall be interpreted as defined in the Zoning Ordinance of Dahlonega, Georgia, as applicable to the use of the word or phrase within the context of this Ordinance. 
(3)  Words or phrases not defined herein or in any other applicable code, regulations or ordinance of the City of Dahlonega, Georgia, shall be construed to have the meaning customarily assigned to them. 
Sec. 2.2. - Definitions of words and phrases. 
Alley or Service Drive: A minor, permanent, public service-way which is used primarily for vehicular service to the back or the side for properties otherwise abutting a street. 
Arterial: An arterial street as defined and/or designated in the Zoning Ordinance or Comprehensive Plan of the City. 
Block: A piece or parcel of land entirely surrounded by public streets, other than alleys, or other major physical barriers. 
Board of Zoning Appeals: The body established by these regulations appointed by the Governing Body which has jurisdiction to take action on appeals, variances, and other determinations as herein established. 
City: The City of Dahlonega, Georgia, a municipal corporation. 
City Council: The legally constituted and elected governing body of the City of Dahlonega, Georgia. 
Clearing: The removal of trees, other vegetation and/or above-ground improvements including, but not limited to, buildings and structures, walls, fences, steps, walks, curbs, gutters, concrete slabs, pavements (including bases for pavements) and surfacing. 
Community Development Director: The department head of the Community Development Department for the City of Dahlonega or their designee. 
Concept Plan: A drawing which shows the overall concept of a proposed development, and which may include lots and streets in a subdivision or the general location of buildings and improvements for a multi-family or nonresidential project, and which may be drawn to approximate dimensions in a freehand style. 
Cul-de-sac: A minor local street having one end open to traffic and being permanently terminated by a vehicular turnaround. 
Developer: Any person, individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, estate, trust, or any other group or combination acting as a unit who directs the undertaking or proposes to undertake development activities as herein defined, whether the development involves the subdivision of the land for sale to individual users, the construction of buildings or other improvements on a single land ownership, or both. 
Development: 
1.  (noun) A specific subdivision or project which is a single entity or intended to be constructed as an interrelated whole, whether simultaneously or in phases. 
2.  (verb) All activities associated with the conversion of land or the expansion or replacement of an existing use to any new use intended for human operation, occupancy, or habitation other than for agricultural purposes. Such activities include land disturbance and the construction of improvements such as, but not limited to, streets, driveways, parking areas, sidewalks, buildings, structures, utilities, or storm drainage facilities. 
Development Plans: The detailed and professional plans showing the layout and design, site work and construction activities proposed for a project (other than architectural/engineering buildings plans); including, but not limited to, Site Plans, Grading Plans, Erosion and Sediment Control Plans, Tree Protection Plans, Landscape Plans, Street Plans and Profiles, Water Supply Plans, Sanitary and Storm Sewer Plans and Profiles, Other Site Improvement Plans and Other Appropriate Sections, Details, Notes, Schedules, Legends and Diagrams. 
Drainage Improvements: Those facilities and structures intended to control and direct the passage of storm waters and other surface water flows from and across property; including, but not limited to, modified natural drainageways, modified creeks, modified streams, channels, swales, ditches, flumes, culverts, cross drains and other piping, catch basins, area drains, drop inlets, junction boxes, headwalls, flared end sections, detention ponds and basins, rip rap, drainageway lining systems, and energy dissipation devices. 
Drainage Manual: The City of Dahlonega Drainage Manual as contained in Appendix A. 
Driveway: A vehicular access way in private ownership, other than a private street, which provides access to primarily only one property, or no more than two single-family detached residences. 
Easement: Recorded authorization for a specified purpose by a property owner for the use of any designated part of the real property by another entity. 
Erosion Control Regulations: The City of Dahlonega, Georgia, Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Ordinance. 
Expressway: A high capacity public street from which access to abutting property is prohibited and as defined and/or designated in the Zoning Ordinance or Comprehensive Plan of the City. 
Final Plat: A finished drawing of a subdivision that provides a complete and accurate depiction of all legal and engineering information required by this chapter. 
Georgia DOT: The Department of Transportation of the State of Georgia. 
Grading: The movement, removal, or addition of soil, earth, sand, silt, or rock on a site by use of mechanical equipment. 
Grubbing: The removal of stumps, roots, and abandoned underground facilities, including, but not limited to, utilities, structures, walls, footings, foundations, wells, septic tanks, storage tanks, and pipe. 
Health Department: The Health Department of Lumpkin County, Georgia. 
Lot: A portion of a subdivision, or any other parcel of land, intended as a unit for transfer of ownership or for development or both. In determining the area and dimensions of a lot, no part of the public right-of-way may be included. 
Lot, Corner: A lot abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection. 
Lot, Double Frontage: A lot, other than a corner lot, abutting upon two or more streets. 
Mean Sea Level: The average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. For purposes of these Regulations, the term is synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum. 
Minor Final Plat: A finished drawing of a subdivision showing completely and accurately all legal and boundary information and certifications of no more than five lots that, at the time of subdivision, does not involve: 
1.  New Streets. 
2.  The extension of a utility or other municipal facility. 
3.  Conditions that varies from the zoning regulation and development regulations of the City of Dahlonega. 
Owner: A person having a majority fee simple interest in real property, or a majority interest through any other form of ownership. 
Pedestrian Way: A right-of-way within a block dedicated to public use, intended primarily for pedestrians and from which motor-propelled vehicles are excluded. 
Person: An individual, firm, partnership, corporation, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, syndicate, or other group or combination acting singly or collectively for a common purpose, and the duly authorized agents thereof. 
Planning and Zoning Commission: The City of Dahlonega Planning and Zoning Commission as established in the City of Dahlonega Zoning Ordinance. 
Plat: A drawing prepared by a land surveyor that describes and depicts real property boundaries, including but not limited to, a map, condominium plat, subdivision plat, as-built survey, easement survey, or retracement survey. 
Preliminary Plat: A drawing which shows the perimeter boundary, topography, lot layout arrangement, street layout, and other features of a proposed subdivision, as specified in these regulations. 
Project: A principal building or structure, or a group of buildings or structures, planned as an interdependent unit together with all accessory uses of structure, utilities, drainage, access, and circulation facilities, whether built in whole or in phases. Examples include, but are not limited to, a principal building on a lot, a residential subdivision, a multi-family development, an industrial plant, an institutional building, a shopping center or an office complex. 
Public Works Department: The Department of Public Works of the City of Dahlonega, Georgia. 
Road: Refer to "Street, Public." 
Sketch Plan: Refer to "Concept Plan." 
Street, Public: A dedicated and accepted public right-of-way which affords the principal means of access to abutting properties. 
Street, Local Nonresidential: A street intended primarily to provide local access to adjacent existing or planned commercial or industrial development and not for through traffic. 
Street, Local Residential: A street intended primarily to provide local access to adjacent existing or planned residential development and not for through traffic. 
Street, Major Collector: A street that collects traffic from minor streets or other collector streets and channels it to arterial streets. Collector streets provide land access and traffic circulation within residential neighborhoods, commercial, and industrial areas. 
Street, Minor Collector: A through street intended primarily to connect subdivisions or other areas to Major Collector Streets or other thoroughfares, or functioning as a central route within a subdivision channeling traffic from the local streets to a Major Collector, another Minor Collector, or other thoroughfares. 
Street, Marginal Access: A local street which is generally parallel to and adjacent to a major thoroughfare and which provides access to adjacent properties and protection from through traffic. 
Street, Substandard: A street which does not comply to at least the standards for the designated street classifications as contained in these Regulations. 
Subdivider: Any person dividing or proposing to divide land so as to constitute a subdivision as herein defined. 
Subdivision: 
1.  (verb) Any division or re-division of a lot, tract or parcel, regardless of its existing or future use, into two or more lots, tracts or parcels. The term "subdivision" shall mean the act or process of dividing property. 
2.  (noun) Where appropriate to the context, the term "subdivision" also may be used in reference to the aggregate of all lots held in common ownership at the time of division. 
Zoning Ordinance: The City of Dahlonega, Georgia, Zoning Ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 2018-11, 9-4-2018 ) 
ARTICLE III. - APPLICATION AND GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 3.1. - Zoning ordinance. 
Whenever there is a discrepancy between minimum standards or dimensions required under this Ordinance and those contained in the Zoning Ordinance, building codes, or other ordinances or regulations, the most restrictive shall apply. 
Sec. 3.2. - Application. 
Any subdivision activity and land development activity must first comply with these Regulations. 
Sec. 3.3. - Dedication of public lands and facilities. 
No land dedicated as a public street or other public purpose shall be opened or accepted as a public street or for any other purpose, and no subdivision of land shall be made, nor subdivision plat, nor part thereof, shall be recorded before obtaining final approval from the City Council. Said final approval shall be entered in writing on the Final Plat by the Mayor. As soon as practical after final approval is granted and recording fees are paid to the City by the subdivider, the Mayor shall cause the Final Plat to be recorded by the Clerk to [of] Superior Court of Lumpkin County. 
Sec. 3.4. - Transfer of land ownership. 
No person shall transfer title or attempt to record title to any land in the City of Dahlonega, and no building permit may be issued on said land, unless: 
(a)  Said land is shown in its entirety and present boundaries on a Final Plat as approved (under these or any previous applicable regulations) and duly recorded with the Clerk to [of] Superior Court of Lumpkin County; or 
(b)  Said land is shown in its entirety and present boundaries on a plat recorded with the Clerk to [of] Superior Court of Lumpkin County pursuant to the regulations governing Subdivision Exemptions contained herein; or 
(c)  Said land is an aggregation of properties for land assembly purposes, and no building permit will be requested prior to the compliance with these regulations and the Zoning Ordinance. 
No person shall transfer title to any property by reference to, exhibit of, or any other use of any map or plat illustrating the subdivision of land without a Final Plat of said land showing said property first having been duly approved under these Regulations or any previously applicable regulations and recorded with the Clerk of Superior Court of Lumpkin County. 
Sec. 3.5. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-12, adopted September 4, 2018 , deleted § 3.5, which pertained to subdivision exemptions and derived from Ord. No. 2000-7, adopted December 4, 2000. 
Sec. 3.6. - Suitability of the land. 
Land subject to flooding, improper drainage or erosion, and any land deemed to be unsuitable for development due to steep slopes, unsuitable soils, subsurface conditions or other undesirable characteristics shall not be subjected to development for any use that may retain such conditions or increase danger to health, safety, life, or property, unless steps are taken to eliminate or abate these conditions. Land within a proposed subdivision which is unsuitable for development shall be incorporated into the buildable lots as excess lot area. 
Sec. 3.7. - Conformance to the comprehensive plan. 
All proposed subdivisions shall conform to the City of Dahlonega Comprehensive Plan at the time of submission of the Preliminary Plat to the Planning and Zoning Commission. Where features of the Comprehensive Plan, such as parks, streets, and utility systems, are located in whole or in part in a proposed subdivision, or when these features have not been anticipated by the Comprehensive Plan, but are considered essential by the Planning and Zoning Commission and/or Mayor and Council, land for such features shall be dedicated to the City. 
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall disapprove subdivisions when such planned features, as specified by the Comprehensive Plan, are not incorporated therein. 
Sec. 3.8. - Survey monuments. 
All property corners shall be monumented with a steel-concrete reinforcing bar or steel pipe at least ½ inch in diameter and 18 inches long. Standard brass disk survey monuments or concrete Georgia Department of Transportation right-of-way markers are also acceptable property corner monuments. In areas to be maintained with grass mowing equipment, bar or pipe monuments are to be installed at or within two inches of ground level. In paved areas, bar or pipe monuments are to be installed flush with the pavement surface. In natural areas, bar or pipe monuments are to be installed so as to extend one to four inches above ground level. 
On subdivisions containing floodplains, not less than one permanent vertical control monument per ten acres of floodplain area shall be established and identified on the Final Plat. Each permanent vertical control monument shall be referenced to mean sea level and be a standard brass disk type survey monument or concrete Georgia Department of Transportation right-of-way marker. When right-of-way markers are used, they shall be buried vertically such that three to six inches of the marker extends above ground level. 
All property corner and vertical control monuments shall be installed before the Final Plat is considered for approval by the City. 
Sec. 3.9. - Access. 
When land is subdivided into larger parcels than ordinary building lots, such lots shall be arranged and designed so as to allow for the construction of future streets and to provide access to those areas not presently served by streets. No subdivision shall be designed so as to completely eliminate street access to adjoining parcels of land. Every development shall be designed to facilitate access to adjoining properties which are developed or anticipated to be developed in a manner substantially similar to the subject property. Inter-parcel access shall be shown on the Final Plat as required by and subject to the approval of the City. 
Any lot required to provide minimum frontage by the zoning district in which the lot is located shall provide vehicular access directly from a public street along the frontage or along any other property line which abuts a public street. 
Private streets as may be approved under the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance or Development Regulations shall be constructed to the roadway standards of the City. 
Sec. 3.10. - Required public improvements. 
Every developer of lands within the jurisdiction of this Ordinance shall provide the public improvements included in this Ordinance, in accordance with these Development Regulations and other pertinent ordinances, codes, and regulations of the City of Dahlonega, Georgia. These public improvements together with associated rights-of-way, easements, and other lands shall be provided at no cost to the City and shall be dedicated or otherwise transferred, as required, to the public in perpetuity and without covenant or reservation. 
Sec. 3.11. - Plan review and approval. 
Any developer of land within incorporated Dahlonega, Georgia, shall first submit to the City such plans, plats, or construction drawings as may be required by these Regulations and receive approval of those documents by the City prior to the initiation of development activities. Approval of plans, plats, or construction drawings by the City shall not imply nor transfer acceptance of responsibility for the application of the principles of engineering, surveying, architecture, landscape architecture, or any other profession, from the professional corporation or individual under whose hand or supervision the plans, plats, or construction drawings were prepared and sealed. 
Sec. 3.12. - Other permits. 
Nothing in these Regulations shall impose any obligation on the City to obtain or assist in obtaining permits, approvals, and/or clearances from other local, state, or Federal agencies having jurisdiction over elements of a project. It is solely the developer's responsibility to obtain all such required permits, approvals, and/or clearances. The developer shall furnish the City with copies of all such permits, approvals, and/or clearances before authorization to proceed with development is requested. 
Sec. 3.13. - Standard specifications. 
The City will maintain on file for consultation and distribution a series of standard specifications for construction of utilities and drainage facilities for the development of land in accordance with these Development Regulations. 
The standard specifications describe minimum acceptable standards for utility and drainage construction of land development activities authorized under this Ordinance, but shall not supersede more restrictive, prudent design requirements or good engineering practice as applied to specific situations on a case-by-case basis. The standard specifications are included in this Ordinance as Appendix B and are subject to the modifications and appeal provisions of [Articles] XII and XIII. 
Sec. 3.14. - Standard drawings. 
The City will maintain on file for consultation and distribution a series of standard drawings illustrating details of construction and design of streets, utilities, drainage facilities, site improvements, and other elements related to the development of land in accordance with these Development Regulations. 
The standard drawings illustrate minimum acceptable standards for land development activities authorized under this Ordinance, but shall not supersede more restrictive, prudent design requirements or good engineering practice as applied to specific situations on a case-by-case basis. 
The standard drawings are included in this Ordinance as Appendix C and are subject to the modification and appeal provisions of Articles XII and XIII. 
ARTICLE IV. - STREET STANDARDS 

Sec. 4.1. - Right-of-way and pavement widths. 
Minimum widths for construction (new streets or widening sections) are specified in Table 4-A. 
TABLE 4-A 

 
Sec. 4.2. - Street design. 
Access. 
A maximum number of 200 residential units shall be allowed per street outlet to a public street. Reserve strips controlling access to public streets shall not be permitted. 
Street Jogs. 
Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 125 feet shall not be permitted. 
Street Gradients. 
(a).  The minimum street gradient shall be one percent without special approval from the City Manager. A minimum street gradient of ½ percent to one percent may be approved by the City Manager, based on adequate engineering designs provided by the subdivider's engineer, where at least one percent cannot reasonably be achieved due to topographical limitations imposed by the land. 
(b).  The maximum street gradient for primary arterial streets shall be eight (8) percent. The maximum street gradient for secondary arterial, primary and secondary collector and nonresidential local streets shall be ten percent. The maximum street gradient for residential local streets shall be 16 percent. Grades between 12 percent and 16 percent shall not exceed a length of 150 feet measured as the tangent length between points of vertical curvature. 
(c).  The maximum gradient on any cul-de-sac shall be six percent. 
Vertical Street Alignment. 
All changes in street profile grades having an algebraic difference greater than one percent shall be connected by a parabolic curve having a minimum length (L) equal to the product of the algebraic difference between the grades in percent (A) and the design constant (K) assigned to the street according to its category (i.e., L = A*K). 
Constant (K) values are shown in the following Table 4-B for both desirable and minimum acceptable conditions. In all cases, the desirable value shall be used, unless it cannot be achieved due to topographical conditions beyond the subdivider's control. In such conditions, the City Manager may approve a lesser value to the extent required by the unique situation, but in no event less than the minimum value specified in Table 4-B. 
TABLE 4-B 

 
Horizontal Street Alignment. 
All new streets shall conform with the horizontal centerline curvature and super elevation criteria specified in Table 4-C. 
TABLE 4-C 
  

 
Super elevation runoff shall be provided on each end of horizontal curves to rotate pavement section from normal crown section to full super elevation section and to rotate pavement section from full super elevation section to normal crown section in accordance with design standards of the Georgia Department of Transportation. 
Tangents between reverse horizontal curves shall not be less than those specified in Table 4-D. 
TABLE 4-D 
  

 
Street Intersections. 
Intersection Angle. 
Intersecting streets shall meet at approximately a right angles and shall not be at an angle of less than 80 degrees unless approved by the City Manager. 
Intersection Vertical Approaches. 
For all but local streets, street intersections, including approaches, shall have a maximum vertical grade of two percent. For local streets, street intersections, including approaches, shall have a maximum vertical grade of five percent. The minimum approach length (distance from extended outer edge of the nearest through lane of the intersecting street to the point of vertical curvature in the approaching street) shall be provided in accordance with Table 4-E. 
TABLE 4-E 
  

 
Intersection Radii. 
Intersection radii for streets, measured at the back of the curb, and for rights-of-way shall be as shown in the following Table 4-F. For intersecting streets of different classifications, the larger radii shall be provided. In all cases, sufficient right-of-way shall be provided to maintain at least ten feet from the back of curb. For intersecting rights-of-way, lines may be joined by either an arc having the minimum radius shown in Table 4-F or by a chord connecting the end points of an arc having the minimum radius shown in Table 4-F. Larger radii may be required for streets intersecting at angles less than 90 degrees. 
TABLE 4-F 
  

 
Islands. 
In general use of raised traffic islands is discouraged in favor of painted islands supplemented with traffic buttons or other devices manufactured for traffic control. Where requested by the City Manager, traffic islands shall conform to the design guidance of the latest edition of "A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets," published by the American Association of Highway and Transportation Officials. Improvements on islands within rights-of-way shall be limited to traffic control devices. 
Turning Lanes. 
Turning lanes shall be required by the City to meet projected traffic demand and/or safe operations. 
When provided, turning lanes shall meet the following criteria: 
(a)  Provide not less than 150 feet of storage length for arterial roadways. Provide not less than 100 feet of storage length for collector roadways. 
(b)  Provide taper lengths of not less than 50 feet. 
(c)  Longer storage and taper lengths may be required when traffic projections indicate they are justified. 
Cul-de-sac Streets. 
Cul-de-sac streets shall be designed so that the maximum desirable length is 800 feet, but no longer than 1,200 feet, including circular turnaround, unless excepted by the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
ARTICLE V. - LOT AND BLOCK STANDARDS 

Sec. 5.1. - Lots. 
In general, lots should be designed such that they are no more than four times as deep as they are wide at the building setback line. For lots which include 1) particular or unusual difficulties to meet minimum setback limits, 2) unusual building sites due to easement configuration, 3) possible floodplain encroachment, 4) stormwater detention facilities, 5) zoning imposed buffers, and/or 6) unusual or severe topographic features, the City shall require a final plat notation requiring an approved Site Plan prior to issuance of a building permit. All lots shall conform to the requirements of the City of Dahlonega Zoning Ordinance. Minimum lot sizes, widths, and setbacks are specified in the City of Dahlonega Zoning Ordinance. 
Sec. 5.2. - Side lot lines. 
In so far as practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight street lines or radial to curved street lines. Each lot must front for at least fifty (50) feet on a dedicated public street unless the lot upon which the building permit is requested is an approved lot in an approved Planned Unit Development. 
Sec. 5.3. - Corner lots. 
Corner lots shall have extra width to permit prescribed setback limits from all streets on which the lot has frontage. 
Sec. 5.4. - Double frontage lots. 
Double frontage lots other than corner lots shall be required for residential subdivisions along arterial or primary collector streets where internal access can be provided. When approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission, double frontage lots can be used to overcome specific disadvantages of topography, orientation and/or property size. Otherwise, double frontage lots other than corner lots shall be prohibited. 
To properly separate residential subdivisions employing double frontage lots from traffic arteries, the Planning and Zoning Commission will require a planted buffer of ten-foot minimum width along the lot line abutting the traffic artery. The easement for the buffer will be required to deny right of access to the lot on which it is located. 
Sec. 5.5. - Panhandle or flag lots. 
Panhandle or Flag lots, of required width and area, may be allowed where terrain makes standard design or frontage impossible or impractical. Where such lots are allowed, the street frontage of each panhandle access shall not be less than 20 feet wide, and the panhandle access shall not be more than 200 feet long. Not more than two (2) such panhandle access points shall abut each other, and if so combined the width of each panhandle may be reduced to not less than fifteen (15) feet. All such access points or combinations thereof shall be separated from each other by the frontage of a standard lot required under the applicable provisions of these Regulations. 
Sec. 5.6. - Blocks. 
The lengths, widths, and shapes of blocks shall be determined with regard to: 
(a).  Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of the type of use contemplated. 
(b).  Applicable zoning requirements as to lot size and dimensions. 
(c).  Needs for convenient access, circulation, control and safety of vehicular and pedestrian traffic. 
(d).  Limitations and opportunities of topography. 
The Planning and Zoning Commission may, when existing or proposed pedestrian/bicycle circulation patterns or public gathering places so justify, require pedestrian/bicycle ways or access easements through blocks. 
ARTICLE VI. - PLAT SPECIFICATIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-14, adopted september 4, 2018 , amended art. VI in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. VI, pertained to the same subject matter, consisted of §§ 6.1—6.5, and derived from Ord. No. 2000-7, adopted December 4, 2000. 

Sec. 6.1. - Subdivision exemptions. 
For the purpose of these Regulations the types of activities contained in this section shall be considered subdivisions but exempt from the procedures and required public improvements portions of these Regulations, except as noted: 
(a)  Retracement survey - A survey of an existing parcel or parcels of land and does not subdivide or create a new parcel or make any changes to any real property boundaries. 
A retracement shall show the surveys certificate as stated below: 
This plat is a retracement of an existing parcel or parcels of land and does not subdivide or create a new parcel or make any changes to any real property boundaries. The recording information of the documents, maps, plats, or other instruments which created the parcel or parcels are stated hereon. RECORDATION OF THIS PLAT DOES NOT IMPLY APPROVAL OF ANY LOCAL JURISDICTION, AVAILABILITY OF PERMITS, COMPLIANCE WITH LOCAL REGULATIONS OR REQUIEMENTS, OR SUITABILITY FOR ANY USE OR PURPOSE OF THE LAND. Furthermore, the undersigned land surveyor certifies that this plat complies with the minimum technical standards for property surveys in Georgia as set forth in the rules and regulations of the Georgia Board of Registration for Professional Engineers and Land Surveyors and as set forth on the O.C.G.A. Section 15-6-67. 
( Ord. No. 2018-14, 9-4-2018 ) 
Sec. 6.2. - Preliminary plat specifications. 
The Preliminary Plat or Site Plan for a subdivision shall be clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of not less than 100 feet to one inch. The sheet size shall not exceed 48 inches by 36 inches, provided, however, a scale of 200 feet to one inch may be used to avoid sheets in excess of 48 inches by 36 inches. 
The Preliminary Plat shall contain the following: 
(a)  Name - Proposed name of development. 
(b)  Property - Owner Information. Name and address of the property owner, and the proposed subdivider or developer. 
(c)  Applicant Information - Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant. 
(d)  Survey Information - Date of survey, north point and graphic scale, source of datum, date of plan drawing, and revision dates, as appropriate. 
(e)  Proposed Use - Proposed use of the property. 
(f)  Location - Location (land district and land lot) and size of property in acres or in square feet if less than an acre. 
(g)  Location Sketch - Location sketch of the property in relation to the surrounding area with regard to well-known landmarks such as arterial streets, railroads or others. 
1.  Preparation - Sketches may be drawn in freehand and at a scale sufficient to show clearly the information required, but not less than one inch equal to 2,000 feet. 
2.  USGS Maps - U.S. Geological Survey maps may be used as a reference guide for the location sketch. 
(h)  Former Approved Subdivision - Name and boundary of former approved subdivision if any or all of the land in the preliminary subdivision plat or site plan has been previously subdivided, showing boundaries of same. 
(i)  Zoning District - Zoning district designation of the subject property and all adjacent properties, and zoning district boundaries as appropriate. 
(j)  Prior Approvals or Applications - Rezoning or special exception use application number, date of approval, and conditions of approval, as applicable. 
(k)  Approved Variances - Variances obtained on the property by application number, date of approval, and conditions of approval, as applicable. 
(l)  Natural Features - Natural features within the property, including drainage channels, bodies of water, wooded areas and other significant natural features such as rock outcroppings. On all watercourses entering or leaving the property, the direction of flow shall be indicated. The area of special flood hazard, the 100-year floodplain, if any, shall be outlined. 
(m)  Manmade Features - 
1.  Features - Manmade features within and adjacent to the property, including all street right-of-way and pavement widths, names of existing streets, all easements, city and county political boundary lines, and other significant information such as location and dimensions of bridges, utility lines, existing buildings to remain, and other features. 
2.  Identification of Public Streets and Areas - All streets and other areas designated for public use, or proposed to be dedication or reserved, should be identified. 
(n)  Contours - Contours drawn at two-foot intervals or as may be approved by the Director of Engineering. 
(o)  Project Layout - The proposed project layout including subdivision and site plan information as indicated below. 
1.  Required Subdivision Information - Proposed subdivision information shall include the following: 
i.  Street right-of-way lines, with proposed street names or letter designations and right-of-way widths; 
ii.  Lot lines, along with the front building setback line with the lot width; 
iii.  Parks, playgrounds, and other public areas to be included in the proposed subdivision; and 
iv.  A sketch of the prospective future street system of the unsubmitted part when the preliminary plat submitted covers only a portion of the subdivider's entire holdings. 
2.  Site Plans - For multifamily and nonresidential development site plans, the following information shall be provided: 
i.  The outline and location of all buildings; 
ii.  The location and relevant dimensions of all minimum building setback lines; 
iii.  The location of outdoor storage areas; 
iv.  The location of solid waste facilities and water lines; 
v.  The location of buffers; 
vi.  The location of parking areas, driveways and curb cuts; 
vii.  Designated fire lanes; 
viii.  All required loading zones; and 
ix.  All sidewalks. 
(p)  Phasing - The proposed phasing of the development if it is proposed to be built in sections. 
(q)  Water Supply - A statement as to the source of the domestic water supply. 
(r)  Sanitary Sewage Disposal - A statement as to the provision forsanitary sewage disposal. For those properties that will not be served by a public sanitary sewerage system, on-site individual or community sewage disposal systems must be approved by the health department. 
(s)  Stormwater Detention - The approximate location of proposed stormwater detention facilities. 
(t)  Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control - For site plans, a statement of intent to comply with the soil erosion and sedimentation control provisions of Chapter 105 of the Dahlonega code must be included on the plan and signed by a representative with soil erosion certification and their certification number listed. 
(u)  Additional information - Such additional information as may be reasonably required to permit an adequate evaluation of the development activity proposed in the application. 
(v)  Registration number - The registration number of the land surveyor and seal of said surveyor. 
(x)  Certifications - Preliminary Plat Certifications as specified in Section 6.7. 
( Ord. No. 2018-14, 9-4-2018 ) 
Sec. 6.3. - Preliminary plat supplemental information. 
In addition to the Preliminary Plat, the following information shall be provided to the Planning Commission with each Preliminary Plat submittal: 
(a)  A written summary of the proposed subdivision giving information as to the overall development plan including, as appropriate, the types and square footages of structures, number of housing units, types of land uses, anticipated traffic generation, and other pertinent information so that the effects of the subdivision can be fully considered by the Planning Commission. 
(b)  Description of the anticipated utility systems required to serve the proposed subdivision including projected average and peak demands or flows for potable water, fire protection, sewerage, and electrical power. 
(c)  Description of proposed storm water management practices for the subdivision including the ownership and proper maintenance provisions of all storm water detention facilities within the subdivision. 
(d)  Such additional information as may be reasonably required to obtain an adequate understanding of the subdivision. 
( Ord. No. 2018-14, 9-4-2018 ) 
Sec. 6.4. - Subdivision development plans. 
Subdivision development plans shall conform to the approved Preliminary Plat and may constitute only that portion of the Preliminary Plat which the developer or subdivider proposes to construct at one time as a single unit or phase, provided that such portion conforms to these regulations. Unless it is a minor final plat and then it shall be submitted to the Community Development Department for review. If the plat is reviewed and meets all requirements for a minor final plat then it can be approved by the Community Development Director or their designee. 
Subdivision Development Plans are to consist of not less than the following: 
(a)  Erosion/Sediment and Pollution Control Plan prepared in accordance with the City's Soil Erosion, Sediment and Pollution Control Ordinance. 
(b)  Grading and Drainage Plans prepared in accordance with the City's Development Regulations. 
(c)  Street Improvement Plans prepared in accordance with the City's Development Regulations. 
(d)  Utility Plans prepared in accordance with the City's Development Regulations. 
(e)  Other plans as requested by the City. 
Encroachments: Where construction is proposed on adjacent property, an encroachment agreement or easement shall be submitted to the City. 
( Ord. No. 2018-14, 9-4-2018 ) 
Sec. 6.5. - Minor final plat specifications. 
The Minor Final Plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn in black ink on suitable permanent reproducible material. The scale of the Minor Final Plat shall be 100 feet to one inch or larger. Sheet size shall not exceed 24 inches by 36 inches. 
The Minor Final Plat shall be based on a certified boundary survey delimiting the entirety of the property contained within the Minor Final Plat, and tied to a point of reference with the same degree of accuracy as the boundary itself. The survey shall have an accuracy of no less than 1 in 10,000, and shall meet all requirements of Georgia Law regarding the recording of maps and plats. 
The Minor Final Plat shall contain the following: 
(a)  A caption containing the type, title or name, including the name of the subdivision, which shall be contained in the caption, and the caption shall provide the following information 
1.  The county, land district and land lot, and subdivision, if the property lies within a particular subdivision; 
2.  The date of plat preparation; 
3.  The scale, stated and shown graphically; 
4.  The name, address, telephone number, and registration number of the land surveyor or the statement that he is the county surveyor and is not required by law to be a registered surveyor; and 
5.  All reproductions of original maps or plats shall bear the original signature, in black ink, of the registrant placed across the registration seal in order to be a valid or recordable map or plat. 
(b)  Point of Reference. All maps or plats shall show the direction and distance from a point of reference to a point on the boundary of the individual survey, and such additional data as may be required to relocate the boundary point from the point of reference with the same degree of accuracy required of the parcel surveyed. The point of reference shall be an established, monumented position which can be identified or relocated from maps, plats, or other documents on public record. 
(c)  Bearings. All maps or plats of boundary surveys or subdivision surveys shall show bearings of all lines of the boundary or lot lines, and distances of all boundary or lot lines, and area of the parcels expressed in acres or square feet. 
(d)  Right-of-way Widths. All maps or plats shall show the width and the former widths, if pertinent, of all rights of way adjacent to or crossing the property or adjacent to any point of reference. 
(e)  Easements and Encroachments. All maps or plats shall show easements and apparent encroachments, if pertinent. 
(f)  Curved Lines. In the case of curved lines, the curve shall be defined by curve data to include the radius, arc length, chord bearing, and distance for regular curves. Chord distances and directions shall be given for irregular curves. 
(g)  Lines and Boundaries. All land lot lines, land district lines, land section lines, and city and county state boundaries intersecting or adjacent to the surveyed property shall be indicated by lines drawn upon the map or plat with appropriate words and figures. 
(h)  Description of Markers. All corner markers and markers of pertinent reference points shall be fully described and indicated as to their material or types and shall be constructed of a permanent material such as iron, steel, concrete, or stone. 
(i)  Arrows. An arrow shall be shown on the map or plat to indicate the principal meridian, and a notation shall be made as to the reference of bearings to magnetic north, astronomic north, or grid north. A grid north reference shall indicate the zone. 
(j)  Horizontal Distances. All linear distances shown on maps or plats shall be horizontal. 
(k)  Angular Directions. All angular directions shown on maps or plats shall be represented in degrees and minutes. Where plats state or surveys require accuracy in excess of 1 in 5,000, the angular directions shall be represented in degrees, minutes, and seconds. All angular directions shall be referenced to the principal meridian. 
(l)  State Plane Coordinates. All maps or plats shall show the state plane coordinates of at least two permanent monuments thereon, when a National Geodetic Survey monument is within 500 feet of any point on the property mapped or platted, or any point of reference shown thereon. 
(m)  Adjacent Subdivisions and Record Owners. The name of all adjacent subdivisions and record owners of an unsubdivided property adjoining the proposed subdivision. 
(n)  Street Names. Street names including both the name and the suffix, such as "street," "avenue," etc. 
(o)  Monuments and Markers. Accurate location, material and description of monuments and markers. 
(p)  Former Name. Name of the former subdivision if any or all of the property has been previously subdivided. 
(q)  Location. Location sketch. 
(r)  Lot Lines. Lot lines with dimensions to the 1/100 (0.01) foot, necessary internal angles, arcs, and chords and tangent or radii of rounded corners. 
(s)  Setback Lines. Building front setback lines with dimensions as to length across each lot and distance from the street right-of-way. 
(t)  Lots, Sites and Blocks. Lots or sites numbered in numerical order and blocks lettered alphabetically. 
(u)  Easements. Location, dimensions and purpose of all easements, including slope easements, if required, and any areas to be reserved, donated, or dedicated to public use. 
(v)  Private Covenants. A listing of the private covenants recorded with each lot or a statement of the location of such covenants, if applicable. 
(w)  Special Flood Hazards. The extent of any area of special flood hazard, as defined in FEMA FIRM Maps. 
(x)  Curve Data. Curve data shall be required for all roadway centerline curves of greater than ten degrees on new roads. 
(y)  Centerline Data. Centerline data including the radius, central angle, arc length, chord bearing and distance, and tangent distance between curves must be given for regular curves. Chord distances and directions shall be given for irregular curves on preexisting roads. 
(z)  [Individual lot designations.] Individual lots which are deemed by the Community Development Director as requiring site plans shall be designated in a readily identifiable manner. 
(aa)  [Certificates and statements.] Certificates and statements specified in these Regulations. 
( Ord. No. 2018-14, 9-4-2018 ) 
Sec. 6.6. - Final plat specifications. 
The Final Plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn in black ink on suitable permanent reproducible material. The scale of the Final Plat shall be 100 feet to one inch or larger. Maps or plats shall not be less than 8½ inches by 11 inches and not larger than 24 inches by 36 inches. A digital copy of the Final Plat shall also be provided to the City. 
The Final Plat shall be based on a certified boundary survey delimiting the entirety of the property contained within the Final Plat and tied to a point of reference with the same degree of accuracy as the boundary itself. The survey shall have an accuracy of no less than 1 in 10,000 and shall meet all requirements of Georgia Law regarding the recording of maps and plats. 
The Final Plat shall substantially conform to the approved Preliminary Plat and it may constitute only a portion of the approved Preliminary Plat which the subdivider proposes to record at any one time, provided that such portion conforms to the requirements of these regulations, and said portion is not inconsistent with the health, safety, or welfare of the public. Any substantial deviation from the approved Preliminary Plat shall require that a revised Preliminary Plat be submitted to and approved by the Planning Commission. 
The Final Plat shall contain the following: 
(a)  Caption. A caption containing the type, title or name, including the name of the subdivision, which shall be contained in the caption, and the caption shall provide the following information: 
1.  The county, land district and land lot, and subdivision, if the property lies within a particular subdivision; 
2.  The date of plat preparation; 
3.  The scale, stated and shown graphically; 
4.  The name, address, telephone number, and registration number of the land surveyor or the statement that he is the county surveyor and is not required by law to be a registered surveyor; and 
5.  All reproductions of original maps or plats shall bear the original signature, in black ink, of the registrant placed across the registration seal in order to be a valid or recordable map or plat. 
(b)  Point of Reference. All maps or plats shall show the direction and distance from a point of reference to a point on the boundary of the individual survey, and such additional data as may be required to relocate the boundary point from the point of reference with the same degree of accuracy required of the parcel surveyed. The point of reference shall be an established, monumented position which can be identified or relocated from maps, plats, or other documents on public record. 
(c)  Bearings. All maps or plats of boundary surveys or subdivision surveys shall show bearings of all lines of the boundary or lot lines, and distances of all boundary or lot lines, and area of the parcels expressed in acres or square feet. 
(d)  Right-of-way Widths. All maps or plats shall show the width and the former widths, if pertinent, of all rights of way adjacent to or crossing the property or adjacent to any point of reference. 
(e)  Easements and Encroachments. All maps or plats shall show easements and apparent encroachments, if pertinent. 
(f)  Curved Lines. In the case of curved lines, the curve shall be defined by curve data to include the radius, arc length, chord bearing, and distance for regular curves. Chord distances and directions shall be given for irregular curves. 
(g)  Lines and Boundaries. All land lot lines, land district lines, land section lines, and city and county state boundaries intersecting or adjacent to the surveyed property shall be indicated by lines drawn upon the map or plat with appropriate words and figures. 
(h)  Description of Markers. All corner markers and markers of pertinent reference points shall be fully described and indicated as to their material or types and shall be constructed of a permanent material such as iron, steel, concrete, or stone. 
(i)  Arrows. An arrow shall be shown on the map or plat to indicate the principal meridian, and a notation shall be made as to the reference of bearings to magnetic north, astronomic north, or grid north. A grid north reference shall indicate the zone. 
(j)  Horizontal Distances. All linear distances shown on maps or plats shall be horizontal. 
(k)  Angular Directions. All angular directions shown on maps or plats shall be represented in degrees and minutes. Where plats state or surveys require accuracy in excess of 1 in 5,000, the angular directions shall be represented in degrees, minutes, and seconds. All angular directions shall be referenced to the principal meridian. 
(l)  State Plane Coordinates. All maps or plats shall show the state plane coordinates of at least two permanent monuments thereon, when a National Geodetic Survey monument is within 500 feet of any point on the property mapped or platted, or any point of reference shown thereon. 
(m)  Adjacent Subdivisions and Record Owners. The name of all adjacent subdivisions and record owners of an unsubdivided property adjoining the proposed subdivision. 
(n)  Street Names. Street names including both the name and the suffix, such as "street," "avenue," etc. 
(o)  Monuments and Markers. Accurate location, material and description of monuments and markers. 
(p)  Former Name. Name of the former subdivision if any or all of the property has been previously subdivided. 
(q)  Location. Location sketch. 
(r)  Lot Lines. Lot lines with dimensions to the 1/100 (0.01) foot, necessary internal angles, arcs, and chords and tangent or radii of rounded corners. 
(s)  Setback Lines. Building front setback lines with dimensions as to length across each lot and distance from the street right-of-way. 
(t)  Lots, Sites and Blocks. Lots or sites numbered in numerical order and blocks lettered alphabetically. 
(u)  Easements. Location, dimensions and purpose of all easements, including slope easements, if required, and any areas to be reserved, donated, or dedicated to public use. 
(v)  Private Covenants. A listing of the private covenants recorded with each lot or a statement of the location of such covenants, if applicable. 
(w)  Special Flood Hazards. The extent of any area of special flood hazard, as defined in FEMA FIRM Maps. 
(x)  Curve Data. Curve data shall be required for all roadway centerline curves of greater than ten degrees on new roads. 
(y)  Centerline Data. Centerline data including the radius, central angle, arc length, chord bearing and distance, and tangent distance between curves must be given for regular curves. Chord distances and directions shall be given for irregular curves on preexisting roads. 
(z)  Additional requirements. Individual lots which are deemed by the City Manager as requiring site plans shall be designated in a readily identifiable manner. 
(aa)  Certificates. Certificates and statements specified in these Regulations. 
( Ord. No. 2018-14, 9-4-2018 ) 
Sec. 6.7. - Plat certifications. 
The Preliminary Plat shall contain the following statements: 
(a)  Preliminary Plat Certification to read as follows: 
I hereby submit this Preliminary Plat as authorized agent/owner of all property shown thereon, and certify that all contiguous property under my ownership or control is included within the boundaries of this Preliminary Plat, as required by the Subdivision Regulations. 

 
(b)  Owners Acknowledgement and Declaration to read as follows: 
(STATE OF GEORGIA) 
(LUMPKIN COUNTY) 
The owner of the land shown on this plat and whose name is subscribed thereto, and in person or through a duly authorized agent, acknowledges that this plat was made from an actual survey, and dedicates by this Declaration to the use of the public forever all streets, street rights-of-way, sanitary sewers and appurtenances, sanitary sewer easements, potable water mains and appurtenances, potable water easements, storm drains and appurtenances within street rights-of-way, and other public facilities and appurtenances thereon shown for the purposes therein expressed. 

 
(c)  Preliminary Plat Approval Statement to read as follows: 
This Preliminary Plat has been reviewed and approved for general compliance with the Zoning Ordinance, Development Regulations and Subdivision Regulations of the City of Dahlonega, Georgia. 

 
The Minor Final Plat shall contain the following statements: 
(a)  Owners Acknowledgement and Declaration to read as follows: 
(STATE OF GEORGIA) 
(CITY OF DAHLONEGA) 
The owner of the land shown on this plat and whose name is subscribed thereto, and in person or through a duly authorized agent, acknowledges that this plat was made from an actual survey, and dedicates by this Declaration to the use of the public forever all streets, street rights-of-way, sanitary sewers and appurtenances, sanitary sewer easements, potable water mains and appurtenances, potable water easements, storm drains and appurtenances within street rights-of-way, and other public facilities and appurtenances thereon shown for the purposes therein expressed. 

 
(b)  Minor Final Plat Approval to read as follows: 
This subdivision has been reviewed by the Community Development Department and found to be in compliance with Zoning Ordinance, Development Regulations and Subdivision Regulations. The City of Dahlonega hereby approve this Minor Final Plat, subject to the provisions and requirements of the City's regulations. 

 
(c)  Surveyor's Certification to read as follows: 
As required by subsection (d) of O.C.G.A. Section 15-6-67, this plat has been prepared by a land surveyor and approved by all applicable local jurisdictions for recording as evidenced by approval certificates, signatures, stamps, or statements hereon. Such approvals or affirmations should be confirmed with the appropriate governmental bodies by any purchaser or user of this plat as to intended use of any parcel. Furthermore, the undersigned land surveyor certifies that this plat complies with the minimum technical standards for property surveys in Georgia as set forth in the rules and regulations of the Georgia Board of Registration for Professional Engineers and Land Surveyors and as set forth In O.C.G.A. Section 15-6-67 

 
The Final Plat shall contain the following statements: 
(a)  Surveyor's Certification to read as follows: 
As required by subsection (d) of O.C.G.A. Section 15-6-67, this plat has been prepared by a land surveyor and approved by all applicable local jurisdictions for recording as evidenced by approval certificates, signatures, stamps, or statements hereon. Such approvals or affirmations should be confirmed with the appropriate governmental bodies by any purchaser or user of this plat as to intended use of any parcel. Furthermore, the undersigned land surveyor certifies that this plat complies with the minimum technical standards for property surveys in Georgia as set forth in the rules and regulations of the Georgia Board of Registration for Professional Engineers and Land Surveyors and as set forth in O.C.G.A. Section 15-6-67 

 
(b)  Owners Acknowledgement and Declaration to read as follows: 
(STATE OF GEORGIA) 
(LUMPKIN COUNTY) 
The owner of the land shown on this plat and whose name is subscribed thereto, and in person or through a duly authorized agent, acknowledges that this plat was made from an actual survey, and dedicates by this Declaration to the use of the public forever all streets, street rights-of-way, sanitary sewers and appurtenances, sanitary sewer easements, potable water mains and appurtenances, potable water easements, storm drains and appurtenances within street rights-of-way, and other public facilities and appurtenances thereon shown for the purposes therein expressed. 

 
(c)  Health Department Approval to read as follows (subdivisions with septic systems only): 
The lots shown hereon have been reviewed by the Lumpkin County Health County Department and with the exception of lots are approved for development. Each lot is to be reviewed by the Health Department and approved for septic system installation prior to the issuance of a building permit. 

 
(d)  Final Plat Approval to read as follows: 
This subdivision has been reviewed by the Planning Commission and the City and found to be in compliance with Zoning Ordinance, Development Regulations and Subdivision Regulations. The Mayor and City Council hereby approve this Final Plat, subject to the provisions and requirements of the City's regulations. 

 
(e)  The Final Plat shall contain a tabulation of the areas of street rights-of-way, sanitary sewer easements, potable water easements, and other public facilities to be dedicated to the City. 
( Ord. No. 2018-14, 9-4-2018 ) 
ARTICLE VII. - STREET IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS 

Sec. 7.1. - Street improvements. 
Streets, whether abutting or internal, existing or new, shall be constructed or improved under those circumstances and to the standards as established in these Regulations. Roadway improvements shall be in accordance with the street classification system defined in these Regulations. Specific street classification designations shall be as shown in adopted transportation plans of the City or as established by the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
Sec. 7.2. - Minimum right-of-way and pavement widths. 
The minimum widths for rights-of-way and pavements shall be as specified in these Regulations and shown on standard drawings. 
On any existing street having a right-of-way less than the minimum which abuts a property being developed, ½ of the required width of right-of-way, measured to the centerline of the existing right-of-way, shall be dedicated at no cost to the City along the entire property boundary abutting the existing street. 
Additional street right-of-way width may be required to be dedicated at intersections or other locations fronting the property where turning lanes, storage lanes, medians, islands, or realignments are required for traffic safety and minimum right-of-way standards would be inadequate to accommodate these improvements. 
Sec. 7.3. - Street widening. 
When property fronting on an existing City street is to be developed and when the property is to be accessed from the existing City street, roadway improvements (pavement, curb and gutter and drainage) are required along the existing road across the entire property frontage. Required improvements shall not be less than provided in these Regulations for the designated street classification. 
Road widening, curb, gutter, and drainage shall be provided from the centerline of the existing roadway along the side of the road upon which the property abuts. In lieu of installation of curbs and gutters and/or related improvements, the developer must have presented to and received approval by the City for a Street Improvements and Storm Water Drainage Plan for the development and its affected environs. Said plan must provide for adequate storm water drainage and will further address, as a minimum, street grading, paving, curbs and gutters, and or other innovative provisions for said drainage. This plan must conform to the applicable standards and specifications established by the City and be prepared, signed, and sealed by a Georgia registered professional civil engineer. 
The developer shall be responsible for the relocation and/or modifications of public and/or private utilities as necessitated by the required street improvements. 
Sec. 7.4. - New streets. 
All public streets proposed to be constructed in a subdivision or other development shall be designed and constructed at least to the standards contained in these Regulations in accordance with the appropriate street classification of said streets. 
Sec. 7.5. - Substandard streets. 
In the event that a development has access to a substandard street and if that substandard street provides the primary means of access to the development, the substandard street, except as indicated below, shall be fully upgraded along the entire property frontage and continuing to the nearest standard paved road along the route of primary access. 
In the event that a development has access to a substandard street and if that substandard street is other than the primary means of access to the development, the substandard street, except as indicated below, shall be fully upgraded only along the entire property frontage and shall be paved on the opposite side of the road from the development, 12 feet from the street centerline. 
The upgrading of substandard streets used for access will not be required if any of the following conditions are met: 
(a)  The development consists of a single one- or two-family residence on an existing recorded lot within the City; 
(b)  Total traffic on the substandard street is less than 2,000 vehicles per day including projected traffic volume from the development; or 
(c)  The development is a small business with ingress/egress of less than 100 vehicles per day. 
Sec. 7.6. - Acceleration/deceleration lanes. 
Except as indicated, acceleration and deceleration lanes shall be provided for new street and driveway connections to existing streets. The lanes will not be required if any of the following conditions are met: 
(a)  The driveway is for a one- or two-family residence; 
(b)  Total traffic on the existing roadway is less than 2,000 vehicles per day (count of existing traffic must have been made within one year of the development plan submittal date); 
(c)  The driveway is for a small business with ingress/egress of less than 100 vehicles per day; or 
(d)  Construction cost of the lanes exceeds 25 percent of the estimated development cost. 
Sec. 7.7. - Improvements along state and federal highways. 
For any development which abuts a State or Federal highway, improvements to the highway and the location and design of any street or driveway providing access from the highway shall comply with the standards and requirements of the Georgia Department of Transportation. A copy of the approved Georgia DOT permit shall be provided to the City prior to issuance of building permits. 
Sec. 7.8. - Specifications. 
Unless otherwise specifically set forth herein, all of the materials, methods of construction, and workmanship for street construction shall conform to the latest edition of the Georgia Department of Transportation Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction including all amendments. 
Sec. 7.9. - Subgrade preparation. 
(a)  Clear and grub entire street right-of-way before commencing street earthwork construction. For specific technical requirements reference is made to Georgia DOT Specifications Section 201 - Clearing and Grubbing Right-of-Way. Combustible material generated from clearing and grubbing operations may be burned only when authorized and permitted by the Lumpkin County Fire Chief. 
(b)  Conduct street earthwork construction in accordance with Georgia DOT Specification Sections 205 - Roadway Excavation and 208 - Embankments. For purposes of these Regulations, the maximum density of soil material shall be determined by ASTM D 698 (Standard Proctor) test procedures. 
(c)  Complete utility and drainage earthwork before starting street subgrade construction. 
(d)  Perform subgrade construction in accordance with Georgia DOT Specification section 209 - Subgrade Construction. 
(e)  The developer shall provide quality control testing during earthwork and subgrade construction as necessary to ensure the entire earthwork, including all fill layers and subgrades, meet the minimum requirements of these Regulations. The minimum quality control testing to be provided consists of the following: 
(1)  Moisture - density relationship curve for each type [of] soil encountered. 
(2)  For cut areas, one in-place density test (ASTM D 1556 or other recognized method). 
(3)  For fill areas, one in-place density test (ASTM D 1556 or other recognized method) per 1,000 cubic yards or fraction thereof of fill placed. 
(f)  Earthwork which falls below specified minimum quality control limits shall be removed, reconstructed, and retested by the developer until compliance with specified requirements is achieved. 
(g)  After completing street earthwork operations and before beginning street base construction, the developer shall file a copy of the quality control test results demonstrating compliance with these requirements with the City. At any time during the construction process, representative(s) of the City may request to review and the developer shall provide quality control test results. 
Sec. 7.10. - Minimum street sections and design speeds. 
(a)  The minimum street sections are defined in the Subdivision Regulations and in Appendix C, Standard Details, of these Regulations. Specific Details and required design speeds for the standard street classifications are as follows: 
  

 
(b)  Construct street and alley bases in accordance with Georgia DOT Specification Section 300 - Specifications Applying to All Base and Subbase Courses. The following Georgia DOT Specification Sections shall apply to base materials indicated on the Standard Detail Typical Street Sections: 
(1)  Graded Aggregate Base - Section 310 - Graded Aggregate Construction. 
(c)  Construct surface and binder asphaltic paving courses, including prime, in accordance with Georgia DOT Specification Section 400 - Hot Mix Asphaltic Concrete Construction. 
(d)  When street earthwork and paving are complete, the developer shall grass and stabilize all disturbed areas including roadway shoulders which are not covered by paving or other improvements. It shall be the developer's responsibility to maintain grassed areas by watering, fertilizing, weeding, mowing, trimming, regrading, and replanting as required to establish a smooth, acceptable stand of grass free of eroded or bare areas. Grassed areas will be considered acceptable when a viable stand of grass covers at least 90 percent of the total area with no bare spots exceeding one square foot and the ground surface is fully stabilized against erosion. Grassing operations shall meet the technical requirements of Georgia DOT Specification Section 700 - Grassing for Planting Zone 1A. 
(e)  The developer shall provide quality control testing during base and pavement construction as necessary to ensure the entire pavement structure meets the minimum requirements of these Regulations. The minimum quality control testing to be provided consists of the following: 
(1)  Moisture-density relationship curve for each base material used on project. 
(2)  For soil cement base, conduct mix design to determine Portland cement content (percent of dry weight of the soil) to achieve a minimum compressive strength of 300 psi at seven days when testing in accordance with ASTM D 1632 and D 1633. 
(3)  One in-place density test (ASTM D 1556 or other method acceptable to the City) per 1,200 square yards or fraction thereof of base. (4.9 (e) (2) and (3).) 
(4)  One thickness measurement normal to base surface per 1,200 square yards or fraction thereof of base. 
(5)  For base course, one surface tolerance measurement using a 15-foot straight edge per 250 square yards or fraction thereof of base. 
(6)  One asphalt extraction (ASTM D 2172) and aggregate gradation analysis (ASTM C 136) per 2,400 square yards or fraction thereof of surface course and per 2,400 square yards or fraction thereof of binder course (if any). Obtain samples for extraction and gradation tests in accordance with ASTM D 979. 
(7)  One density and compacted thickness measurement per 1,200 square yards or fraction thereof of each course placed. Density determined to be made in accordance with ASTM D 1188. Remove not less than 3-inch diameter nor larger than 12-inch square test specimens. Repair test specimen holes with full depth application of fresh hot asphaltic plant mix. 
(8)  For asphalt extraction, one surface tolerance measurement using 15-foot straight edge per 250 square yards or fraction thereof of surface course. 
(f)  Base and/or paving construction which falls below specified minimum quality control limits shall be removed, reconstructed, and re-tested until compliance with specified requirements is achieved. 
(g)  After completing base and paving construction, the developer shall file a copy of the quality control test results demonstrating compliance with these Regulations with the City. At any time during the construction process, representative(s) of the City may request to review and the developer shall provide quality control test results. 
(h)  In the event the developer desires to utilize base or paving materials or systems not included in these Regulations, the developer shall provide an engineering study prepared by a Georgia registered professional civil engineer comparing the proposed material or system to the appropriate system which is included in these Regulations. The engineering study will include a pavement structural design based on the AASHTO "Guide for Design of Pavement Structures" and suggested specifications for the materials and construction of the proposed system. The City will treat the developer's request through the appeals process described elsewhere in these Regulations. 
Sec. 7.11. - Curb and gutter. 
(a)  All new streets or street widening sections shall be provided with curb and gutter, except as provided herein. All gutters shall drain smoothly with no areas of ponding. In lieu of installation of curbs and gutters and/or related improvements, the developer must have presented to and received approval by the City for a Street Improvements and Storm Water Drainage Plan for the development and its affected environs. Said plan must provide for adequate storm water drainage, and will further address, as a minimum, street grading, paving, and curbs and gutters, and or other innovative provisions for said drainage. This plan must conform to the applicable standards and specifications established by the City and be prepared, signed, and sealed by a Georgia registered professional civil engineer. 
(b)  Concrete used for curb and gutter construction shall have a minimum 3,000 psi compressive strength at 28 days (ASTM C 39); a 2-inch to 4-inch slump (ASTM C 143) and 3 to 6 percent air content (ASTM C 231 or C 173) and shall comply with ASTM C 94. 
(c)  In residential developments, the developer may use either a standard curb and gutter section or a roll back curb and gutter section. In other developments, the developer shall use a standard curb and gutter section. Both sections are shown in Appendix C, Standard Details. 
(d)  Construct curb and gutter true to line, grade and cross section on properly prepared subgrade. Apply Georgia DOT Type 2 membrane curing compound. 
(e)  Protect completed curb and gutter work from damage until dedication to the City. As soon as the curb and gutter will not be damaged, backfill, compact, stabilize and grass adjacent ground to achieve design line and grade. Acceptably repair or replace broken or defective curbs and gutters. 
Sec. 7.12. - Sidewalks. 
Sidewalks shall be provided for all developments within a mile from an existing or proposed school, park, or community center. Sidewalks shall be provided along public streets for all multi-family, commercial, and industrial developments, and in such other locations as deemed necessary by the City for safe pedestrian movement. 
Sec. 7.13. - Traffic control devices. 
Traffic control devices consisting of street name signs, traffic control signs, traffic markings, and traffic signals shall be provided by the developer as appropriate to serve each development. All traffic control devices and installation thereof shall conform to the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, ANSI D6.1e. 
For residential developments, minimum traffic control devices shall consist of street name signs on at each street intersection, stop or yield signs at each intersection, one speed limit sign per block, school or pedestrian crossing signs where appropriate, and limited pavement marking such as crosswalk lines for school or pedestrian crossings. 
Minimum traffic control devices for nonresidential developments shall include those devices for residential developments and lane and centerline markings, stop lines, and parking space markings. Additionally, appropriate other signs and signals shall be provided by the developer. 
Sec. 7.14. - Street lighting. 
The developer shall provide a street lighting standard at each street intersection and at an intervals not exceeding 400 feet. 
Sec. 7.15. - Preparation of street improvement plans. 
Street improvement plans for all new streets, street widenings, and existing street upgrades shall be prepared by a Georgia registered professional civil engineer. At least three (3) copies of the plans shall be submitted to the City for review and comment. Within thirty (30) days of submittal of the plans, the City will either approve the plans or disapprove the plans and provide written comments on items requiring changes and/or additional information. When not approved, the cycle of plan submittal and review will be repeated until the plans can be approved by the City. 
Information to be shown on the plans shall consist of not less than the following: 
(a)  Profiles of existing ground levels along street centerlines and each right-of-way. Field determined elevations shall be indicated at intervals not exceeding 100 feet. Where cross sections are provided at least every 100 feet, only centerline elevations need be shown on the profile. 
(b)  Existing facilities and features within and adjacent to rights-of-way which affect or could be affected by street improvement construction. Items include, but are not limited to, streets, rights-of-way, buildings, parking lots, driveways, fences, and tree lines. 
(c)  All drainage ways, lakes, streams, creeks, channels, wetlands, and drainage facilities. 
(d)  All existing utilities and appurtenances within and adjacent to rights-of-way which affect or could be affected by street improvement construction. The utility type, size, depth, material and location in relation to street improvements must be indicated. 
(e)  Existing and proposed property and easement lines, land lot, and land district lines intersecting street rights-of-way. 
(f)  Limits of new construction. 
(g)  New road improvements, including, but not limited to, curbs and gutters, sidewalks, pavements, driveways, wheel chair ramps, traffic control devices, and street lights (if any). 
(h)  Profiles of each pavement edge or line of curb and gutter with new finished grade elevations at intervals not exceeding 100 feet. 
(i)  Horizontal and vertical street geometry including street centerline angles of deflection, radii, degree of curvature, design speed, tangent lengths, arc lengths, bearings street grades, and lengths of vertical curves. Stations for all points of curve, points of tangency, points of intersection, both horizontal and vertical, must be shown. 
(j)  Benchmarks for vertical control. 
(k)  Name of the development, names, addresses, and telephone numbers of developer and developer's engineer, engineer's seal, north arrow, scale, and date. 
Plans shall be prepared in conformance with the following: 
(a)  Where specific design guidance is not given, in these regulations or other regulations, rules, ordinances, of the City, the AASHTO publication "A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets," latest edition, shall be followed. 
(b)  All elevations shall be based on and tied to U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey mean sea level datum. 
(c)  Plan drawings shall be at a scale of at least 1 inch equals 50 feet. In developed or congested areas, a scale of 1 inch equals 20 feet or less shall be utilized. 
(d)  For profile drawings, the horizontal scale shall be the same as that used for associated plan drawings. The vertical scale shall be at least 1 inch equals 10 feet. A 1 inch equals 5 feet vertical scale is often necessary to properly depict grade changes in flat areas. 
(e)  The desired drawing size is 24 inches by 36 inches. In no case shall drawings be larger than 30 inches by 42 inches nor smaller than 11 inches by 17 inches. 
ARTICLE VIII. - WATER AND SEWER SYSTEMS 

Sec. 8.1. - Approval procedure. 
The following process applies to the approval for the installation of water mains, water systems, sewer mains, sewer systems, and appurtenances in residential and commercial developments to be operated and maintained by the City of Dahlonega. The process includes the following steps: 
(a)  Application and Preliminary Approval; 
(b)  Construction and Inspection; and 
(c)  Final Acceptance. 
Sec. 8.2. - Application and preliminary approval. 
(a)  The Developer must submit to the City three (3) copies of the preliminary plans showing the location and general plan for water and/or sewer systems. If the subdivision is to be constructed in phases, the Developer should also include a general layout of the entire subdivision as well as the more detailed layout of the specific phase(s) to be approved at the time. 
(b)  The City will evaluate the site for water service as well as the potential need for looping easements by conducting flow and pressure tests, and/or computer modeling in the area of the proposed development. 
(c)  The Developer or a representative of the Developer must bring a formal request for water and/or sewer service to the City. The City will take action to commit to serve a specific number of lots in the subdivision as presented, modify the request, or reject the request entirely. The City will also determine the City's participation in water and sewer system construction, as appropriate. 
(d)  If the City commits to serve the proposed development, the Developer must submit to the City a minimum of three (3) sets of plans prior to submission for design and construction approval by the Georgia Environmental Protection Division. The water and sewer system improvements being submitted to the City must be in accord with the most current Design Criteria Standards adopted by the City Council. 
(e)  If the plans submitted to the City for review are approved, two (2) copies of the plans will be retained by the City and the remaining copies will be returned to the Developer. 
(f)  If changes are required, a checklist will be returned to the Developer. 
(g)  After the changes have been made, the Developer must submit three (3) copies of the revised construction plans to the City for review. 
(h)  After review and approval by the City, two (2) copies of the plans stamped "Approved for Design Concept" will be retained by the City and the remaining copies returned to the Developer. 
(i)  The City shall bill the Developer for all research and engineering time on the application and approval process. 
(j)  The plans shall be submitted by the Developer to the Georgia Environmental Protection Division (EPD) for review and approval prior to construction. Should any changes be made to the plans resulting from the EPD review and approval process, the Developer shall provide to the City one (1) set of plans as approved by EPD for construction. 
Sec. 8.3. - Construction and inspection. 
(a)  A representative of the Developer, the installation contractor, and the City shall attend a pre-construction conference at the City at least two (2) working days prior to the start of any construction. The purpose of this conference will be to define roles and responsibilities for the correct execution of the proposed water and/or sewer line installations. 
(b)  All water and/or sewer line installations shall be inspected during construction. This can be accomplished in one of two ways, and the method shall be agreed upon at the pre-construction conference by the Developer and the City: 
(1)  Option A - The design professional engineer shall provide inspection and submit to the City a set of as-built drawings at the completion of all work. The engineer shall certify that all work was installed in accordance with the approved plans and specifications or as modified by change orders which must also be reviewed and accepted by the City. Responsibility for retention of this service is the Developer's. The Developer shall submit as-built drawings and engineering certification to the City before final acceptance of the water and/or sewer lines by the City. 
(2)  Option B - City personnel shall inspect and certify that all work was installed in accordance with the Construction Standards of the City and design provided by the Developer. The City shall receive a set of as-built drawings, as prepared by the design engineer, at the completion of all work. Payment for the inspection services provided by the City will be billed by the City to the Developer within seven (7) days of final inspection. 
(c)  The contractor shall notify the City 24 hours in advance of starting construction. 
(d)  The contractor shall perform all required water and/or sewer line tests. The construction inspector shall be present during testing and keep detailed records for the City. 
(e)  The contractor shall prepare the water lines for bacteriologic testing. It is the sole responsibility of the City to secure the samples and have them tested in an EPD approved water laboratory. The Developer will be notified of the results within four (4) working days. Successful bacteriological testing must be completed prior to the acceptance by the City. 
(f)  The Developer must have an executed Change Order in hand before making any field changes that do not conform to the water and/or sewer line plans approved by EPD. 
Sec. 8.4. - Final approval. 
(a)  The Developer shall submit to the City three (3) copies of the as-built drawings stamped by a registered civil engineer. If the Developer's design engineer inspected the job, the engineer certification must be submitted at this time as well. 
(b)  The City Manager will make final acceptance for ownership of the water and/or sewer line installations. The Developer shall submit to the City a copy of the final subdivision plat for certification, with respect to easements dedicated to the City. 
Sec. 8.5. - Design criteria. 
GENERAL. 
(a)  A horizontal separation of at least 10 feet must be maintained between the water main and any existing or proposed parallel sewer. When water mains cross sewers, a minimum vertical separation of 18 inches must be provided between the two pipes (measured edge to edge), and the water main must cross over the sewer line. At crossings, one full length of water pipe must be located so that both joints are as far from the sewer as possible. 
(b)  The minimum cover over water and sewer lines shall be three (3) feet. 
(c)  All elevation data shall be referenced to mean sea level (MSL). 
(d)  A project location map shall be provided on the drawings. 
(e)  The drawings shall bear the following notes: 
(1)  The City of Dahlonega shall be notified 24 hours prior to any water or sewer line construction or repair. Call City Hall at (706) 864-6133. 
(2)  All water main and sanitary sewer materials and workmanship shall be in accordance with the City of Dahlonega Design Criteria. 
(3)  The Contractor shall be responsible for maintaining a marked-up set of design drawings showing "as-built" conditions. These "record drawings" shall be made available to the designer and/or the City Inspector upon request. The mark-ups shall be at the site at all times and shall be utilized to develop final record drawings. 
(f)  The following note shall appear on the final plat and/or as-built drawing: 
Owners Dedication Certificate 
City of Dahlonega 
Lumpkin County, Georgia 
The owner of the land shown on this plat and whose name is subscribed thereto, and in person or through a duly authorized agent, acknowledges that this plat was made from an actual survey and dedicated to the City of Dahlonega forever, all water mains, sanitary sewers, easements, and associated appurtenances thereon shown. 

 
(g)  Contractors and subcontractors are required to possess a business license to work within the applicable jurisdiction. Proof of said license and all other applicable permits (County Erosion Control, DOT, etc.) shall be on the job site. 
WATER LINES INSTALLED WITHIN SUBDIVISIONS. 
(a)  Water lines shall have a minimum diameter of 6 inches. The lines must be large enough to meet the residential demand of the proposed subdivision and fire flow requirements combined. Acceptable fire flow is a minimum of 500 gpm at 20 psi. The residential demand is determined as follows: 
  

 
  
(b)  Looping and Easements. 
(1)  The overall distribution plan adhered to by the City utilized extensive looping of water lines. This looping provides adequate fire flow protection while eliminating dead ends and stagnated water. 
(2)  It is the City's policy to require 20-foot-wide utility easements between lots in new subdivisions where a loop cannot be installed to connect to another subdivision or main line in the future. The design engineer should determine the location of possible future development around the proposed subdivision, consider the ease of construction of a loop to the future development, and discuss these with the City. All easements must be shown on the plans and on the final recorded plat as 20-foot utility easements dedicated to the City of Dahlonega. 
(3)  The Developer must lay the water line along the entire length of each required easement to the adjoining property with a dead-end gate valve at the end. 
(4)  Water lines are to be installed only on dedicated rights-of-way and centered within the easement. In general, easements dedicated to the City will be entered by City personnel for maintenance purposes only. Non-permanent structures such as fences, shrubs, and trees shall be allowed within the water line easement. 
(c)  Subdivision water lines shall have a minimum cover of 3 feet to the top of the pipe. 
(d)  Pipe and Fittings. 
(1)  All water main piping shall be a minimum of 8 inches and shall be ductile iron pipe (DIP) and shall conform to AWWA C 151 with a minimum pressure class 350 or thickness class 52 unless otherwise specified or shown on the drawings. Pipe and fittings shall be cement lined in accordance with AWWA C 104. 
(2)  Fittings shall be mechanical joint compact ductile iron and conform to AWWA C 153 with rated working pressure of 350 PSI or AWWA C 110 with rated working pressure of 250 PSI. 
(e)  A ¾-inch service tap and corporation stop for chlorination shall be indicated on the plans within 3 to 5 feet from the beginning point of the water line installation. 
(f)  All services crossing streets inside the subdivision shall be installed inside 1½-inch or 2-inch Class 160 PVC conduit. Conduit shall extend to a minimum of 5 feet on each side of the curb/pavement. 
(g)  Developer shall be responsible for contacting the power company and determining where the transformers will be positioned so as to avoid conflict with meter set and fire hydrant locations. 
WATER LINES INSTALLED OUTSIDE OF SUBDIVISION SITE. 
(a)  All piping and fittings shall conform to the design criteria for water lines installed within subdivisions as a minimum. More stringent criteria may be required at the City's discretion. 
(b)  Water lines shall be located within 5 feet of the right-of-way limits with a minimum cover of 36 inches on county roads, state routes, and federal highways. All bores shall have steel casing with PVC carrier pipe, with the casing length equal to the width of the pavement plus 10 feet on each side. 
(c)  If any portion of a project is within a Georgia DOT right-of-way, then a DOT permit application will be required. The Developer must prepare a complete application package and provide it to the City for submittal to the Georgia DOT. 
(d)  Crossings of large streams wider than 15 feet shall require TR Flex D.I. pipe as manufactured by U.S. Pipe or approved equal. 
FIRE HYDRANTS. 
(a)  Fire hydrants are to be spaced a maximum distance of 750 feet apart inside a proposed subdivision and a maximum of 1,000 feet outside the subdivision, measured from hydrant to hydrant along the roadway. 
(b)  Hydrants are to be set within a foot of the right-of-way limits on any street or road and are to be set on property lines where possible. 
(c)  Fire hydrants shall be required at the end of all dead-end lines such as those installed in cul-de-sacs. 
(d)  Each fire hydrant shall have a 6-inch gate valve bolted directly to a hydrant tee. 
(e)  No fire hydrants shall be placed on water mains which are smaller than 8 inches in diameter unless the main is "looped" or the Developer can show the farthest hydrant can maintain a flow of 500 gpm at 20 psi. 
(f)  In commercial and industrial areas, fire hydrants shall be placed such that the maximum hose lay (as a truck travels) shall be no greater than 300 feet, unless the Fire Department requires closer spacing for specific reasons. 
(g)  As a minimum, fire hydrants shall be placed such that the maximum hose lay (as a truck travels) shall be no greater than 500 feet in single-family residential areas and 350 feet in multi-family residential housing complexes. Note: The Fire Chief should be contacted to determine if stricter requirements are in order for specific project types. 
(h)  Fire hydrants shall be three-way hydrants with a 4½-inch valve opening. They shall be Clow F 2545 M.J. 
(i)  Gate valves shall be installed on all hydrant leads. 
(j)  Valve location markers shall be installed for all valves (except hydrant lead valves). The markers shall be four feet long concrete posts with brass discs cast into one side. The marker posts shall extend from ½ to 18 inches above finished grade. 
VALVES. 
(a)  Gate Valves. 
(1)  Gate valves size 3 inches and larger shall be resilient seat wedge type and shall conform with the specifications of the American Water Works Association, Designation C509 with a wall thickness that meets or exceeds AWWA C 153, latest edition rated for 200 psi minimum working pressure. Gate valves shall be equipped with "O" ring stem seals above and below stem thrust collar. Gate valves for use on mechanical joint ductile iron pipe and slip joint ductile iron pipe shall have manufacturer's standardized mechanical joint ends. Gate valve body and bonnet shall be ductile or cast iron and shall be fusion bonded, interior and exterior, with epoxy coating which conforms to AWWA C 550, latest edition. 
(2)  Water mains in which the valves are installed shall be tested as specified and the valve must remain water tight under this pressure in each direction. 
(3)  Valves shall open counter clockwise, be designed for vertical installation, be the non-rising stem type, and shall have 2-inch square operating nut. 
(4)  Valves shall be equipped with valve boxes. Provide extension stem where required to bring the operating nut to within 12 inches of ground surface. Extension connection shall be with wrench nut coupling; no set screw allowed. 
(5)  All gate valves shall be manufactured by Mueller, M & H Valve, American-Darling, U.S. Pipe, Clow, or approved equal. 
(b)  Butterfly Valves. 
(1)  Butterfly valves shall be resilient seated, short body design and shall conform to AWWA C 504 latest edition. Valves shall be Class 250 (250 psi bi-directional shut-off rating, 500 psi body hydrostatic shell test, fusion bonded epoxy coated interior and exterior, and maximum line velocity of 16 feet per second). Valves shall be Mueller, M & H Valve, Clow, Dezurik, or Pratt. Certified test results shall be furnished with each valve. 
(c)  Every tee shall have two valves away from the source, and every cross shall have three valves away from the source. 
(d)  An inline valve shall be installed every 1,000 feet of water line within a subdivision, and every 1,000 feet outside of a subdivision. 
(e)  All connections to existing water mains shall be made with tapping sleeves and tapping valves. All back-taps should be shown on the drawings and labeled as such. 
(f)  Tapping valves shall be Mueller Model H-687 or H-667, M & H Style 3751-NRS or 751, or American Darling No. 864 or 565. Sleeves shall be Mueller Model H-615, M & H Style 1174-01, or American Darling mechanical joint, Tyler Model 5-149-D1, or U.S. Pipe T-9 M.J. 
(g)  All stub-out valves and dead-end valves shall be shown to have a mechanical joint cap on the plans. 
SERVICES. 
(a)  Meters and backflow preventers shall be installed by the City. The City will make all service connections and collect fees for each meter set. 
(b)  Water service lines on the City side of the meter shall be copper tubing with brass fittings conforming to ASTM B88, Type K and ANSI B 16.26 respectively. 
BACKFLOW PREVENTION. 
(a)  Backflow prevention devices shall be required on all housing and on all commercial, industrial, and institutional establishments' water service lines. 
(b)  As a minimum, commercial, industrial, and institutional establishments and multi-family housing shall install and maintain double check valve assemblies in a separate vault immediately downstream from the City's meter. 
(c)  Establishments determined to present a high hazard backflow potential shall be required to install and maintain reduced pressure zone (RPZ) backflow preventers. 
(d)  Double detector check valves shall be installed on all fire sprinkler mains. Valves shall be housed in a vault as close to the City main as is possible. A double check valve and a detector check valve in combination may be provided in lieu of the double detector check. 
SEWER LINES INSTALLED INSIDE AND OUTSIDE SUBDIVISIONS. 
(a)  A 30' 0" permanent, recorded easement shall be required on all 8-inch diameter and larger sanitary sewers. The sewer shall be on the centerline of the easement. No permanent buildings or structures shall be built within easements. 
(b)  Minimum slope for 8-inch and larger gravity sanitary sewer pipe shall be 0.50%, the maximum slope shall be 15.0%. 
(c)  Gravity sanitary sewer pipe material shall be vitrified clay, ductile iron pipe or SDR 26 PVC unless depth of cover is 20 feet or greater, less than 4 feet, or the sewer is to be laid in fill area. In these cases, the pipe shall be ductile iron, Class 51. 
(d)  Bedding for sanitary sewers shall meet the following: Embedment materials shall be angular graded crushed stone, ¼-inch to ¾-inch in size with no more than 5% passing a No. 8 standard sieve in accordance with Class I materials as defined in ASTM D 2321 Section 5.1.1. 
(e)  Sanitary sewer force mains shall be ductile iron pipe, Class 50 minimum. 
(f)  Service lateral pipe material shall be vitrified clay or SDR 26 PVC sewer pipe. If PVC sewer service is used, the connection to the VC sewer main shall be made with an appropriate bell donut and clay wye. The bell donut shall be equivalent to those manufactured by Fernco, Inc. 
(g)  Cleanouts shall be placed on all building service laterals at the point at which City maintenance terminates. This point shall be the curb line, the property line, the right-of-way line, or the easement line as applicable. Cleanouts shall be 6 inches and have a brass cap. 
(h)  Manhole frames and covers shall be Vulcan V-1480-1, U.S. Foundry 362, or equivalent. If equivalent rings and covers are proposed, they shall be approved by the City prior to installation. 
(i)  At the point of connection in manholes the invert of building service lines shall be placed, as a minimum, at the crown of the City sewer. 
(j)  The minimum diameter of gravity sanitary sewer pipe shall be 8 inches with the exception of sewer service line which may be a minimum of 4 inches. 
(k)  Manholes shall be placed at all changes in direction and grade of sanitary sewers. Manholes shall be spaced such that the distance between manholes does not exceed 350 feet. 
(l)  Outside drop connections shall be constructed at manholes on all influent sewers where the invert elevation is greater than 2 feet over the invert elevation of the effluent sewer. 
(m)  Sewage pumping stations will not be permitted unless the Developer can demonstrate extreme hardship would result if the station were denied. Pumping stations will be discouraged and therefore, only permitted on a case-by-case basis. 
(n)  All sewage pumping stations shall have an auxiliary power source. Additionally, they shall be provided with a remote telemetry system compatible with the City's existing system. 
(o)  Plans and profiles showing all utility and pipeline crossings as well as existing and proposed grades shall be provided for all sanitary sewers. Building services are excepted. 
(p)  Sewer maintenance access shall be maintained on all sanitary sewer easements. Maintenance access is defined as grades, soil compaction and slopes which allow a sewer jet truck (weighing approximately 50,000 pounds) to navigate easily. Maximum slope shall not exceed 20%. 
WASTEWATER PRETREATMENT. 
(a)  Sand traps and oil separators with sample station manholes shall be installed in all sanitary sewer service lines from service stations, garages, and similar operations. Domestic sewage shall not pass through sand traps or oil separators. 
(b)  Grease traps and sample station manholes shall be installed in process waste lines of all sanitary service sewers for commercial, industrial, and institutional establishments with food preparation areas. 
(c)  If dumpster pad drains are to be tied onto the sanitary sewer, a grease trap and sample station manhole shall be placed between the pad and the City sewer. Domestic wastewater shall be excluded from the trap. Food process waste streams may utilize the same trap if sized appropriately. 
(d)  Rainwater shall be prevented from entering the sanitary sewer at all dumpster pad locations. Method must be detailed on drawings. 
(e)  Grease trap and oil separator details shall appear on the project drawings and shall be approved prior to installation. 
(f)  Oil separators shall be sized to handle two (2) times the expected flow rate. 
(g)  Grease traps shall be sized as necessary with the minimum allowable size being 1,000 gallons. If a dumpster pad is tied into the grease trap the minimum size is 1,500 gallons. 
(h)  Sample station manholes may be required on all commercial, industrial, and institutional sanitary service sewers. 
PLANS FOR PROPOSED SUBDIVISION WATER AND SEWER SYSTEM. 
(a)  Design engineer/Developer is to submit drawings on 24" x 36" paper stamped by a professional engineer registered in Georgia. Water and sewer line details included in Appendix C are part of the plans and specifications. Only special details not included in Appendix C should be shown on the drawings. Drainage design details, erosion control, and other plans required by the City should not be submitted with the water and sewer line plans. 
(b)  Scale is to be 1" = 100'. 
(c)  Site plans shall include: 
(1)  Streets and street names with lot layout and district; 
(2)  Location of storm drains, drainage easements, and any retention ponds; 
(3)  Location map and topography of subdivision; 
(4)  Water line layout with all gate valves, air release valves, fittings, tapping sleeves, hydrants, chlorination taps, and sampling station including materials and size labels for each; 
(5)  Any rock outcroppings; 
(6)  All easements with labels; 
(7)  City road and DOT rights-of-way; 
(8)  Existing water lines, hydrants, and valves in surrounding area including materials and size labels for each; 
(9)  Service laterals; 
(10)  Water line legend with symbols; 
(11)  Details of special water line installations such as stream crossings, elevated lines on piers, bridges, etc.; 
(12)  All pad-mounted electrical transformers; and 
(13)  Project name with specific phase(s) to be reviewed for approval clearly marked red on the plans. 
(d)  All proposed water lines and appurtenances shall have a line weight equivalent to a #3 pen. All other lines shall have a line weight equivalent to a #1 or #2 pen. 
(e)  If the subdivision consists of multiple phases or units, two copies of the overall subdivision plan shall be submitted with the phase(s) or unit(s) being requested for approval. Scales of the overall plans may vary. 
AS-BUILT DRAWINGS. 
(a)  As-builts must be submitted before a project can receive final approval by the City. 
(b)  Copies must be clear, clean, and legible. 
(c)  Drawings shall include a site plan of the water and sewer lines and appurtenances as they were installed with any shop drawings needed for clarification or as requested by the City. 
(d)  As-built drawings must be on Mylar, 24" x 36" in size, and stamped by a Professional Engineer registered in the State of Georgia. 
ARTICLE IX. - GRADING AND DRAINAGE 

Sec. 9.1. - Site grading. 
Site grading shall be done in accordance with the finished grades shown on the approved development drawings. Site grades shall direct surface drainage away from buildings without causing adverse impact on adjacent properties. 
The maximum slopes for soil cut or fill shall be two feet of horizontal run for each foot of vertical rise or fall except for stable rock slopes. If actual soils encountered require a flatter slope for stability, the lesser slope shall be used. 
Soil erosion and sediment control measures shall be provided as required in the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Ordinance. 
Sec. 9.2. - Drainage. 
Provisions for storm water drainage and detention designs are given in the City of Dahlonega Drainage Manual which is incorporated in these Regulations as Appendix A. 
Sec. 9.3. - Specifications for drainage construction. 
Specifications for drainage construction are included herein as Appendix B, Specifications for Utility and Drainage Construction. 
Sec. 9.4. - Preparation of grading and drainage plans. 
Grading and drainage plans for all developments except individual one- and/or two-family dwelling units, shall be prepared by a Georgia registered professional engineer or landscape architect. At least three copies of the plans and detention study shall be submitted to the City for review and comment. Within thirty days of submittal of the plans, the City will either approve the plans or make comment on items requiring changes and/or additional information. When not approved, the cycle of plan submittal and review will be repeated until the plans can be approved by the City. 
Information to be shown on the plans shall consist of not less than the following: 
(a)  Topographic map of the existing conditions for the development showing existing facilities and features which affect or could be affected by grading and drainage improvements. Utilize a contour interval of not greater than two feet with spot elevations as necessary to define existing ground surfaces. 
(b)  All drainageways, lakes, streams, creeks, swales, ditches, channels, wetlands, and drainage facilities. 
(c)  All existing utilities and appurtenances which affect or could be affected by grading and drainage improvements. The utility type, size and location in relation to grading and drainage improvements should be indicated. 
(d)  Existing and proposed property and easement lines and land lot and land district lines intersecting or bounding grading and drainage improvements. 
(e)  Finished grades depicted by finished contours and/or spot elevations as necessary to define finished grade surfaces. 
(f)  New drainage improvements, including, but not limited to, pipes, culverts, catch basins, area drains, drop inlets, junction boxes, headwalls, berms, dikes and detention basins with outlet works. The drainage areas tributary to each drainage structure, design flow, and time of concentration shall be indicated. 
(g)  Profiles of storm drains showing existing and finished ground surfaces, pipes, drainage structures with top and flow line elevations, distances from centerline to centerline of drainage structures, pipe and ditch grades, crossing utilities, and limits of special construction. 
(h)  Benchmarks for vertical control. 
(i)  Name of the development, names, addresses and telephone numbers of developer and developer's design professional, design professional's seal, north arrow, scale, and date. 
Plans shall be prepared in conformance with the following: 
(a)  All elevations shall be based on and tied to U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey mean sea level datum. 
(b)  Plan drawings shall be at a scale of at least 1 inch equals 100 feet. In developed or congested areas, a scale of 1 inch equals 20 feet or less shall be utilized. 
(c)  For profile drawings, the horizontal scale shall be the same as that used for the associated plan drawings. The vertical scale shall be at least 1 inch equals 10 feet. A 1 inch equals 5 feet vertical scale is often necessary to properly depict drainage conditions. 
(d)  The desired drawing size is 24 inches by 36 inches. In no case shall drawings be larger than 30 inches by 42 inches nor smaller than 11 inches by 17 inches. 
(e)  Drainage construction may be shown on street or utilities improvements plans provided the resulting drawings are clear, legible and plainly show all necessary information. 
ARTICLE X. - FEES 
Fees for subdivision plat review, development plan review, copies of these Regulations, appeals, waivers, re-inspections, and other items are on file with the City Clerk and may be altered or amended from time to time by the City Council to help defray the costs of the administration of these Regulations. Subdivision plat and development plan review fees shall be paid at the time plats and plans are submitted for review. 
ARTICLE XI. - ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT, APPEAL, AND VIOLATIONS 

Sec. 11.1. - Administration and enforcement. 
These Regulations shall be administered, interpreted, and enforced by the City Manager or the City Manager's designated representative. 
In any case in which activities are undertaken in violation of these Regulations, not in compliance with the provisions of a permit issued by the City, or without authorization of a permit which would otherwise be required, the City Manager is hereby authorized to order that all unauthorized or improper work be stopped, direct correction of deficiencies, or take any other legal or administrative action appropriate to the severity of the violation and degree of threat to the public's health, safety and welfare. 
It shall be the duty and responsibility of the City Manager to maintain an accurate and up-to-date compilation of these Regulations, including Appendices, and all amendments, and to publish said compilation and make it available to the public for a fee set by the City Council. 
Sec. 11.2. - Appeal and waiver of the regulations. 
It is the intention of this Ordinance that all questions arising in connection with the interpretation and enforcement of these Regulations first be presented to the City Manager and that such questions shall be presented to the Board of Zoning Appeals only on appeal from the decision of the City Manager. 
Requests of waivers of the requirements of these Regulations shall be submitted in a form as prescribed by the City Manager along with such fee as shall be established by the City Council. The City Manager shall coordinate the review of each waiver request by all other affected City departments and shall summarize such comments and/or recommendations as may be received to the Board of Zoning Appeals for final action in their normal course of business. 
Sec. 11.3. - Violation and penalty. 
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this Ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined, as determined by the Criminal Court of the City of Dahlonega, for each offense. Each day such violations continues shall constitute a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
ARTICLE XII. - APPEALS PROCEDURE 

Sec. 12.1. - Appeals, hearings, and notice. 
Appeals to the Board of Appeals may be initiated by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department, board, or bureau of the City. Such appeal shall be taken within a reasonable time, as provided by the rules of the Board by filing with the officer from whom the appeal is taken and with the Board's notice of said appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The City Manager shall forthwith transmit to the Board all papers constituting the record from which the action appealed was taken. 
An appeal stays all legal proceeding in furtherance of the action appealed, unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the Board, after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with the officer, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in the officer's opinion, cause imminent peril to life and property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the Board or by a court of record on application, on notices to the officer from whom the appeal is taken, and on due cause shown. 
The Board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal or other matter referred to it, and give public notice thereof, as well as due notice to the parties of interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. At the hearing any party may appear in person, by agent, or by attorney. 
Sec. 12.2. - Powers and duties. 
The Board of Zoning Appeals shall have the following powers and duties: 
•  To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the City Manager in the enforcement of this Ordinance. 
•  To authorize, upon appeal, in specific cases a variance from the terms of this Ordinance as will not be contrary to the public interest, where a literal enforcement of the provisions of the Ordinance will, in an individual case, result in unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of the Ordinance shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. Such variance may be granted in such individual case of unnecessary hardship upon a finding by the Board of Zoning Appeals that: 
(a)  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape, or topography; 
(b)  The application of the Ordinance to this particular piece of property would create an unnecessary hardship; 
(c)  Such conditions are peculiar to the particular piece of property involved; and 
(d)  Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public good or impair the purpose and intent of this Ordinance, provided, however, that no variance may be granted for a use of land or building or structure that is prohibited in a given district by the Zoning Ordinance. 
•  To decide on other matters where a decision of the Board of Zoning Appeals may be specifically required by the provisions of this Ordinance. In exercising these powers, the Board of Zoning Appeals may reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or may modify the order, requirements, decision, or determination, and to that end shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken and may issue or direct the issuance of a permit. The Board, in the execution of the duties for which appointed, may subpoena witnesses and in case of contempt may certify such fact to the Superior Court. 
Sec. 12.3. - Certiorari from decisions. 
Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Board of Zoning of Appeals shall have the right of certiorari to the Superior Court within thirty (30) days after the decision of the Board is rendered. 
ARTICLE XIII. - AMENDMENTS 

Sec. 13.1. - Authority. 
This Ordinance may be amended from time to time by the City Council as herein specified, but no amendment shall become effective unless it has been submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission at a public hearing for review and recommendation. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall have 30 days from the date of the hearing to submit its recommendation to the City Council. If the Planning and Zoning Commission fails to submit a report within the 30-day period, it shall be deemed to have approved the proposed amendment. 
Sec. 13.2. - Requirements for change. 
When the public necessity, general welfare, or good development practices justify such action, and after the required review and report by the Planning and Zoning Commission, the City Council may undertake the necessary steps to amend these Regulations. 
Sec. 13.3. - Procedure for amendments. 
Requests to amend these Regulations shall be processed in accordance with the following requirements: 
(a)  Initiation of amendments. A proposed amendment to these Regulations may be initiated by the City Council, Board of Zoning Appeals, the Planning and Zoning Commission, the City Manager, or by application filed with the City Manager by a developer or citizen. 
(b)  Application Procedure. Each request for amendment of these Regulations shall be submitted in a form as prescribed by the City Manager along with such fee as shall be established by the City Council. Applications for amendments must be submitted in proper form at least 25 days prior to a Planning and Zoning Commission hearing in order to be heard at that hearing. 
ARTICLE XIV. - LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS 

Sec. 14.1. - Conflict with other regulations. 
Whenever the regulations of this Ordinance require or impose more restrictive standards than are required in or under any other statutes, the requirements of this Ordinance shall govern. Whenever the provisions of any other statute require more restrictive standards than are required by this Ordinance, the provisions of such statute shall govern. 
Sec. 14.2. - Severability. 
Should any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or provision of this Ordinance be declared invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such declaration shall not affect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole or any part thereof which is not specifically declared to be invalid or unconstitutional. 
Sec. 14.3. - Effective date. 
These Regulations shall be in full force and effective on ___________________, 2000, following adoption by the City Council and shall apply to any subdivision or development for which the first submittal of a Preliminary Plat or development plan are received after the effective date of these Regulations. 
APPENDIX A. - DRAINAGE MANUAL[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— The drainage manual is not included herein but is on file in the office of the city clerk. 

APPENDIX B. - STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS - DAHLONEGA, GA 

Sec. 02112. - Route clearing. 
PART 1 - GENERAL 
DESCRIPTION OF WORK: 
The extent of route clearing is that minimum degree of clearing necessary to install utilities and appurtenances, and such additional clearing as may be shown on the drawings or required by other documents. 
Route clearing operations include, but are not limited to, the following: 
Protecting existing trees and other vegetation. 
Removing trees and other vegetation. 
Clearing. 
Removing above-grade improvements. 
Removing underground improvements. 
Restoring damaged improvements. 
Protecting above-grade and underground improvements. 
JOB CONDITIONS: 
Protection of Existing Improvements: 
Provide barricades, coverings, or other types of protection necessary to prevent unnecessary damage to existing improvements. 
Protect improvements on adjoining properties as well as those along the project route. Restore improvements damaged by this work to their original condition, as acceptable to the owners or other parties or authorities having jurisdiction. Have property line monuments (such as iron pins) removed or disturbed by clearing operations, replaced by a Georgia registered land surveyor. 
Protection of Existing Trees and Vegetation: Protect existing trees and other vegetation against unnecessary cutting, breaking or skinning of roots, skinning and bruising of bark, smothering of trees by stockpiling construction materials or excavated materials within drip lines, excess foot or vehicular traffic, or parking of vehicles or equipment within drip line. Provide temporary fences, barricades or guards as required to protect trees and vegetation to be left standing. 
Provide protection for ornamental tree roots over 1.5 inches diameter that are cut during any construction operation. Coat the cut faces with an emulsified asphalt, or other acceptable coating, especially formulated for horticultural use on cut or damaged plant tissues. Temporarily cover all exposed roots of ornamental trees with wet burlap to prevent roots from drying out; provide earth cover as soon as possible. 
Repair or replace unnecessarily damaged trees and vegetation, as determined by the City, resulting from any construction operation, in a manner acceptable to the property owner and the City. Tree damage repair shall be performed by a qualified tree surgeon. Replace unnecessarily damaged trees which cannot be repaired and restored to full-growth status, as determined by the tree surgeon. 
Protection of Adjacent Property: 
Protect improvements, trees and vegetation on adjoining property as well as those on property requiring route clearing work. 
Execute work so as not to create a nuisance to persons utilizing adjacent property. 
Use work methods and provide temporary facilities as necessary to prevent washing, erosion, siltation or dust damage, or hazard to persons and property, within and off the work area. 
PART 2 - PRODUCTS 
Not applicable to work of this section. 
PART 3 - EXECUTION 
CLEARING: 
Remove vegetation, trees, lawns, shrubbery, gardens and other plant growth to the minimum practicable extent. Limit clearing to a single lane work route without provision for construction vehicles to pass utility operation. Accurately determine limitations of construction easements or rights-of-way, and keep construction activity within such limits. 
Remove lawn sod by cutting into maximum size which can be handled without tearing, stripping sod and underlying topsoil, and stockpiling for use in restoring the surface area. Water sod and otherwise maintain sod in viable, growing condition. 
Remove above-grade structures only where specifically authorized. 
Remove conflicting fences and provide effective temporary measures to prevent stock, cattle or other domestic animals from wandering to other lands. Reconstruct fences promptly. 
Remove abandoned underground facilities such as utilities and structures, walls, footings, basements, wells, septic tanks, tanks, underground pipe, and other items which conflict with construction. 
HOLES AND DEPRESSIONS: 
Fill holes, depressions and voids created or exposed by clearing operations with non-organic soil material, unless further excavation or earthwork is indicated. 
Place fill material in horizontal layers not exceeding six inches loose depth, and thoroughly compact to a density at least equal to adjacent original ground. 
DISPOSAL OF WASTE MATERIALS: 
Disposal General Requirements: 
Accomplish disposal of cleared matter daily so as to maintain site in a safe and neat condition throughout the construction period. 
Burning of cleared materials on the work site is only allowed when authorized and permitted by the Fire Chief. 
On-Site Disposal: 
Unless property owner requests complete removal, cut tree trunks and limbs, over two inches in diameter, into 24-inch lengths and neatly stack within work limits having the same property ownership as that on which the tree originally grew. 
On undeveloped property, distribute brush, trees and limbs less than two inches in diameter, within the work area from which cut, in such a way as not to be objectionable to the property owner. On developed property, remove all such clearing waste and legally dispose of it. 
END SECTION 02112 
Sec. 02204. - Trenching and backfilling. 
PART I - GENERAL 
DESCRIPTION OF WORK: 
Trenching and backfilling operations include, but are not limited to, all earthwork associated with installation, modification, or abandonment of underground utilities and appurtenances, and restoration of damaged improvements and disturbed surfaces. 
Related work specified elsewhere includes, but is not limited to, the following: 
Route Clearing, Section 02112. 
Sampling and Testing: 
Provide quality control testing during construction as necessary to ensure the entire earthwork including all fill layers, subgrades, and bases meets specified requirements. Remove and reconstruct, or otherwise correct work which falls below specified density or is outside other specified limits. 
Employ, at Contractor's expense, an independent testing laboratory to perform quality control testing during trenching and backfilling operations. 
The City may perform sampling, surveying, inspection or testing activity during construction for its use, but such activity does not relieve the Contractor from responsibility to achieve specified results. 
SUBMITTALS: 
Quality Control Testing Reports: After completing utility earthwork construction and prior to acceptance by the City, the Contractor must file a copy of the quality control test results demonstrating compliance with these specifications with the City. At any time during the construction process, representatives of the City may request to review and the Contractor shall provide quality control test results. 
SITE INFORMATION: 
Verify existing site grades to be substantially consistent with grades shown on the drawings before commencing work. Report any significant conflict in grades to the design engineer before proceeding. 
Subsurface conditions presented, if any, are not intended as representations or warrants of continuity of such conditions between soil borings or pits. It is expressly understood that the Contractor is solely responsible for interpretations or conclusions drawn therefrom. Data are made available for the convenience of the Contractor who may, without cost to the City, perform additional test borings and other exploratory operations, provided such operations are acceptable to the City. 
Existing Utilities: Locate all existing underground utilities in the areas of work including verification of nature and exact location of any utility indicated on drawings. If utilities are to remain in place, provide adequate means of protection during earthwork operations. 
Should unexpected piping or other utilities be encountered during excavation, consult the utility owner immediately for directions. Cooperate with City and other utility companies in keeping respective services and facilities in operation. Repair damaged utilities to satisfaction of utility owner. 
Do not interrupt utilities serving existing facilities except when permitted in writing by City and then only within time periods acceptable to the City. 
Demolish and completely remove from site existing underground utilities indicated to be removed. Coordinate with utility companies for shut-off of services if lines are active. 
Traffic Control: Schedule and conduct Work in a manner which will minimize inconvenience to vehicular and pedestrian traffic. Provide flaggers, barricades, warning signs, warning lights, and other warning means as appropriate. Flaggers, when utilized, must hold a valid Georgia D.O.T. flagging certificate. Maintain traffic on all roads and streets which must be crossed by trenching and making two separate cuts so that at least one traffic lane is open at all times. All traffic controls during construction must conform to Part VI of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, ANSI D6.1e. 
PART 2 - PRODUCTS 
RIP RAP STABILIZATION: 
Soil-Cement Bag Rip-Rap: 
Cement: ASTM C 150 Portland Cement, Type I or II. 
Soil: Select site excavation material of finely selected earth, stone dust, sand or similar material. 
Bags: Cotton or burlap, capable of containing the soil-cement mixture without leakage during handling and placing. Do not use bags which have previously been used for sugar, or other material which will adversely affect the soil-cement mixture. Provide bags with a capacity between one cubic foot minimum and two cubic feet maximum. 
Stone Rip-Rap: Individual stones not less than 6 inches thick nor 12 inches wide, not more than 2 cubic feet in volume and of proper shape to bring structures to accurate lines, shapes and elevations. Provide stone free of rounded, or worn surfaces and also free of segregation, seams, cracks, pyrite intrusions and other defects tending to reduce weather resistance. 
PART 3 - EXECUTION 
PROTECTION OF PERSONS AND PROPERTY: 
Prior to commencing other work, accurately locate above and below ground utilities and structures which may be affected by the Work, using whatever means be appropriate. Mark the location of existing utilities and structures, not otherwise readily visible, with flagging, stakes, barricades, or other suitable means. 
Barricade open excavations and post warning lights for safety of persons. Operate warning lights during hours from dusk to dawn each day. 
Protect structures, utilities, sidewalks, pavements, and other facilities immediately adjacent to excavations, from damage caused by settlement, lateral movement, undermining, washout and other hazards. 
Take precautions and provide necessary bracing and shoring to guard against movement or settlement of existing improvements or new construction. Contractor is entirely responsible for strength and adequacy of bracing and shoring, and for safety and support of construction from damage or injury caused by the lack thereof or by movement or settlement. 
Use work methods and provide temporary facilities as necessary to prevent washing, erosion, siltation or dust damage, or hazard to persons and property, within and outside the work area. 
Place excavated material compactly alongside of the trench, and keep such material trimmed up so as to present the least practicable inconvenience to the public. Where necessitated by traffic conditions, remove from the roadway the first material excavated from a working length of trench so that further excavation is immediately used for backfilling, and thereby avoid stockpiling of material upon the roadway. Afterward, return first excavated material if needed for final backfilling. 
Maintain all streets, alleys, sidewalks, pipe crossings, fire hydrants, water and gas valves, and other utilities accessible for their intended use except while the work is steadily advancing in the immediate vicinity of each such facility. 
Keep every drain, gutter, culvert, sewer, and surface drainage route encountered, open for both temporary and permanent flow unless other effective provision for drainage is made. 
Do not permit any hazardous condition to result from trenching and backfilling operations. 
USE OF EXPLOSIVES: 
Do not bring explosives onto site or use in work without prior written permission from authorities having jurisdiction. 
Use explosives only as legally permitted and when other work methods are impractical. 
Do not permit explosives on the project site other than during the least practicable use period. 
Assume sole responsibility for handling, storage, and use of any explosive materials. 
TRENCHING: 
Trenching consists of removal and disposal of material encountered to obtain required subgrade elevations, usually, but not necessarily limited to that incidental to installation or modification of underground pipelines and appurtenances. 
Unauthorized trenching consists of removal of materials beyond indicated subgrade elevations or dimensions without specific authorization of the City. 
Rock excavation consists of removal and disposal of natural material encountered that cannot be excavated without continuous and systematic drilling and blasting or continuous use of a ripper or other special equipment. Intermittent drilling or blasting performed to increase production and unnecessary for excavation of material encountered will not be classified as rock excavation. 
Stability of Excavation: Slope sides of excavations to comply with Subpart P of Part 1926 of the Occupational Safety and Health Act as amended. Shore and brace or use trench box where sloping is not possible either because of space restrictions or stability of material excavated. 
Maintain sides and slopes of excavations in a safe condition until completion of backfilling. 
Shoring and Bracing: Provide portable trench boxes and materials for shoring and bracing, such as sheet piling, uprights, stringers and cross-braces, in good serviceable condition. 
Maintain shoring and bracing and/or portable trench boxes in excavations regardless of time period excavations will be open. Carry down shoring and bracing as excavation progresses. 
Provide trench boxes and/or shoring and bracing to comply with Subpart P of Part 1926 of the Occupational Safety and Health Act as amended. 
Dewatering: Perform earthwork in a manner to prevent surface water and minimize subsurface or ground water from flowing into excavations, and to prevent water from flooding project work and surrounding area. 
Do not allow water to accumulate in excavations. Remove water using dewatering methods which will prevent softening of foundation bottoms, undercutting footings, and soil changes detrimental to stability of subgrades and foundations. Provide and maintain pumps, sumps, suction and discharge lines, and other dewatering system components necessary to convey water away from excavations. 
Limit opening of additional trench length to that which can be dewatered with available equipment or methods. 
Do not use trench as temporary drainage ditch. 
Material Storage: Locate and retain materials away from edge of trench. 
Dispose of excess soil material and waste materials, such as unsatisfactory excavated soil material, trash and debris, as specified hereinafter. 
Excavating: Do not extend excavation below or wider than that which is necessary to construct work except as otherwise provided herein. Repair any unauthorized trenching as necessary to obtain an adequate subgrade. 
Limit open trench excavation to a maximum of 300 feet ahead of completed backfill. 
Where specific utility system elevations or depths are indicated on the Drawings or elsewhere herein, accurately conform with such requirements. Otherwise, achieve a minimum earth and/or pavement cover of 30 inches above top of underground utilities being constructed unless a greater cover is made necessary by easement or permit requirement, by maintaining a minimum clearance of 18 inches below any existing or proposed structure or channel, or by achieving proper alignment with existing or proposed facilities. 
Maintain a horizontal separation of at least 10 feet between sanitary sewers and any existing or proposed water main. A sewer may be laid closer than 10 feet to a water main if it is laid in a separate trench. 
Maintain a vertical separation of at least 18 inches between the crown of sanitary sewers and the invert of existing or proposed water mains with the sewer located below the water main. Where a vertical separation of 18 inches cannot be provided and the water main cannot be relocated to provide adequate clearance, center one full length of water main over the sewer so that both joints of the water main will be as far from the sewer as possible. 
Confine trench width from an elevation of one foot above top of underground pipe to the trench bottom, to that minimum which is necessary to pipe laying operations, but do not exceed maximum trench width determined by pipe foundation requirements. 
Remove rock, masonry and concrete material to a distance of at least six inches from all parts of pipe and appurtenances being installed. Backfill and thoroughly compact to proper trench bottom elevation with select excavated material. 
Do not mix excavated rock, masonry or concrete with backfill material placed within two feet of installed pipe, or within one foot of finished grade. 
Pavement Removal: Remove all pavement, including curb and gutter, sidewalk and the like, which must be disturbed by trenching operations. 
Saw cut edges of bituminous pavement. For concrete pavement, saw cut edges or remove and replace to nearest joint. 
At sidewalks, curbs and gutters, and the like, remove entire width of damaged sections. 
Extend pavement removal to the width required to accomplish trenching operations without damage to edge of remaining pavement. Correct any edge damage which occurs as requested by the City. 
Removal of Unsatisfactory Soil Materials: To the extent necessary, over-excavate those soil materials which are unsatisfactory in the opinion of the City and backfill with approved materials. 
COMPACTION: 
General: Control soil compaction during construction providing minimum percentage of density specified for each area classification. 
Percentage of Maximum Density Requirements: Achieve not less than the following percentages of maximum density of soil material compacted at optimum moisture content, for each layer of soil material-in-place as determined by ASTM D 698 (Standard Proctor) test procedures: 
Rights-of-Way: Conform with the more stringent requirements of the permit issuing authority and the requirements herein. 
Roadways: Under and within five feet horizontal distance of traffic using surfaces, compact each layer of backfill and fill material to 95 percent of maximum dry density. 
Walkways: Under and within two feet horizontal distance of paved walks, compact top six inches of subgrade and each layer of backfill and fill material to 95 percent of maximum dry density. 
Driveways and Parking Lots: Under and within two feet horizontal distance of traffic-using surfaces, compact each layer of backfill and fill material to 95 percent of maximum dry density. 
Lawn or Unpaved Areas: Compact each layer of backfill or fill material to 85 percent of maximum dry density. 
Spoil Areas: Compact each layer of backfill or fill material to 85 percent of maximum dry density. 
Moisture Control: Where a layer of soil material is too dry to achieve required compaction, uniformly apply water to layer as necessary to bring moisture within limits which permit compaction to at least the specified densities. 
Remove, dry and replace, or scarify and air dry in place, soil material that is too wet to achieve required compaction. 
BACKFILL AND FILL: 
General: Place acceptable soil material in uniform layers, to required elevations. Backfill excavations as promptly as work permits. 
Backfill and Fill Materials: Use acceptable trench excavated soil material, free of stumps, trees, roots, muck, trash and other objectionable matter. 
Placement and Compaction: Place backfill and fill materials in layers not more than eight inches in loose depth. Before compaction, moisten or aerate each layer as necessary to provide the proper moisture content. Compact each layer to not less than the required percentage of maximum density for each area classification. Do not place backfill or fill material on surfaces that are muddy, frozen, or contain frost or ice. 
Commence backfill and fill operations close behind utility laying operations. Take care to prevent wedging action of backfill or fill against structures by carrying the material uniformly around structure to approximately same elevation in each lift. 
GRADING: 
General: Uniformly grade areas within limits of earthwork, including adjacent transition areas. Smooth and compact finished surface within specified tolerances, with uniform levels or slopes between points where elevations are shown, or between such points and existing grades, or between existing grades. 
Grading Outside Structures: Grade finished areas adjacent to structures to drain away from structures (except drainage inlets), and to prevent ponding. Finish surfaces free from irregular surface changes, and as follows: 
Grassed or Landscaped Areas: Finish areas to within not more than 0.10 feet above or below the required elevations. 
Walks and Pavements: Shape surface of areas under walks and pavements to line, grade and cross-section, with finish surface not more than ½ inch above or below the required subgrade elevation. 
Compaction: After grading, compact subgrade surfaces to the depth and percentage of maximum density for each area classification. 
RIP RAP SURFACE STABILIZATION: 
General: 
Prior to placing rip rap, bring ground surface to correct line and grades. At Contractor's option, provide either soil cement bag rip rap or stone rip rap at all stream crossings, and/or at locations indicated on Drawings or requested by the City. 
Soil Cement Bag Rip Rap: 
Proportion select pipe line excavation material and cement in the ratio of 5:1 by volume. Uniformly fill bags to maximum capacity which will permit satisfactory tying, and which produces an in-place thickness of 6 inches. Place bagged rip rap by hand with the tied joint ends facing the same direction with close staggered joints. 
When rip rap is placed above water level, do not add water to mix until bags have been finally placed. Then lightly sprinkle bags with water using methods which moisten soil-cement through its entire depth without causing washes or permitting bagged material to become fluid. Use minimum water necessary to moisten mix. 
When rip rap is placed below water, temporarily place bagged mix above water level and moisten as outlined above. Use care in uniformly shaping bagged mixture to approximately rectangular cross section before adding water. After moistened bagged mixture has set up sufficiently to be handled without cracking, but not less than 7 days, the rip rap may be placed in its final position. Where bagged mix can be placed below water without danger of contents being washed out of bags, bags may be placed under water in the same manner as specified for placing above water. 
When placing rip rap above water level, ram and pack bags against one another to produce the required thickness and form a consolidated mass. When placing rip rap below water, carefully handle bags so as not to crack the soil-cement. Place bags neatly and so that finished rip rap units are free of tendency to slip out of position. Place all rip rap so that no more than 3 inches variation exists above or below the required plane. 
Stone Rip Rap: 
Hand place stone rip rap into final position to form a compact layer not less than 6 inches in-place thickness. Use well graded stone sizes to eliminate void spaces between stones. 
Place stones neatly and anchor units to be free of tendency to slip out of position. Place rip rap so that no more than 3 inches variation exists above or below the required plane. 
MAINTENANCE: 
Protection of Graded Areas: Protect newly graded areas from traffic and erosion, and keep free of trash and debris. 
Repair and re-establish grades in settled, eroded, and rutted areas to specified compaction and tolerances. 
Reconditioning Compacted Areas: Where completed compacted areas are disturbed by subsequent construction, adverse weather, traffic, or other cause, scarify surface, re-shape, and compact to required density prior to further construction. 
Maintain temporary erosion and sediment control measures until permanent measures become effective. 
DISPOSAL OF EXCESS AND WASTE MATERIALS: 
Disposal of Excess Excavation: Transport excess excavated material, including unsatisfactory soil material, to any designated spoil areas, and spread as specified; otherwise remove from the project work area and legally dispose of such material which cannot be acceptably distributed within project work area. 
Disposal of Waste Material: Remove trash, debris, and waste materials from the project work area and legally dispose of such material. 
RESTORATION: 
Plan and execute total work so as to minimize damage to property. Restore all surface materials, shrubbery, fences, lawns, walls, structures and other improvements to a condition no less desirable than that which existed before construction operations began. 
Conduct all construction operations such that upon completion of any part of the work, the contour and topography of the construction area has not been substantially altered. No alteration of previously established storm drainage patterns will be permitted unless such alteration can be proven to the City's satisfaction to improve the drainage pattern without adverse impact on affected property owners. 
Where necessary to temporarily remove or damage improvements of any significance, take professional quality photographs of such improvements before disturbing them. Make copies of such photographs available to the City on request. 
Restore work area and accomplish site cleanup immediately after backfilling and fill operations. 
Replace property line monuments which were damaged, removed or disturbed by trenching and backfilling operations. Employ, at Contractor's expense, a Georgia registered land surveyor for all property line monument replacement. 
END SECTION 02204 
Sec. 02408. - Tunneling. 
PART I - GENERAL 
DESCRIPTION OF WORK: 
Tunneling pertains to the installation of carrier pipe or tunnel liner below ground by means other than open cut excavation. 
Tunnel liner sizes indicated on the Drawings are minimum nominal diameters. Use appropriate size and type of tunnel liner and construction methods as necessary to provide a complete tunnel liner installation. 
Related Work Specified Elsewhere: 
Route Clearing, Section 02112 
Trenching and Backfilling, Section 02204 
Storm Sewer System, Section 02770 
PART 2 - PRODUCTS 
CARRIER PIPE: 
Where carrier pipe is installed without tunnel liner by tunneling methods, conform with carrier pipe material specifications unless otherwise indicated. 
PIPE TUNNEL LINER: 
Where tunnel liner is installed using jacking or boring construction methods, comply with the following material specifications for tunnel liner: 
Steel Pipe Tunnel Liner. 
Steel Pipe Tunnel Liner, 4 Inches and Smaller Conform to ASTM A120 material specifications. Use galvanized steel, Schedule 40 minimum, with threaded couplings. 
Steel Pipe Tunnel Liner, Larger Than 4 Inches: Conform to ASTM A53 or A139 material specifications, except hydrostatic testing is not required. Join pipe sections with full strength, continuous welds in accordance with procedures approved by the American Welding Society to obtain a watertight seal. 
Use pipe having not less than the following wall thicknesses: 
  

 
  
Reinforced Concrete Pipe Tunnel Liner: 
Conform to ASTM C76, Class V material specifications for withstanding in-place vertical loads. Provide additional reinforcement or strength required to withstand jacking pressure. Except for end closures, provide pipe in eight-foot minimum lengths. Use self-centering tongue and groove joints such that outside of tunnel liner is uniform in diameter at all locations. Seal pipe joints with butyl-based sealant manufactured for that purpose. 
SECTIONAL PLATE TUNNEL LINER: 
Where carrier pipe is installed in tunnel liner and mining methods are utilized, comply with the following specifications: 
Materials: 
Fabricate tunnel liner sections of corrugated steel plate especially manufactured for tunnel liner service. Design liner sections and fasteners in consideration of actual tunnel location. For liner plate design purposes, use soil, wheel, and surcharge loads of sufficient magnitude to ensure a safe liner plate system in actual use conditions. 
Provide tunnel liner plate having a minimum thickness of 0.179 inches and liner plate fasteners having a minimum diameter of 0.625 inches. 
Fabrication: 
General: Tunnel diameters shown on the Drawings are in terms of the required minimum clear inside diameter of the erected liner plate tunnel. Fabricate liner plate sections so as to allow complete installation from within the tunnel, and with alternate liner plate rings in the erected tunnel containing two threaded grout holes in the vicinity of the tunnel invert and two grout bleed holes in the vicinity of the tunnel crown. 
Galvanized Coating: After tunnel liner plate sections have been formed and punched, hot dip galvanize plate sections with at least a two-ounce coating of spelter per square foot total for both sides. Galvanized liner plates must not be warped, and the spelter coating must be free from defects such as blisters, flux, abrasion, poor adhesion and uncoated spots. 
Bituminous Coating: After galvanizing, fully coat both sides of liner plate sections with an asphaltic bituminous coating not less than 0.05 inch thick and conforming to AASHTO N 190 for bituminous protected corrugated metal pipe. 
PART 3 - EXECUTION 
INSPECTION: 
Examine areas and conditions under which tunneling is to be done, and notify design engineer in writing, of conditions detrimental to proper and timely completion of Work. 
GENERAL: 
Carry out Work in a safe manner, taking all necessary precautions and measures necessary to maintain a stable construction system which does not weaken existing earth or structures nor cause settlement of the overpassing roadway or railway section. 
When tunneling operations are carried out under railroad tracks, highways, streets, or any other existing thoroughfare, perform operations in such manner as not to interfere with nor in any way endanger the normal operation of such thoroughfares. 
Complete all tunneling work at one particular location before starting work at another location. 
EXCAVATION: 
The following requirements are supplemental to Section 02204, Trenching and Backfilling, of these specifications. 
When required, excavate suitable pits or trenches for tunneling operations. Provide all necessary bracing, sheeting and/or other temporary means to ensure safety of persons and property. Comply with Subpart P of Part 1926 of the Occupational Safety and Health Act as amended. 
Maintain excavation free from water, mud and debris which will interfere with an efficient tunneling operation. Neatly dry-excavate material of whatever nature encountered within the tunnel. Do not use sluicing or jetting excavation techniques. 
Limit excavation to the minimum diameter required for tunnel liner installation. 
Pressure grout all excessive voids which may develop about the tunnel liner exterior. 
Promptly backfill all pits and trenches. 
JACKING: 
When installing tunnel liner by jacking method, use guide rails or other jacking frame structure to effectively maintain tunnel liner at proper line and grade. Force tunnel liner into place with suitable jacks which apply uniform pressure around the tunnel liner end section. Excavate at the lead end of the tunnel as the jacking operation progresses, but do not excavate more than six inches in front of tunnel liner. Reduce the two feet distance where material character results in excess loss of soil. Remove excavated material through the tunnel liner. Once jacking is begun, continue operation without interruption to prevent the pipe from becoming firmly set in the embankment. 
Perform tunneling such that the final tunnel liner position is within the following limits: 
Lateral Alignment: Within two percent of tunnel liner length. 
Vertical Elevation: Within one percent of tunnel liner vertical grade, provided that the final grade of flow line is in the direction indicated on the Drawings. 
BORING: 
Mechanically bore by use of a cutting head on a continuous auger. Install tunnel liner in hole by jacking or other suitable methods. Accomplish boring of hole and tunnel liner installation simultaneously. Do not permit boring to proceed more than one foot in front of tunnel liner. 
At contractor's option and to minimize abandoned tunnel liner, conduct initial boring using a pilot hole approximately 2 inches in diameter for the entire installation length. Verify required line and grade and use pilot hole as the center line of the larger hole to be bored. If rock is encountered in pilot hole, withdraw equipment and relocate tunnel location. Conduct pilot hole installation in revised location and repeat procedure. No extra payment will be considered for installations that encounter rock and must be abandoned. 
Perform tunneling such that the final tunnel liner position is within the following limits: 
Lateral Alignment: Within two percent of tunnel liner length. 
Vertical Elevation: Within one percent of tunnel liner vertical grade, provided that the final grade of flow line is in the direction indicated on the Drawings. 
MINING: 
When installing tunnel liner by mining methods, handle, maintain, and install liner plate sections in such manner as to avoid damage to plates and surface coating thereon. Install liner plates immediately after excavated material is removed from the tunnel. Do not permit liner plate installation to fall more than 24 inches behind the tunnel working face. Do not leave more than 12 inches of unlined tunnel at the end of the day's operation. 
Provide all necessary bracing bulkheads and/or shields required to ensure safety of persons and property. Provide well braced, temporary bulkhead against excavation face during each cessation of work while the heading is within 20 feet of railroad tracks or roadway pavement. 
Pressure grout voids between excavated tunnel bore and liner plate at least daily as tunnel excavation and liner plate installation proceeds. In addition, do not extend liner plate installation more than 10 feet without placing grout. Introduce grout through all grout holes in tunnel liner plate at or near tunnel invert, continue grouting until grout mixture bleeds through grout holes located at tunnel crown. Use grouting pressure sufficient to fill all voids. 
Perform tunneling such that the final tunnel liner position is within 0.2 feet of specified position, both laterally and vertically. 
ABANDONMENT: 
Should it become necessary to abandon a tunnel for any reason, pressure grout the abandoned hole to prevent damage to surrounding earth and structures. When the tunnel liner is retained, fill entire tunnel with grout and pressure grout any voids about the tunnel liner exterior. 
TUNNEL LOCATIONS: 
Locate tunnels as indicated on the drawings or by City. 
To facilitate construction, changes in tunnel location may be permitted. Proposed changes must be submitted by the Contractor. Changes in location must be acceptable to the City, and any utility company or public agency having jurisdiction over the location. 
END SEALS: 
Seal ends of tunnel liner to prevent debris and moisture from entering the annular space between the carrier pipe and tunnel liner. For pipe tunnel liner, provide end seal consisting of flexible synthetic rubber boot conforming to ASTM C-923 or Link Seal penetration seal with insulating plastic plate, galvanized bolts and nuts, and EPDM rubber element manufactured by Thunderline Corporation. 
END SECTION 02408 
Sec. 02504. - Graded aggregate base and subbase. 
PART I - GENERAL 
RELATED DOCUMENTS: 
Drawings and general provisions of the Contract, including General and Supplementary Conditions and Division-1 Specification Sections, apply to this section. 
DESCRIPTION OF WORK: 
The extent of graded aggregate base and subbase is shown on the Drawings. 
Graded aggregate base and subbase construction includes, but is not limited to, the furnishing and placing of graded aggregate base or subbase on prepared subgrade or subbase. 
Related work specified elsewhere includes Earthwork and Site Grading, Section 02200. 
QUALITY ASSURANCE: 
Submittals: 
For information, and as necessary to show compliance with these specifications, submit producer's technical data for graded aggregate including laboratory test reports or notarized certificates and other data. 
Sampling and Testing: 
Provide quality control testing during construction as necessary to ensure the entire base or subbase including all courses meets contract requirements. Remove and reconstruct, or otherwise correct work which falls below specified density or is outside other specified limits. 
Provide quality control testing by an approved testing laboratory during construction as necessary to ensure the entire base or subbase including all courses meets contract requirements. 
Remove and reconstruct, or otherwise correct work which falls below specified density or is Outside other specified limits. 
Minimum quality control testing to be provided by the Contractor consists of the following: 
Moisture-density relationship curve for graded aggregate to be used on project. 
One-in-place density test (ASTM D 1556 or other method approved by the Engineer) per 1,200 square yards of base or subbase. 
One thickness measurement normal to base or subbase surface per 1,200 square yards of base or subbase. 
One surface tolerance measurement using a 15-foot straight edge per 250 square yards of base or subbase. 
Report test results in writing to the Engineer promptly (normally same day tests are made). 
The Engineer may perform sampling, surveying, inspection or testing activity during construction for his use, but such activity does not relieve the Contractor from his responsibility to achieve specified results. 
The Owner may perform compaction, surface tolerance and thickness check tests on graded aggregate work when the Contractor indicates such work meets contract requirements. If these tests demonstrate work fails to meet contract requirements, it is the Contractor's responsibility to determine the extent to which the deficiency is present, to correct the deficiency, and to demonstrate by tests made by an approved testing laboratory, compliance with contract provisions in the deficient area. Check testing activity by the Owner does not relieve the Contractor from his responsibility to achieve specified results. All costs of determining the extent to which a deficiency is present and of retesting to demonstrate compliance with specified results are to be assumed by the Contractor. The Owner will pay all other check testing costs. 
PART 2 - PRODUCTS 
GRADED AGGREGATE: 
Hard, strong, durable particles or fragments of crushed stone of uniform quality, free from dirt and other detrimental matter. 
Not more than a 50 percent wear as determined by ASTM C131. 
Not more than a 15 percent weight loss when subjected to 5 alterations of the magnesium sulfate soundness test (ASTM C88). 
Gradation: 
  

 
  
Material passing No. 10 sieve to have a sand equivalent not less than 20 as determined by ASTM D 2419. 
GRADED AGGREGATE: 
Hard, strong, durable particles or fragments of crushed stone of uniform quality, free from dirt and other detrimental matter. 
Not more than a 65 percent wear as determined by ASTM C131. 
Not more than a 15 percent weight loss when subjected to 5 alterations of the magnesium sulfate soundness test (ASTM C88). 
Gradation: 
  

 
  
Material to have a liquid limit not exceeding 25 and a plasticity index not exceeding 6. 
PART 3 - EXECUTION 
GENERAL: 
Assure that subgrade or subbase conforms to specified compaction, line and grade and thickness requirements before commencing graded aggregate construction. 
Responsibility for placing the specified graded material lies with the Contractor. Approval by the engineer of material, source of supply, etc., in no way relieves the Contractor of his responsibility of providing the specified graded aggregate material. 
PLACING AND SPREADING: 
Place homogeneously and uniformly mixed graded aggregate on prepared subgrade or subbase. 
Spread material to a uniform depth not exceeding the thickness indicated on the Drawings nor 6 inches after compaction. Where graded aggregate base or subbase is indicated more than 6 inches in thickness, construct base or subbase in two or more courses of approximately equal thickness. 
COMPACTION: 
General: Control graded aggregate compaction during construction providing no less than Minimum percentage of density specified. 
Percentage of Maximum Density Requirement: Achieve not less than 100 percent of maximum dry density as determined by ASTM D 698 (Standard Proctor) for each course of material-in-place. 
FINISHING: 
After compaction, shape surface to required line, grade, and cross section. Compact loosened Material until the surface is smooth, closely knit, free from cracks, conforming to required line, Grade and cross section. 
Obtain a finished surface with no variation from design requirements in excess of ¼ inch when measured with a 15-foot straight edge. 
Maintain graded aggregate base or subbase in a smooth, true to grade, compacted condition until it is covered by other construction. 
THICKNESS TOLERANCE: 
Achieve compacted thickness which is no more than ½ inch less than the required thickness at any point. 
Correct any area deficient by more than ½ inch by adding additional graded aggregate and rebuilding the base or subbase to the required thickness in accordance with this section. 
END OF SECTION 02504 
Sec. 02482. - Grassing. 
PART I - GENERAL 
RELATED DOCUMENTS: 
The Drawings and general provisions of the contract, including General and Supplementary Conditions and General Requirements (if any), apply to the work of this section. 
DESCRIPTION OF WORK: 
The extent of grassing consists of those areas which are disturbed by operations of the Contractor and are not covered over by improvements, except where specifically noted otherwise, together with any additional areas shown on the drawings or designated by the City. 
Grassing operations include, but are not limited to, the following: 
Ground preparation 
Seeding 
Liming 
Fertilizing 
Mulching 
Watering 
Maintenance of grassed areas 
QUALITY ASSURANCE: 
Source Quality Control: Use grassing materials with certificates of inspection as required by governmental authorities. Comply with regulations governing grassing materials. 
Specified work is minimum required, and any and all necessary materials and operations including reworking, must be performed to obtain specified results. 
PART 2 - PRODUCTS 
GRASS MATERIALS: 
Grass Seed: Provide fresh, clean, new-crop seed complying with the tolerance for purity and germination established by the Official Seed Analysts of North America. Provide seed of the grass species, proportions and minimum percentages of purity, germination, and maximum percentage of weed seed, as specified below: 
  

 
  
SOIL AMENDMENTS: 
Lime: Natural limestone containing not less than 85 percent of total carbonates, ground so that not less than 90 percent passes a 10-mesh sieve and not less than 25 percent passes a 100-mesh sieve. 
Fertilizer: Standard commercial grade fertilizer conforming to the standards of the Association of Official Agricultural Chemists. Provide either grade 4-12-12, 6-12-12 or 5-10-15 at Contractor's option. 
Nitrogen: Standard commercial grade nitrogen conforming to state fertilizer laws. Provide in either granular or liquid form at Contractor's option. 
WATER: 
Water used to produce grass is to be free of excess and harmful chemicals, acids, alkalies and all other substances which are harmful to plant growth. 
MULCH: 
Wood Cellulose Fiber Mulch: Green colored wood cellulose fiber containing no germination or growth inhibiting ingredients, and suitable for uniform application by hydraulic mulching equipment. Mulch material to have the following packaged properties: 
  

 
  
Natural Mulch: At Contractor's option, either threshed rye, oat or wheat straw or Bermuda grass hay free of noxious weed seeds. 
Asphalt: Homogeneous emulsified asphalt meeting ASTM D 977 which contains no agents harmful or toxic to plant growth. 
PART 3 - EXECUTION 
GENERAL: 
Minimum Operations: These Specifications set forth minimum operations and material applications which are acceptable. However, a satisfactory stand of grass must be obtained by using supplemental methods and/or materials as may be required. 
Grassing By Private Property: Where grassing is required between curbs and sidewalks or behind sidewalks in areas adjacent to private residential or commercial property, the City may change the type of grassing required to match any type of grass which may be planted and growing on the adjacent lawn. 
Ground Preparation: 
Plow area to be grassed to a depth of not less than 4 inches. After plowing disk and harrow area until soil is well pulverized to a depth of at least 4 inches. Completed surface must be smooth, uniform, loose and free of large clods, boulders, stumps, large roots, debris and other similar undesirable matter. 
Lime and Fertilizer Application: 
Spread lime uniformly over the ground surface at the following rate: 1,000 pounds per acre. 
Spread fertilizer uniformly over the ground surface at the following rate: 1,000 pounds per acre. 
Once lime and fertilizer are placed, blend into top 4 inches of soil with suitable harrows, rotary tillers or other appropriate equipment. Restore surface areas to line and grade. 
SEEDING: 
Sowing: Sow seed within 24 hours following completion of placing lime and fertilizer using mechanical equipment that produces uniform application of seed. Once seed is sown, roll seeded areas before placing mulch. Sow seed only when weather conditions permit uniform distribution of seed and ground is not frozen, wet or otherwise non-tillable. 
MULCHING: 
Mulch all grassed areas using either wood cellulose fiber mulch or natural mulch with bituminous treatment at the following rates: 
Wood Cellulose Fiber Mulch: 1,500 pounds per acre. 
Natural Mulch-Bituminous Treated: ¾ inch to 1½ inch deep over entire area with sufficient asphalt material to hold mulch in place. 
Apply mulch only when weather conditions will permit uniform distribution of mulch. 
Exercise care at all times to protect the public, adjacent property, bridges, pavements, curbs, sidewalks and all other structures. 
Remove any mulch placed on facilities or areas other than areas authorized for grassing. 
APPLICATION OF NITROGEN: 
Make two applications of nitrogen to all grassed areas using mechanical spreading equipment. Apply at a uniform rate of not less than 70 pounds per acre per application. Make both applications only when weather conditions will permit uniform and even distribution and when moisture conditions will not cause harm to grass. 
Place first application of nitrogen when young grass reaches a height of at least one inch. Make the second application of nitrogen between 30 and 45 days after the first application. 
WATER: 
Water grassed areas as required to obtain specified grass coverage. 
REQUIRED COVERAGE: 
Grassed areas will be considered acceptable when a viable stand of grass covers at least 98 percent of the total area with no bare spots exceeding one square foot and the ground surface is fully stabilized against erosion. 
MAINTENANCE: 
Maintain grassed areas until the later of (1) final project acceptance, or (2) the required grass coverage is achieved. 
Maintain grassed areas by watering, fertilizing, weeding, mowing, trimming, and other operations such as rolling, regrading and replanting as required to establish a smooth, acceptable stand of grass free of eroded or bare areas. Mow areas as required to keep grass not more than 8 inches above ground surface until grassing work is accepted. 
Final Inspection and Acceptance: 
When the grassing work is completed, including maintenance, the City will, upon request, make an inspection to determine acceptability. 
Where inspected work does not comply with the requirements, replace rejected work and continue specified maintenance until re-inspected by the City and found to be acceptable. 
END SECTION 02482 
Sec. 02528. - Pavement patching. 
PART 1 - GENERAL 
RELATED DOCUMENTS: 
Drawings and general provisions of the Contract, including General and Supplementary Conditions and Division-1 Specification Sections, apply to the Work specified in this section. 
DESCRIPTION OF WORK: 
The extent of pavement patching consists of the repair of all pavement removed or damaged in the course of constructing the Project. 
Pavement patching includes repair of paved roads, streets, highways, walkways, driveways, patios, slabs on grade, and parking lots together with walls, curbing, gutters and headers, and other pavements and appurtenances. Pavement referred to under this Section, refers to asphaltic, cementious, brick, cobble or other large stone pavement materials together with underlying construction, irrespective of its composition. 
JOB CONDITIONS: 
Traffic Control: Schedule and conduct Work in a manner which will minimize inconvenience to vehicular and pedestrian traffic. Provide flaggers, barricades, warning signs, warning lights, and other warning means as appropriate. 
Weather Limitations: Conduct all operations during weather conditions appropriate to the Work being performed. 
Grade Control: Establish and maintain lines and elevations which will ensure finished Pavement patch having desirable appearance, function and strength. 
SUBMITTALS: 
Submit detailed material descriptions when requested by the Engineer. 
PART 2- PRODUCT 
General: For products not described below, use materials and gradations which have locally exhibited a satisfactory record of previous usage, and which for finished visible surfaces will permit obtaining appearance, color and texture reasonably matching remaining adjacent pavement of the same type. 
Asphalt Concrete: Bituminous plant mixture of asphalt cement and aggregates complying with Type E or F hot plant mix of Section 828 of the Georgia Department of Transportation "Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Constructions." 
Graded A aggregate Base: Uniform graded aggregate material complying with Section 815 of the Georgia Department of Transportation "Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction." 
Bituminous Prime: Cutback asphalt complying with Section 821 of the Georgia Department of Transportation "Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction." 
Bituminous Tack Coat: Asphalt material complying with Section 413, topics 413.01 Through 413.04 of the Georgia Department of Transportation "Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction." 
Portland Cement Concrete: Concrete mix of Portland cement, aggregates, water, and air entraining admixture to produce the following properties: 3,500 psi minimum compressive strength at 28 days per ASTM C39, 4 inches maximum slump per ASTM C143, and air content between 3% and 6%. 
Cold Mix: Uniform bituminous mixture of aggregate, asphaltic material and, if it is required, mineral filler complying with Type E or F cold mix of Section 401 of the Georgia Department of Transportation "Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction." 
PART 3 - EXECUTION 
Pavement Cuts: Saw cut trench edges in paved areas to neat, straight lines before starting to break the pavement slab. Completely backfill the open half before opening the other half of pavement. 
Backfill Placement: Place trench backfill materials in layers not more than six inches compacted thickness. Commence backfill immediately after utility is installed. Complete new replacement base construction immediately after trench backfill. 
Inspection: Examine areas and conditions under which pavement patching will be conducted, giving special attention to stability of subbase. Do not proceed with pavement patching work until unsatisfactory conditions have been corrected. 
Preparation: Saw cut any ragged edges of existing pavement, or in the case of concrete work, remove existing pavement to nearest joint. Remove all loose material from underlying and adjacent surfaces. 
Strength and Stability: Use materials and construction techniques as necessary to obtain strength, stability and durability of pavement patch at least equal to that of remaining adjacent pavement of the same type. As a minimum, conform with pavement patch details, if any, required elsewhere by the Contract Documents; and where such details are not provided, accomplish pavement patching utilizing strengths, thicknesses, etc., not less than that of remaining adjacent pavement of the same type. 
Placing: 
Construct pavement using methods and equipment in general use for the type of work being performed. 
Immediately after new base construction, cover pavement cut with steel plates or similar devices of sufficient thickness to span the cut without noticeable deflection. Maintain plates in place for not less than 24 hours and not more than 7 days and until the concrete base (if used) has gained sufficient strength to withstand traffic loads. Traffic may resume after installation of metal plates. 
Upon removal of the metal plates or similar devices, provide new pavement surface in accordance with one of the following options: 
Immediately apply new permanent pavement surface materials indicated or 
Immediately apply bituminous cold mixture over bond breaker paper over new base. Monitor performance and repair or replace materials regularly to maintain smooth traffic surface until placement of permanent pavement surface materials. At Contractor's time selection prior to substantial completion, remove cold mix and bond breaker paper and provide new permanent pavement surface materials. If performance or maintenance of cold mix patch is unsatisfactory in the opinion of the Owner or Engineer, remove materials and provide new permanent pavement surface materials within 72 hours of notice by the Owner or Engineer. 
Traffic control devices in lieu of cover plates are permitted for pavement patching longitudinal to the street centerline in excess of 20 feet. Use traffic barricades, warning signs and lights, flagmen, and other means as appropriate to continuously control traffic 24 hours per day. Use devices such that at least 12 feet wide, one-way through traffic access is provided at all times. 
Upon removal of traffic control devices, install permanent pavement surface. 
Contractor assumes all responsibility for maintaining repairing and/or replacing concrete base that may be damaged during curing period. 
For existing surface of Portland cement concrete, furnish new Portland cement concrete structure thickness, including base and pavement surface, of not less than eight inches; except for driveways and sidewalks which shall be not less than four inches thick. 
Provide not less than eight inches thickness of new graded aggregate base for replacement of asphalt concrete pavement at driveways, sidewalks and parking lots. 
For repair of asphalt concrete pavement, clean base and adjacent surfaces and apply bituminous tack coat or bituminous prime (as appropriate) to such surfaces before placing new asphalt concrete surface. 
Finish: Accomplish pavement patching using materials and techniques which result in visible, finished surfaces having appearance, color, and texture reasonably matching remaining adjacent pavement of the same type. Do not permit the finished surface to have dips, objectionable roughness or discontinuity or non-draining areas. Do not create any unsafe pavement condition. 
Repairs: If pavement patch or adjacent pavement settles or shows evidence of other distress resulting from the Work, cut pavement out, repair subgrade, and reconstruct patch. Do not place additional pavement material on top of unsatisfactory previously repaired surfaces. At expense of Contractor, repair any pavement which he damages beyond that minimum amount necessary to construct the Work. 
END SECTION 02528 
Sec. 02770. - Storm sewer system. 
PART I - GENERAL 
DESCRIPTION OF WORK: 
The extent of storm sewer system is shown on the drawings. 
Storm sewer system work includes, but is not limited to, the following: 
Foundation preparation. 
Furnishing and laying gravity sewer pipe. 
Furnishing and/or constructing drainage structures and appurtenances. 
Cleaning constructed work. 
Related Work Specified Elsewhere: 
Route Clearing, Section 02112 
Trenching and Backfilling, Section 02204 
Pavement Patching, Section 02528 
JOB CONDITIONS: 
Traffic Control: 
Schedule and conduct Work in a manner which will minimize inconvenience to vehicular and pedestrian traffic. Provide flaggers, barricades, warning signs, warning lights, and other warning means as appropriate. Flaggers, when utilized, must hold a valid Georgia D.O.T. flagging certificate. Maintain traffic on all roads and streets which must be crossed by sewer lines. All traffic controls during construction must conform to Part VI of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, ANSI D6.le. 
Weather Limitations: 
Conduct all operations during weather conditions appropriate to the Work being performed. 
QUALITY ASSURANCE: 
Manufacturer Experience: 
Furnish manufactured products produced by firms having regularly produced such items as specified herein which have proven satisfactory in actual service over at least a two-year period, as determined by the City. 
Imperfections: 
Regardless of tolerances permitted by industry standards specified herein, the City may reject pipe or precast structures at the manufacturing plant or project site, which have cracks, chips, blisters, lack of smooth interior or exterior surface, evidence of structural weakness, porosity, joint defect, significant variation from theoretical shape, or other imperfection which might, in the opinion of the City, contribute to a reduced functional capability, accelerated deterioration, or reduced structural strength. 
Repairs: 
Do not use patched or repaired pipe or precast structures unless each individual length or element has been approved and marked for repair by the City at the manufacturing plant. Repairs, other than at the manufacturing plant, are not permitted. 
PART 2 - PRODUCTS 
Concrete Pipe (CPDV): 
Basic specification, nominal 15-inch size and over: ASTM C 76, reinforced sewer pipe furnished in not less than 8-foot lengths. 
Identification: Stamp each length or joint of concrete pipe at the plant of manufacture, showing strength or reinforcement class, wall thickness designation, date of manufacture, and manufacturer symbol. 
Joints: At Contractor option use one of the following jointing systems. Once a system is selected, utilize system for entire project unless specified or authorized otherwise. 
Cement grout type which results in entire joint annular space being filled with grout and inside of each joint being wiped smooth. Use grout mixture consisting of not more than five gallons of water per sack of cement. Utilize cement conforming to AASHTO M85 or M150. 
AWWA C 302 O-ring rubber gasket style in which the completed joint confines the O-ring on four sides with nominal clearance not to exceed 1/16 inch between smooth, accurately formed, bell and spigot surfaces. 
Elliptical Concrete Pipe (ECPD): 
Basic Specification: ASTM C 507, reinforced elliptical sewer pipe furnished in not less than 8-foot lengths. 
Additional Specification Requirements: Maximum absorption by standard ASTM test may not exceed 7.0 percent, and pipe must be aged at manufacturing plant for not less than five days. 
Identification: Stamp each length or joint of concrete elliptical pipe at the plant of manufacture, showing strength or reinforcement class, wall thickness designation, date of manufacture, manufacturer's symbol and quadrant reinforcing symbol. 
Joints: At Contractor option use one of the following jointing systems. Once a system is selected, utilized system for entire project unless specified or authorized otherwise. 
Cement grout type which results in entire joint annular space being filled with grout and inside of each joint being wiped smooth. Use grout mixture consisting of not more than five gallons of water per sack of cement. Utilize cement conforming to AASHTO M85 or MISO. 
Preformed flexible pipe joint compound to be confined in the tongue and groove joint, meet Federal Specification SS-S-002 10. 
Corrugated Plastic Pipe (CPPD): 
Corrugated flexible conduit with slip-on joints made of polyethylene conforming with ASTM F 405 and F 449. 
Subject to compliance with requirements, firms offering products which may be incorporated in the work include, but are not limited to, the following: 
ADS Inc. 
Hancor Inc. 
Bituminous Coated Corrugated Aluminum Pipe (BCCAP): 
Basic specification: AASI-ITO M 196 with full uniform bituminous coating having minimum thickness of 0.05 inch and conforming with AASHTO M 190. 
Joints: Fully bituminous coated coupling bands manufactured from base metal as pipe. Utilize bands of same manufacturer as pipe. 
Pipe Fittings: 
Use standard, factory fabricated adapters, wyes, tees, and other necessary fittings comparable to pipe with which connected. 
Coarse Granular Material For Pipe Bedding: 
Crushed stone, crushed gravel, natural gravel, or crushed shell meeting ASTM C 33, and having No. 67 gradation (¾ inch to No. 4 sieve). 
Fine Granular Material For Pipe Bedding: 
Uniformly graded natural or manufactured sand composed of hard, durable particles with 100 percent passing a No. 4 sieve, not more than 25 percent passing a No. 100 sieve, and containing no more than 25 percent total of silt and clay. 
Sewer System Structures: Conform with applicable provisions contained in Article V of the City's Development Regulations. 
PART 3 - EXECUTION 
PIPE FOUNDATION: 
Concrete Pipe Foundation: 
Unless otherwise indicated, lay pipe in trenches and on foundations prepared as selected by the Contractor in conformance with the bedding class, trench width and depth, and pipe size tabulated below: 
  

 
  
Corrugated Plastic Pipe Foundation: 
Unless otherwise approved, lay corrugated plastic pipe in trenches, or fills using not less than Class C Modified Bedding and in conformance with the maximum fill depth and pipe size tabulated below: 
  

 
  
Bituminous Coated Corrugated Aluminum Pipe Foundation: 
Unless otherwise approved, lay bituminous coated corrugated aluminum pipe in trenches, or fills using not less than Class C Modified Bedding, and in conformance with the maximum fill depth, and pipe size tabulated below: 
  

 
  
Definition of Pipe Foundation Terms: 
Trench depth is the vertical distance from pipe invert or flow line to finished ground surface. 
Trench width is the horizontal distance between trench walls at any point from one foot above top of pipe to trench bottom. 
Class B Bedding may be achieved by either of the following two construction methods. 
(1)  Shaped Bottom with Tamped Backfill: Shape bottom of trench excavation to conform to a cylindrical surface with a radius at least 2 inches greater than the radius to the outside of the pipe and with a width sufficient to allow six-tenths of the width of the pipe barrel to be bedded in fine granular material fill placed in the shaped excavation. Carefully place and compact backfill at sides of pipe to a thickness of at least 12 inches above top of pipe. Limit use of this bedding method to trenches with firm bottom and sides. 
(2)  Compacted Coarse Granular Bedding With Tamped Backfill: Bed pipe in compacted coarse granular material placed on a flat trench bottom. Thickness of granular bedding must be at least one-fourth the outside pipe diameter, but not less than 4 inches thick under pipe barrel, and extend at least halfway up the pipe barrel at the sides. Carefully place compacted backfill above the granular material up a minimum depth of 12 inches over the top of pipe. 
Class C Bedding may be achieved by either of the following two construction methods: 
(1)  Shaped Bottom: Bed pipe with ordinary care in an earth foundation formed in the trench bottom by a shaped excavation which fits the pipe barrel with reasonable closeness for a width of at least 50 percent of the outside pipe diameter. Place compacted fill to a minimum depth of six inches above top of pipe. 
(2)  Compacted Coarse Granular Bedding with a Tamped Backfill: Bed pipe in compacted granular material placed on a flat trench bottom. Thickness of granular material must be at least 4 inches under the barrel and must extend one-tenth to one-sixth of the outside diameter up the pipe barrel at the sides. Place compacted backfill above the granular material to a minimum depth of six inches over top of pipe. 
Class C Modified Bedding is defined as bedding pipe on a bedding blanket of sandy material roughly shaped to fit bottom of pipe. Thickness of bedding blanket must be not less than 0.1 of the nominal pipe diameter. Place compacted backfill above bedding blanket to a minimum depth of 12 inches over the top of pipe. 
PIPE LAYING: 
When either bituminous coated corrugated aluminum or corrugated plastic pipe is used, pipe installation must be observed by a Georgia registered professional engineer engaged by the contractor or developer. Upon completion of the pipe installation and prior to acceptance by the City, the observing engineer is to furnish to the City a certification that the storm drainage pipe has been installed in accordance with the approved plans and these specifications. Acceptance by the City will not be considered without the engineer's certification. 
Clean interior of pipe and all joints before laying. When pipe laying activity is not in actual progress, tightly cover open ends of sewer. Avoid permitting mud or other material from entering sewer at all times. 
Avoid damage or shock in handling pipe and accessories. Inspect each length of pipe, and reject any defective piece. Carefully protect pipe in place from damage or displacement until backfilling operations are complete. 
Lay and joint pipe in strict conformance with manufacturer's written recommendations as submitted to and accepted by the City. 
Where cement joints are used, provide wet burlap or earth protective cover for joints immediately after initial grout [is] set. Maintain protective cover until joint is covered by backfilling. Lay all pipe upgrade with spigots pointing downgrade. 
Control geometric position of pipe as necessary to ensure that pipe and fittings accurately conform with required grade and alignment after sewer is completed. 
Prevent water from accumulating or running in trench during pipe laying operations, and until the trench or excavation has been backfilled. 
Remove and re-lay any length of pipe which does not accurately conform with required line or grade, is crushed, or is excessively deflected. 
PIPE CONNECTIONS: 
Make all pipe connections with standard fittings, manholes, structures, or special construction detailed on Drawings. 
At manholes and structures, neatly cut all connecting pipe flush with inside surface, and provide flexible pipe joint within 18 inches of outer surface. Make pipe connections to manholes and structures by laying pipe in mortar bed or concrete. Use supplemental materials and techniques as required to obtain watertightness. 
Do not connect any flow to new work until authorized by the City. 
SEWER STRUCTURES: 
Conform with applicable provisions contained in Article V of the City's Development Regulations. 
LINE CLEANING: 
Avoid permitting dirt, rubbish, surplus construction material, and other foreign matter to enter structures or pipe during construction. Use whatever means may be necessary to obtain a clean and internally smooth sewer system prior to final acceptance. 
SEWER LEAKAGE: 
General Leakage Requirements: 
Make entire sewer line system as near watertight as practicable. Eliminate all visible points of ground water infiltration, and any other significant points of leakage which can be located. 
END SECTION 02770 
APPENDIX C. - STANDARD DETAILS 
Available at City Hall 
(706) 864-6133 
Appendix B - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is Ord. No. 91-9, Amendment No. 21, adopted September 6, 2016, which replaces previous version of said ordinance, adopted on October 18, 2012. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original ordinance. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings and catchlines has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

ARTICLE I. - PREAMBLE AND ENACTMENT CLAUSE 
Pursuant to the authority conferred by the 1983 Georgia State Constitution, Article IX, Section II, Paragraph IV, and for the purpose of promoting the health, safety, convenience, order, prosperity, and general welfare of the present and future inhabitants of the City of Dahlonega and the State of Georgia, including among other purposes the lessening of congestion in the streets; securing safety from fire, flood, panic, and other dangers; promoting health and the general welfare; providing adequate light and air; preventing the overcrowding of land and avoiding both undue concentration of population and urban sprawl; facilitating the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage service, schools, parks, and other public requirements; promoting such distribution of population, classification of land uses, distribution of land uses and distribution of land development and utilization as will tend to facilitate and promote desirable living conditions and the sustained stability of neighborhoods; preserving buildings, structures and uses in areas having national, regional, state or local historic or environmental significance; improving the aesthetic appearance of the City; protecting property against blight and depreciation; securing economy in governmental expenditures; conserving the value of buildings; and encouraging the most appropriate use of land, buildings and structures throughout the City of Dahlonega, all in accordance with a comprehensive plan for the development of the City of Dahlonega, the City Council does hereby ordain and enact into law the following Articles and Sections. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
ARTICLE II. - SHORT TITLE 
These regulations shall be known and may be cited as the "Zoning Ordinance of the City of Dahlonega, Georgia." 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
ARTICLE III. - DEFINITIONS OF TERMS USED IN ORDINANCE 

Sec. 301. - Definitions. 
When used in this Ordinance, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning given in this Article. Terms not herein defined shall have their customary dictionary definitions where not inconsistent with the context. The term "shall" is mandatory. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the singular number include the plural and those used in the plural number include the singular. Words used in the present tense include the future. 
Abutting: Having property or district lines in common, or having property separated by only an alley. Separation by a street right-of-way is not considered abutting. 
Accessory Building, Structure or Use: A building or structure or the use of a building, structure or land which: is subordinate to and serves a principal building or principal use; is subordinate in area, extent, or purpose to the principal building or use served; contributes to the comfort, convenience or necessity of occupants of the principal building or principal use; and is located on the same lot as the principal building or principal use. 
Agriculture: The cultivation or growth of a field or horticultural crop, including dairying, livestock and poultry raising, farm forestry, and other similar enterprises or uses. 
Airport: Any area of land, water or mechanical structure which is used for the landing and take-off of aircraft, including any appurtenant structures and areas which are used or intended to be used for airport buildings, other airport facilities, rights-of-way or easements. 
Alley: A private or public thoroughfare which affords only a secondary means of access to a building or abutting property and is not intended for general traffic circulation. 
Alteration: Any change in the supporting members of a building, any modification or change in construction, any addition which increases the area or height, any change in use from that of one district classification to another, or movement of a building from one location to another. 
Animal Hospital: A facility operated by a licensed veterinarian specifically for the practice of veterinary medicine. 
Antique Shop: A store or shop for the sale of relics, objects of ancient times or of an earlier period, works of art, pieces of furniture or decorative objects made at a much earlier period than present. 
Apartment House: A multi-family dwelling located on a parcel of land under a single ownership, designed for use by three or more housekeeping units, living independently of each other, and doing their own cooking on the premises 
Architectural Features, Exterior: The architectural style, general design and general arrangement of the exterior of a building or other structure, including but not limited to, the kind or texture of the building material and the type and style of all windows, doors, signs and other appurtenant architectural fixtures, features, details or elements relative to the foregoing. 
Area of Shallow Flooding: A designated AO or VO Zone on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Art Gallery: A facility, structure or building used for the display of sculptures, paintings, photographs or other artistic works for public viewing with only incidental sales. 
Automated Teller: An accessory facility through which certain banking functions such as deposits and withdrawals can be completed without the personal assistance of a bank employee. 
Bakery, Bake Shop: The use of a structure or building for the production and retail sale of bakery products, including, but not limited to, breads, cakes, pastries and doughnuts. Wholesale bakeries are not included in this definition. 
Banquet Hall: An establishment which is rented by individuals or groups to accommodate private functions including, but not limited to, banquets, weddings, anniversaries and other similar celebrations. 
(1)  Kitchen facilities for the preparation or catering of food; 
(2)  The sale of alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption, only during scheduled events and not open to the general public; and 
(3)  Outdoor gardens or reception facilities. 
Basement: That portion of a building located wholly or partly underground but having less than one-half of its height above the grade. 
Bed and Breakfast Inn: A dwelling unit, or portion thereof, where short term lodging rooms, with or without meals, are provided for compensation, and where the operator of the inn resides on the premises. 
Berm: An earthen structure used as a screening device in conjunction with the planting of grass, shrubbery and trees. 
Board of Zoning Appeals: The body established by these regulations composed of or appointed by the Governing Body which has original jurisdiction to take action on appeals, variances and other determinations as herein established. 
Boarding House: A building, where for compensation, both lodging and meals are provided for persons, provided that a single family dwelling shall not be deemed to be a boarding house by reason of a contribution to or expense sharing arrangement with the owner or tenant occupying the dwelling by a person related by blood or marriage. 
Broadcasting Studio: A room or suite or rooms operated as a radio or television broadcasting studio or station with local broadcast capability or intended for satellite distribution of programs. 
Buffer: A landscaped open space and/or screen located between incompatible land uses for the purpose of visibly separating uses through distance and to shield or block noise, light, glare, or visual or other nuisances; that portion of a given lot, not covered by buildings, pavement, parking, access and service areas, established for the purpose of screening and separating properties with incompatible land uses, the width of which is measured from the common property line and extending the developed portion of the common property line. A buffer consists of trees, shrubs and other natural vegetation undisturbed by grading or site development and replanted where sparsely vegetated or where disturbed for approved access and utility crossings. 
Buildable Area: The portion of a lot remaining after required yards, buffers and building setbacks have been provided, where construction of principal buildings is permitted. 
Building: Any structure, either temporary or permanent, above or below ground, having a roof or other covering, and designed, built, or used as a shelter or enclosure for persons, animals, or property of any kind, including tents, awnings, or vehicles used for purposes of a building. 
Building Addition: Any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a fire wall. Any walled and roofed addition which is connected by a fire wall or is separated by independent perimeter load-bearing walls is new construction. 
Building, Elevated: A non-basement building built to have the lowest floor elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns (posts and piers), shear walls, or breakaway walls. 
Building Official: The Chief Building Inspector of the City of Dahlonega, or his authorized representative. 
Building, Principal: A building or structure in which is conducted the main use of the property on which the building or structure is located. In any residential district, any structure containing a dwelling unit shall be defined to be the principal building on the lot on which said structure is located. 
Building Setback Line: A line establishing the minimum allowable distance between the main or front wall of a building, including any covered porches, and the street right-of-way or property line when measured perpendicularly thereto. In the case of corner lots or double frontage lots, front yard requirements shall be observed for those areas adjacent to street right-of-ways. 
Bulk: A term used to describe the size and shape of a building or structure and its relationship to other buildings, to the lot area for a building and to open spaces and yards. 
Bus Terminal: An area and building where buses stop to load and unload passengers and luggage or packages and which may include the sale of bus tickets. 
Campground: Land containing two (2) or more campsites which are located, established or maintained for occupancy by people in temporary lodging units such as camp tents, or cabins, for recreation, education or vacation purposes. 
Car Wash: An establishment engaged in the business of washing domestic vehicles with self-serve, automated or staffed facilities. 
Carport: An accessory structure or portion of a principal structure, consisting of a roof and supporting members such as columns or beams, unenclosed from the ground to the roof on at least two (2) sides, and designed or used for the storage of motor vehicles or boats. 
Cemetery: Land used or intended to be used for the burial of the dead and dedicated for cemetery purposes, but not including crematories and mortuaries. 
Centerline of Street: That line surveyed and monumented by the Governing Body and designated as the center of a public street. If a centerline has not been surveyed, it shall be the line running midway between the outside curbs, ditches or pavement ends of such street. 
Certificate of Appropriateness: (For definition see Ordinance 98-3 as amended.) 
Certificate of Occupancy: A legal statement or document issued by the Building Official indicating that the building and use or reuse of a particular building or land is in conformity with all applicable codes and regulations, and that such building or land may be occupied for the purpose stated therein. 
Church: An institution that people regularly attend to participate in or hold religious services, meeting and other purposes, including education, day care and recreation facilities when owned and operated by such church. 
Circus: The temporary use of land offering entertainment and instruction in the form of such things as thrill rides, games of chance and skill, educational exhibits, display of oddities and the like. The term also includes carnivals and fairs. 
City Engineer: The Engineer of the City of Dahlonega, or his authorized representative. 
Clinic: A building designed and used for the diagnosis and treatment of patients that does not include overnight care facilities. 
Club: A building or facilities owned or operated by a group for social, educational or recreational purposes, but not customarily for profit or to render a service that is customarily carried on for gain. 
College: A degree-granting establishment, accredited or qualified, which provides formal academic education and generally requiring for admission at least a high school diploma or equivalent academic training. Accessory uses under this definition include but are not limited to dormitories, cafeterias, bookstores, research facilities, sports facilities and auditoriums. 
Commercial-Residential Group Project: One or more buildings containing both a permitted commercial operation(s) and a residential use(s) within such building(s). It is typically characteristic of a commercial-residential group project to have the residential unit or units occupied by the owners, operators, lessees, or employees of the shop, business or office which occupies the same building or project. 
Community Center: A building or facility used to provide recreational, social, educational and cultural activities for an area of a community, which is owned and operated by the management agency of that community, or the Homeowner's Association of that community. A community can be an incorporated area, a developed subdivision, or a planned development. 
Compatibility: The characteristics of different uses or activities that permit such uses or activities to be located near each other in harmony and without conflict. Some elements affecting compatibility include: intensity of occupancy as measured by dwelling units per acre or gross square footage per acre; pedestrian or vehicular traffic generated; volume of goods handled, and such environmental affects as noise, vibration, odor, glare, air pollution or radiation. 
Comprehensive Plan: Those coordinated plans or portions thereof which have been prepared by or for the Governing Body for the physical development of the jurisdiction; or any plans that designate plans or programs to encourage the most appropriate use of the land in the interest of public health, safety and welfare. 
Conditional Use: A use which would not be appropriate without restriction throughout a zoning district and is not automatically permitted by right within a zoning district, but which may be permitted within a zoning district subject to meeting specific conditions (such as controls on number, size, area, location and activities) contained in these regulations or required by the Governing Body. Such uses may be permitted only if approved by the Governing Body in accordance with the regulations established herein. 
Conditional Zoning: The granting or adoption of zoning for property subject to compliance with restrictions as to use, size, density or actions stipulated by the Governing Body to mitigate adverse impacts that are anticipated without imposition of such conditions. 
Condominium (Residential Building): A building or complex of multiple-unit dwellings in which a tenant holds full title to his unit and joint ownership in the common grounds. 
Conference/Convention Center: A facility typically designed to accommodate two hundred (200) or more people and used for conventions, conferences, seminars, product displays, recreation activities, and entertainment functions, along with accessory functions, including outdoor displays, food and beverage preparation, and service foron-premise consumption of alcoholic beverages. The accommodations can include sleeping, eating, and recreation. The site shall be of sufficient size to accommodate all off-street parking associated with an individual event. 
Contractor's Establishment: An establishment engaged in the provision of construction activities including but not limited to plumbing, electrical work, building, paving, carpentry and other such contracting activities, including the storage of materials and the overnight parking of commercial vehicles. 
Convalescent Home: A home for the care of children or the aged or infirm, or a place of rest for those suffering bodily disorders, wherein two (2) or more persons are professionally cared for. 
Convenience Store: A small retail store, 5,000 square feet or less, which sells convenience items as its primary sales. A convenience store may include the sale of gasoline and diesel fuel but such sales shall be accessory to the primary sale of convenience goods. 
Conversion: Any change in the original use or purpose of a building or lot to a different use. 
Cul-de-sac: A street having one end open to traffic and being permanently terminated by a vehicular turn-around. 
Cultural Facility: A structure or portion of a structure used as an art gallery, museum, historical display, performing arts theatre, library, and other uses similar in character to those listed. 
Curb Cut: A provision for vehicular ingress and/or egress between property and an abutting public street. 
Day Care Center: A child care facility, pre-kindergarten, play or other special school for young children (other than at public or private elementary schools) providing, for compensation, care and maintenance to seven (7) or more children under age 17 for a period of twelve (12) hours or less, typically during normal daytime hours. A day care center of six (6) children or less is considered to be a home occupation. 
Deciduous: Falling off or shedding seasonally or at a certain stage of development in the life cycle. 
Density: The number of dwelling units developed, or to be developed, per gross acre of land, or the gross square footage of a building per acre of land. 
Department Store: A retail facility which offers the sale of various goods and merchandise and serves a regional market as opposed to a facility serving only neighborhood markets. A Department Store is typically at least 40,000 square feet in area and serves as an anchor for smaller retail stores and shops, usually located in a shopping mall or center. 
Development: Any man-made change or improved or unimproved real estate including, but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling operations, or permanent storage of materials or equipment. 
Developmentally Disabled Person: A person with a disability resulting in substantial functional limitations in such person's major life activities which disability is attributable to mental retardation, cerebral palsy, epilepsy, or autism or is attributable to any other condition related to mental retardation because such condition results in impairment of general intellectual functioning or adaptive behavior similar to that of mentally retarded persons. 
District, Zoning: A geographical area or areas, designated with the use of symbols on the Official Zoning Map, wherein uses of land are restricted in type, size, height and other limitations as established in these regulations. 
Dormitory: A building that is owned and/or operated by an educational institution, the primary purpose of which is to provide living accommodations for individuals associated with the institution, but which does not include individual kitchen facilities. 
Drive-in: A retail or service enterprise wherein service is provided to the customer within a motor vehicle on the outside of the principal building. 
Drive-in Theater: A facility designed for the outdoor projection of motion pictures onto a permanent screen to be viewed from the patron's automobile. 
Dry Cleaners: An establishment engaged in providing laundry, dyeing and dry cleaning services to individual customers. 
Dry Cleaning Plant: An establishment engaged in providing laundry, dyeing and dry cleaning services on a large scale for institutions, businesses or other such establishments. 
Dwelling: A building, other than a mobile home or house trailer, designed, arranged or used for permanent living, and/or sleeping quarters. 
Dwelling Unit: A building, or portion thereof, designed, arranged and used for living quarters for one (1) or more persons living as a single housekeeping unit with cooking facilities, but not including mobile homes and units in hotels or other structures designed for transient residence. 
Dwelling, Multi-Family: A building designed for or occupied exclusively by three (3) or more single housekeeping units with separate kitchen or house-keeping facilities for each family or housekeeping unit, including apartment houses, row houses, town houses, and similar housing types but not including motels, hotels, lodging houses, hospitals, nursing homes, or public institutions such as prisons and mental institutions. 
Dwelling, Single-Family: A building designed or arranged to be occupied by one (1) single housekeeping unit only. 
Dwelling, Two-Family (Duplex): A building designed or arranged to be occupied by two (2) single housekeeping units living independently of each other. 
Easement: A non-possessory interest in land; a grant by a property owner for the use by the public, a corporation or persons, of a portion of land for a specified purpose or purposes. 
Event Center: A facility used for weddings, anniversaries, birthdays, showers, reunions, recitals, dances, and ethnic and religious celebrations, etc. The accommodations can include sleeping, eating, and recreation. The site shall be of sufficient size to accommodate all off-street parking associated with an individual event. 
Exterminator: An establishment engaged in the service of killing insects, mice, rats or other pests. 
Facade: The exterior wall of a building exposed to public view or that wall viewed by persons not within the building. 
Family: An individual, or two (2) or more persons related by blood, marriage, adoption or guardianship, or a group of not more than four (4) unrelated persons, occupying a single dwelling unit and using the same cooking facilities; provided however that domestic servants employed on the premises may be housed on the premises without being counted as a separate family or families. Any group which is licensed by the State of Georgia, or any political subdivision thereof, which contains up to six developmentally disabled persons and up to two supervisors or surrogate parents residing on the premise at one time shall constitute a family. 
Farm: An area of land principally devoted to agriculture. 
Farm Supply Store: An establishment engaged in the retail sale of animal feeds, fertilizers, agricultural chemicals, pesticides, seeds and other such farm supplies. 
Fence: A structural barrier for enclosure, screening or demarcation, presenting a solid face or having openings amongst or between its constituents members; also, a wall separate from or extending from a building. 
Flea Market: The use of land, structures or buildings for the sale of produce or goods, usually second or cut-rate. 
Flood, Base: The flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, also known as the one-hundred-year flood. 
Flood, Flooding: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland waters or the unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood Hazard Area, Special: Special flood hazard areas are those lands subject to periodic flooding and shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map and/or Flood Hazard Boundary Map as a numbered or unnumbered "A" zone, subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any one given year. 
Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM): An official map of a community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, where the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard have been designated as Zone A. 
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM): An official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood Insurance Study: The official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration containing flood profiles as well as the Flood Hazard Boundary-Floodway Map and the water surface elevation of the base flood. 
Floodproofing: Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodplain: An area within the flood contour elevations subject to periodic flooding as designated by federal, state, regional, county or local studies. 
Flood Way: The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. 
Floor: The top surface of an enclosed area in a building (including basement), i.e., top of slab in concrete slab construction or top of wood flooring in wood frame construction. The term does not include the floor of a garage used solely for parking vehicles. 
Floor Area: The gross heated, finished horizontal area of the floor or floors of a dwelling unit, exclusive of basement, attic, carport or garage. 
Floor, Habitable: Any floor usable for living purposes, which includes sleeping, working, eating, cooking or recreation, or a combination thereof. A floor used for storage only is not a habitable floor. 
Floor, Lowest: The floor of least elevation including basement and garage. 
Funeral Home: A building or part thereof used for human funeral services, which may contain space and facilities for: embalming and the performance of other services used in preparation of the dead for burial; performance of autopsies; storage of caskets; and chapel services. 
Furniture Finishing and Repair: An establishment engaged in the stripping, cleaning, painting, staining, sealing, varnishing, or other like refinishing of the wood or metal components of furniture or the replacement or repair of broken or missing portions of a piece of furniture. 
Garage: An accessory building or portion of a principal building used only for the private storage of motor vehicles and other personal property as an accessory use. 
Glare: A sensation of brightness within the visual field that causes annoyance, discomfort, or loss in visual performance and visibility. 
Governing Body: The Mayor and City Council of the City of Dahlonega, duly elected by the citizens within the jurisdiction. 
Grade: The average of the finished ground levels at the center of all walls of a building. 
Greenhouse: A building designed or used for growing or propagating plants, with walls or roof usually designed to transmit light. Greenhouses shall not be construed to include commercial horticultural activities. 
Guest House: A lodging unit for temporary guests in an accessory building. No such lodging unit shall contain independent cooking or kitchen facilities and shall not be rented or otherwise used as a separate dwelling. 
Height, Building: The vertical distance measured from the grade to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof; to the decklines of a mansard roof; or to the mean height level between the eaves and ridge of a gable, hip or gambrel roof. 
Heliport: An area, either at ground level or elevated on a structure, licensed or approved for the landing and takeoff of helicopters, and including auxiliary facilities such as parking, waiting room, fueling and maintenance equipment. 
Helistop: A heliport, but without auxiliary facilities such as parking, waiting room, fueling and maintenance equipment. 
Historic Commission: (See Preservation Commission). 
Historic District: A geographically defined area that has been officially designated by the Governing body as a historic district within or pursuant to the procedures and requirements of the Historic Preservation Ordinance of Dahlonega, Georgia. 
Historic Property: An individual building, structure, site, or object, including the adjacent area necessary for the proper appreciation thereof, designated by the Governing body as a historic property pursuant to the procedures and requirements of the Historic Preservation Ordinance of Dahlonega, Georgia. 
Historic Structure: Any structure that is: listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to quality as a registered historic district; individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior, or directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Home Occupation: Any use, occupation or activity conducted entirely within the dwelling by the residents thereof, which is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for residence purposes and does not change the character thereof, and in connection with which there is no display, no stock-in-trade nor commodity sold or stored on the premises; and where only those persons residing on the premises are employed specifically in connection with the home occupation. Provided further, that no mechanical equipment is installed or used except such as is normally used for domestic purposes. 
Hospital: An institution providing health services, for in-patients and medical or surgical care of the sick or injured, including as an integral part of the institution, such related facilities as laboratories, out-patients department, training facilities, central service facilities and staff offices. 
Hotel: A public commercial lodging facility intended for use as temporary residence including meals, entertainment and various personal services provided for compensation to persons traveling for business, tourism or other visitation purposes in which ingress and egress from all rooms is made through an inside lobby or office supervised by a person in charge at all hours. 
Household Pet: An animal which is customarily kept for company or pleasure within a home or yard which is not exhibited to the public, nor raised for commercial purposes. Household pets include domestic canines, felines, tropical birds, fish, rabbits, rodents and other animals customarily sold in pet stores. 
Inoperable Vehicle: Any motorized vehicle, other than those vehicles temporarily disabled incapable of immediately being driven. Any motorized vehicle without a current vehicle registration tag shall be considered an inoperable vehicle. 
Junk/Salvage Yard: Any property involving the abandonment, parking, storage or disassembly of junked or inoperable vehicles or junked machinery, the abandonment, storage, sale, or resale of used auto parts, tires, scrap iron, metal, used plumbing fixtures, old stoves, refrigerators and/or other old household appliances, used brick, wood, or other building/structural materials, used paper, rags or other scrap materials. 
Kennel: The housing, breeding, boarding or training of four (4) or more dogs, cats, or other domestic animals, whether or not it is operated for the purpose of providing income or revenue. 
Laboratory: A place devoted to experimental study, such as testing and analyzing, but not including the manufacturing of product or products. 
Land-Disturbing Activity: Any grading, scraping, excavating, or filling of land; clearing of vegetation; any other alteration of land which causes land and stream bank erosion, siltation or water pollution; and any construction, rebuilding or alteration of a structure. 
Landfill: An area wherein solid wastes are placed, compacted and covered but specifically excluding hazardous or radioactive wastes. 
Landscape Strip: That portion of a given lot, not covered by buildings, pavement, parking, access and service areas, established as landscaped open space, the width of which is measured from a given property line and extending the developed portion of the property line. A landscape strip, as distinguished from a buffer, may be disturbed by grading or side development but shall be maintained as landscaped open space. A landscape strip may consist of grass lawns, decorative planting, berms, walls, fences or other approved features designed and arranged to produce an aesthetically pleasing effect within and outside of the development. 
Landscaping: Changing, rearranging or adding to the original vegetation or scenery of a piece of land to produce an aesthetic effect appropriate for the use to which the land is put. It may include reshaping the land by moving the earth, as well as preserving the original vegetation. 
Landscaping Service: An establishment engaged in performing a variety of lawn and landscaping services such as lawn fertilizing, mowing, spraying and planting, and the planting and maintenance of landscaping. 
Laundromat: A business that provides home-type washing and drying machines for hire to be used by customers on the premises. 
Library: A building in which literary, musical, artistic or reference materials are kept for use but not generally for sale. 
Loading and Unloading Space: A space, typically with dimensions of twelve (12) feet by sixty (60) feet, logically and conveniently located for pickups and/or deliveries or for loading and/or unloading, scaled to delivery vehicles to be used, and accessible to such vehicles. 
Lodging House: A fraternity house, sorority house, dormitory, or other such building designed and occupied, with or without separate kitchen or housekeeping facilities for each unit. 
Lot: A parcel of land occupied or capable of being occupied for a use, by a building or group of buildings devoted to a common use, together with the customary accessories and open spaces belonging to the same, and having principal frontage on a public street; a developed or undeveloped tract of land in one ownership legally transferable as a single unit of land. 
Lot Area: The total horizontal area within the lot lines of a lot, exclusive of public street right-of-ways. 
Lot, Corner: A lot abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection. 
Lot Coverage: The part or percent of a lot occupied by buildings and structures, including accessory buildings and structures, but not including unenclosed parking areas. 
Lot Depth: The mean horizontal distance from the front lot line to the rear lot line. 
Lot, Double Frontage: Any lot, other than a corner lot, which has frontage on two (2) streets that do not intersect at a point abutting the property. 
Lot, Flag: A tract or lot of land of uneven dimensions in which the portion fronting on a public street is less than the required minimum width for construction of a building or structure on that lot. 
Lot Frontage: The width in linear feet of a lot where it abuts the right-of-way of any public street. 
Lot of Record: A lot which is part of a subdivision, a plat of which has been recorded in the records of the County Superior Court Clerk; or a parcel of land, the deed of which has been recorded in the same office as of November 6, 1979. 
Lot Width: The horizontal distance between side lot lines measured at the minimum required front yard (regulatory front building set back) line. 
Mail Order Office: An establishment which engages in the taking of requests for mail order or catalog merchandise by telephone, but not including, the storage or distribution of such merchandise. The establishment where orders are picked up or taken in person is not considered a mail order office. 
Manufacturing, Processing and Assembling: The mechanical or chemical transformation of materials or substances into new products. The land uses engaged in these activities are usually described as plants, factories or mills and characteristically use power driven machines and materials handling equipment. Establishments engaged in assembling component parts of manufactured products are also considered under this definition if the new product is neither a fixed structure nor other fixed improvement. Also included is the blending of materials such as lubricating oils, plastic resins or liquors. 
Marina: A facility for storing, servicing, fueling and securing and launching of boats and other private pleasure craft. 
Marquee: A permanent roof-like structure made of metal or other durable material affixed to the wall of a building. 
Material Change in Appearance: A change that will affect either the exterior architectural or environmental features of a historic property or any building, structure, site, object, landscape feature or work of art within a historic district. 
Metes and Bounds: A system of describing and identifying land by distances or measures (metes) and bearings or direction (bounds) from an identifiable point of reference, such as a monument or other marker or the corner of intersecting streets. 
Mini-Warehouse: A building or group of buildings in a controlled access and fenced compound that contains varying sizes of individual, compartmentalized stalls or lockers used for storage, including accessory office and/or night watchman's residence, but not including retail sale on the premises, commercial repair or other services, manufacturing or any other commercial use. 
Mobile Home: A new or used, currently or formerly transportable structure, equipped or used now or previously for residential purposes, originally constructed to be towed on its chassis and suitable for year-round occupancy and containing the same water supply, waste disposal, and electrical conveniences as immobile housing. It can consist of one or more units that can be telescoped when towed and expanded later for additional capacity, or two or more units separately towable but designed to be joined only by incidental hookups, but excluding motorized homes; Or a structure transportable in one or more sections built on a permanent chassis, and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning (if any), and electrical systems contained therein; Or that certain type of manufactured housing which is regulated by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, including any structure or component whereof wholly or in substantial part made, fabricated, formed, or assembled in manufacturing facilities for ultimate installation or assembly on a building site and has been manufactured in such a manner where all parts cannot be inspected at the installation site without disassembly, damage to, or destruction thereof; Or a factory-fabricated home built in one or more sections, which must adhere to a national code for construction. 
Mobile Home Park: A parcel of land or any portion thereof under single ownership which has been designed, planned, or improved for the placement of two or more mobile homes for residential use, including land, buildings, and facilities used by the occupants of mobile homes on such property. 
Mobile Home Space: A parcel of land within a mobile home park which is reserved or leased for the placement of an individual mobile home and accessory structures for the exclusive use of its occupants. 
Modular Home: Any structure or component thereof, designed primarily for residential occupancy which is wholly or in substantial part made, fabricated, formed, or assembled in manufacturing facilities for installation, or assembly and installation, on the building site, and which is designed and constructed to conform to the local building code rather than a national housing or construction code. 
Motel: A public commercial lodging facility intended for use as temporary residence including meals, entertainment and various personal services provided for compensation to persons traveling for business, tourism or other visitation purposes, distinguished from a hotel in that ingress and/or egress to and from all rooms is made primarily from an exterior walkway rather than from an interior lobby. 
Museum: An establishment engaged in the procurement, care, study, and display of objects of historical, educational and cultural value and interest. 
New Construction: Any structure for which the start of construction commenced after the effective date of these regulations. The term also includes any subsequent improvements to such structure. 
Non-Conforming Lot: A lot, the area, width, or other characteristic of which fails to meet requirements of the zoning district in which it is located and which was of record as of November 6, 1979. Any lot which was subsequently annexed into the Dahlonega City limits which does not meet the requirements of the particular zoning district shall also be considered a non-conforming lot. 
Non-Conforming Structure: Any building or structure which does not conform to the regulations governing the bulk, location, height or size of buildings or structures permitted in the district. 
Non-Conforming Use: Any building or use of land or building lawfully existing at the effective date of these regulations or as a result of subsequent amendments to these regulations, which does not conform with the permitted use provisions established herein for the district in which it is located. 
Nuisance: Anything that interferes with the use or enjoyment of property, endangers public health or safety, or is offensive to the senses. 
Nursing Home: Any building in which aged, chronically ill or incurable persons are housed and furnished with meals and professional nursing care for compensation, but not including hospitals and mental health institutions. 
Office: A building or portion thereof wherein services are performed involving predominantly administrative, professional or clerical operations and not involving retail sales or other sales of any kind on the premises. 
Official Zoning Map: The map, which accompanies the zoning ordinance text, that delineates the geographic location of the boundaries of zoning districts established in this ordinance in relation to natural features, man-made features and/or property uses. 
Open Air Business: Any commercial establishment that displays products in a non-enclosed area. 
Open Space, Landscaped: That portion or portions of a given lot, not covered by buildings, pavement, parking, access and service areas, set aside and maintained as a buffer, landscape strip or other approved open area. 
Outdoor Display: See Outdoor Display, Outdoor Storage and Outdoor Sales. 
Outdoor Storage: See Outdoor Display, Outdoor Storage and Outdoor Sales. 
Outdoor Display, Outdoor Storage and Outdoor Sales: The keeping, in an unenclosed area, of any goods, junk, material or merchandise in front of a business, building or establishment or in an area visible from a public street, for display, advertisement or purposes for attracting rental or sales.Such definition shall not be construed as to include the temporary loading or unloading of such goods, junk, material or merchandise to or from an enclosed area in which the period of time of storage is less than twenty-four hours and said items are not offered for attracting rental or sales during the temporary storage period. Further, this definition shall not include outdoor display, storage and sales in non-residential zones of the City of Dahlonega, provided that: 
1.  The display, storage and sales are to be conducted by nonprofit organizations; 
2.  Said nonprofit organizations must be civic or religious entities which maintain a local organization located within the boundaries of Lumpkin County, Georgia; 
3.  The nonprofit organization must have received a permit from the City of Dahlonega and countersigned by the Sheriff of Lumpkin County for this activity at least thirty (30) days in advance of the date upon which sales will occur; and 
4.  The display, storage and sales are not conducted upon any public road and are not conducted on a door-to-door basis. 
Parking Lot: Any public or private open area used for the express purpose of temporary storage of private motor vehicles. A parking lot may be the principal use on a given lot or an accessory use to the principal use on a given lot. 
Parking Space: An area having typical dimensions of not less than nine (9) feet by twenty (20) feet and three hundred (300) square feet including maneuvering space within a parking lot, to be used exclusively as a temporary storage space for a motor vehicle. 
Permitted Use: A use by right which is specifically authorized in a particular zoning district. 
Person: An individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association or institution, including any trustee, assigns or other representative. 
Personal Care Home: A dwelling in which the aged or infirmed persons are boarded and receive personal care on a 24-hour basis, but not including professional treatment. 
Photography Studio: An establishment engaged in photography for the general public, including but not limited to portrait, passport, wedding and other special occasion photographs. 
Planned Unit Development: A form of development usually characterized by a unified site design for a number of housing units, clustered buildings, common open space, density increases, and a mix of building types and land uses. 
Planning Commission: The Dahlonega Planning Commission as established in this Ordinance. 
Premises: A lot as otherwise used in this Ordinance. 
Preservation Commission: Preservation Commission: The body established and appointed by the Governing Body, as provided in the Historic Preservation Ordinance of the City of Dahlonega, which is authorized to review and approve the architectural styles and compatibility of buildings and structures and to act on applications for certificates of appropriateness within historic districts and upon historic properties designated by the Governing Body under said ordinance. 
Public Use: Any building, structure or use owned and/or operated by the Federal Government, State of Georgia, Lumpkin County or other county, the City of Dahlonega or other municipality, or any authority, agency, board or commission of the above governments, which is necessary to serve a public purpose, such as but not limited to the following: government administrative buildings, police and fire stations, public health facilities and hospitals, public works camps, parks and community centers, public roads and streets, airports, water and sanitary sewerage storage, intake, collection and treatment and pumping facilities, public housing facilities, jails and correctional centers. 
Recreation Facility, Commercial: A use of land involving some form of recreational activity or activities operated as a business and open to the public for a fee. 
Recreational Vehicle: A vehicular type portable structure which can be towed, hauled or driven and is primarily designed as temporary living accommodations for recreational, camping and travel uses. 
Recreational Vehicle (RV) Park: Any lot of land upon which two or more recreational vehicle sites are located, established or maintained for occupancy on a temporary basis by recreational vehicles of the general public as temporary living quarters by campers, vacationers or travelers. 
Recycling Collection Center: A principal or accessory use that serves as a neighborhood or regional drop-off point for temporary storage of recoverable resources such as cans, bottles and newspapers, but specifically excluding processing of such resources. 
Recycling Plant: A facility in which recoverable resources such as cans, bottles and newspapers are recycled, reprocessed and treated to return such products to a condition in which they may again be used in packaging or for production. 
Rehabilitation: The process of returning a property to a state of utility, through repair or alteration, which makes possible an efficient contemporary use while preserving those portions of the property which are significant to its historic, architectural and cultural values. 
Rehabilitation Center: Facilities authorized or licensed by appropriate agencies for the primary purpose of rehabilitation of: offenders against the law; persons with drug or alcohol abuse problems; mentally handicapped; and physically handicapped. 
Residence For Caretaker or Night Watchman: An accessory residence, which may be a mobile home, located inside or in addition to the principal structure or use of a parcel of land, designed or occupied by security personnel for security reasons only. 
Residential District: Any R-1, R-2, R-3 or MHP Zoning District as indicated on the Official Zoning Map. 
Restaurant: Any place or premises used for sale, dispensing or service of food, refreshment or beverages. 
Restaurant, Drive-in: Any place or premises used for sale, dispensing or service of food, refreshment or beverage to person(s) in automobiles, including those establishments where customers may eat or drink on the premises. 
Rezoning: An amendment to or a change in the official zoning map. 
Right-of-Way: That area, distinguished from an easement, which is owned in fee-simple title by the governing body or other government, for the present or future use of roads, streets, and highways, together with its drainage facilities and other supporting uses and structures. 
Rooming House: A building where, for compensation, lodging only is provided. 
Sanitarium: A hospital used for treating chronic and usually long-term illness. 
Satellite Dish Antenna: A round, parabolic antenna intended to receive signals from orbiting satellites and other sources. 
School: A facility that provides a curriculum of elementary and secondary academic instruction. A school is considered public if operated by the County Board of Education. 
School, Trade, Technical, Business: An establishment in which is offered, for compensation, instruction in a trade, craft, technical field, or business skills. 
Screening: A method of shielding, obscuring or buffering one use or building from another use or building by fencing, walls, berms, densely planted vegetation, natural vegetation or other means; a visual and acoustical barrier which is of such nature and density that provides year-round maximum opacity from the ground to a height of at least six (6) feet or that screens structures and activities from view from the normal level of a first story window on an abutting lot. 
Semi-Public Use: Any building, structure or use owned and/or operated by private utilities or private companies for a public purpose, or which is reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate service by such utilities, such as but not limited to the following: underground or overhead gas, electrical, steam or water distribution or transmission lines or systems, electric power substations, wires, towers, cables, and poles. 
Service Station: Any building, structure or land used for the retail sale of motor vehicle fuel, oil, accessories, and motor vehicle servicing, except that major repairs, body repairs, and painting of motor vehicles shall not be considered motor vehicle servicing. 
Setback: The minimum horizontal distance between a street, alley, or the property boundary lines of a lot and the front, rear, or side lines of a building located on that lot. 
Shopping Center: A group of commercial establishments, planned, developed, owned and managed as a unit, with off-street parking on the property. 
Sign: deleted 
Sign, Animated: deleted 
Sign Area: deleted 
Sign, Bench: deleted 
Sign, Construction: deleted 
Sign, Directional: deleted 
Sign, Flashing: deleted 
Sign, Freestanding: deleted 
Sign, Ground: deleted 
Sign Height: deleted 
Sign, Identification: deleted 
Sign, Internally Illuminated: deleted 
Sign, Mansard: deleted 
Sign Number: deleted 
Sign, Off-site: deleted 
Sign, On-site: deleted 
Sign, Political: deleted 
Sign, Portable: deleted 
Sign Projecting: deleted 
Sign, Real Estate: deleted 
Sign, Roof: deleted 
Sign, Sandwich: deleted 
Sign, Special Event: deleted 
Sign Structure: deleted 
Sign, Wall: deleted 
Sign, Window: deleted 
Site Plan: A graphic illustration, two-dimensional, prepared to scale, showing accurately and with complete dimensioning, the boundaries of a lot or tract and the location of all buildings, structures, uses and principal site development features proposed for a specific lot or tract of land. 
Slaughterhouse: An establishment where animals are killed, butchered and prepared for further processing. 
Story: That portion of a building comprised between a floor and the floor or roof next above. 
Street: A public or private thoroughfare which is open to the general public and which affords the principal means of access to abutting property. 
Street, Arterial: Unless otherwise specified by the Comprehensive Plan, Transportation element of the Comprehensive Plan or Major Thoroughfare Plan, arterial streets are those streets and highway facilities, including full and partial access controlled highways and major urban area entrance highways, which are designed to carry the highest traffic volumes and the longest trips through and within an urban area. 
Street, Collector: Unless otherwise specified by the Comprehensive Plan, Transportation element of the Comprehensive Plan or Major Thoroughfare Plan, collector streets are those streets that collect traffic from minor streets or other collector streets and channel it to the arterial system. Collector streets provide land access and traffic circulation within residential neighborhoods, commercial and industrial areas. 
Street, Public: A dedicated and accepted public right-of-way which affords the principal means of access to abutting properties. 
Structure: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires more or less permanent location on the ground, or which is attached to something having more or less permanent location on the ground, not including utility poles. 
Subdivision: The division of a parcel or tract of land into two (2) or more lots for the purposes of creation of lots for development, the rearrangement of existing lot lines, or for the purpose of transfer of ownership. 
Substantial Improvement: Any combination of repairs, reconstruction, alteration, or improvement to a building, taking place during the life of a building, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds fifty percent of the market value of the building. The market value of the building should be (1) the appraised value of the building prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or (2) in the case of damage, the value of the building prior to the damage occurring. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
The term does not, however, include any project for improvement of a building required to comply with existing health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the Code Enforcement Official and which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions. 
Taxi Cab Station: An establishment engaged in furnishing passenger transportation by automobile or van, not operating on regular schedules or between fixed terminals and containing space for taxi cab fleets and related office facilities. 
Temporary Use: A prospective use, intended for a specified limited duration. 
Townhouse: One (1) of a group of three (3) or more attached dwelling units under fee simple ownership. 
Transitional Use: A permitted use, building or structure that by nature or level and scale of activity acts as a transition or buffer between two or more incompatible uses. 
Travel Trailer: A portable dwelling or lodging unit, distinguished from a mobile home, designed for short-term travel, recreational or vacation use, including pickup campers and motor homes. 
Tree: Any self-supporting, woody perennial plant having a single trunk diameter of two (2) inches or more which normally grows at maturity to an overall height of a minimum of fifteen (15) feet. 
Tree Protection Zone: All areas of a lot or tract of land defined as the combined minimum front yard, minimum side yards, minimum rear yard or minimum buffer required by the particular district regulations within which such property is located. 
Truck Stop: An area principally devoted to the service re-fueling, temporary storage or parking of trucks, including accessory buildings, structures and uses such as restaurants. 
Truck Terminal: An area where cargo is stored for routing or reshipment and where trucks load and unload cargo on a regular basis, or an area in which semi-trailers and/or trucks are parked and stored. 
Unenclosed Area: Any area of a given lot or structure which is not covered with a roof and protected by opaque walls on each of the sides of said area or structure. 
Use, Principal: The primary or predominant purpose for which an individual tract of land, building or structure may be designed, arranged, intended, maintained, or occupied; or the primary or predominant activity, occupation, business, or operation carried on, or intended to be carried on, in a building or on a structure or a tract of land. A use that is an accessory use to a principal use on a property shall not be considered a principal use. (See the definition of an "accessory building, structure or use.) 
Variance: A minimal relaxation or modification of the strict terms of the height, area, placement, setback, yard, buffer, landscape strip, parking and loading regulations as applied to specific property when, because of particular physical surroundings, shape, or topographical condition of the property, compliance would result in a particular hardship upon the owner, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience or a desire to make a profit. 
Warehouse: A building or group of buildings for the storage of goods or wares, with access to contents only through management personnel. 
Wetland: An area that is inundated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation. 
Wholesale Distribution: An establishment engaged in selling merchandise to retailers, to industrial, commercial, institutional or professional business users or to other wholesalers. 
Wrecked Motor Vehicle Compound: An area used to store disabled motor vehicles until such time as their disposition (either by junk, salvage or repair) has been determined by the insurance company, the owner of the vehicle, or his legal representative. 
Yard: A space on the same lot with a principal building, which is open, unoccupied, and unobstructed by buildings or structures from ground to sky except where encroachments and accessory buildings are expressly permitted. A yard may contain a parking and/or loading area unless otherwise specified by these regulations. 
Yard, Front: A space on the same lot with a principal building, extending the full width of the lot, and situated between the street right-of-way and the front line of the building projected to the side lines of the lot. In the case of a corner lot, both spaces with street frontage shall be considered front yards. In the case of double frontage lots, the spaces as defined above shall both be considered front yards. 
Yard, Rear: An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a principal building, extending the full width of the lot and situated between the rear line of the lot and the rear line of the building projected to the side lines of the lot. 
Yard, Side: A space on the same lot with a principal building, situated between the building and the side lot line and extending from the rear line of the front yard to the front line of the rear yard. 
Yard Sale: The temporary sale of home furniture, appliances, clothing and/or domestic items owned by an occupant of a residential dwelling and taking place on the premises on which such occupant resides, whether in the yard or in a carport or garage, usually as a result of the occupant moving/relocating to another place of residence. Yard sales which do not take place on the premises on which such occupant resides are considered open-air businesses and are permitted only as a conditional use in the B-2, Highway Business District. 
Zero Lot Line: The location of a building on a lot in such a manner that one or more building sides have no side building set back and rest directly on a side lot line. 
Zoning: A police power measure in which the community is divided into districts or zones within which permitted uses, and in some cases conditional uses, are established as well as regulations governing lot size, bulk, height and other development requirements. 
Zoning Administrative Officer: The zoning administrative officer of the City of Dahlonega, or his authorized representative. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ; Ord. No. 2018-08, 8-13-2018 ) 
ARTICLE IV. - ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS: PROVISION FOR OFFICIAL ZONING MAP 

Sec. 401. - Use districts. 
For the purpose of this Ordinance, the City of Dahlonega is hereby divided into use districts as set out below: 
R-1, Single Family Residential District 
R-2, Multiple-Family Residential District 
R-3, Multiple-Family Residential District 
MHP, Mobile Home Park District 
PUD, Planned Unit Development District 
B-1, Neighborhood Business District 
B-2, Highway Business District 
B-3, Historical Business District 
CBD, Central Business District 
O-I, Office-Institutional District 
I, Industrial District 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 402. - Official zoning map. 
The location and boundaries of the above listed districts are hereby established as shown on a map entitled Official Zoning Map of the City of Dahlonega, Georgia. Said map, together with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this Ordinance. 
The Official Zoning Map shall be identified by the signature of the Mayor, attested by the City Clerk, and bear the seal of the City or that of a Notary Public under the following words: "This is to certify that this is the Official Zoning Map referred to in Article IV of the Zoning Ordinance, City of Dahlonega, Georgia", together with the date of the adoption of the Ordinance. 
If in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance and the applicable laws of the State of Georgia, changes are made in boundaries or other matter portrayed on the Official Zoning Map, such changes shall be entered on the Official Zoning Map promptly after the amendment has been approved by the City Council, with appropriate entry or indication of such amendment on the Official Zoning Map. No amendment to this Ordinance which involves matter portrayed on the Official Zoning Map shall become effective until after such change and entry has been made on said map. 
No changes of any nature shall be made in the Official Zoning Map or matter shown thereon except in conformity with the procedures set forth in this Ordinance. Any unauthorized change of whatever kind by any person or persons shall be considered a violation of this Ordinance. 
Regardless of the existence of purported copies of the Official Zoning Map which may from time to time be made or published, the Official Zoning Map shall be located in the Office of the Mayor, City of Dahlonega and shall be the final authority as to the current zoning status of land and water areas, buildings, and other structures in the City. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 403. - Replacement of official zoning map. 
In the event that the Official Zoning Map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost, or difficult to interpret because of the nature or number of changes and additions, the City Council may adopt a new Official Zoning Map which shall supersede the prior Official Zoning Map. The new Official Zoning Map may correct drafting or other errors or omissions in the prior Official Zoning Map, but no such correction shall have the effect of amending the original Official Zoning Map or any subsequent amendment thereof. The new Official Zoning Map shall be identified by the signature of the Mayor, attested by the City Clerk, and bear the seal of the City or a Notary public under the following words: "This is to certify that this Official Zoning Map supersedes and replaces the Official Zoning Map adopted (date of adoption of map being replaced) as part of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Dahlonega, Georgia." 
Unless the prior Official Zoning Map has been lost, or has been totally destroyed, the prior map or any significant parts thereof remaining, shall be preserved, together with all available records pertaining to its adoption or amendment. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 404. - Interpretation of district boundaries. 
1.  Where boundaries are indicated as approximately following the centerline of streets or highways, street right-of-way lines or railroad right-of-way lines or such lines extended, such centerline, street right-of-way lines, or railroad right-of-way lines shall be construed to be such boundaries. 
2.  Where boundaries are indicated as approximately following the corporate limit line of the city, such corporate limit line shall be construed to be such boundaries. 
3.  Where boundaries are indicated as approximately following property lines or such lines extended, such property lines or such lines extended, as indicated by boundary survey, deed or legal description maintained in the official file of said zoning adoption or amendment, if available, shall be construed to be such boundaries. 
4.  Where boundaries are indicated as approximately following the centerline of stream beds or river beds, such centerline shall be construed to be such boundaries. 
5.  In the case where the exact location of a boundary cannot be determined by the foregoing methods, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall, upon application, determine the location of the boundary. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 405. - Boundary line divides a lot of single ownership. 
Where a boundary line as appearing on the Official Zoning Map divides a lot in single ownership at the time of the enactment of these regulations, the requirements for the district in which the greater portion of the lot lies may be extended to the balance of the lot without recourse or amendment procedure, provided that this provision shall not apply to a double frontage lot. In the case of a double frontage lot, the restrictions of the district applying to the adjoining lots which front on the same street as the lot frontage in question shall apply. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 406. - Designation after street abandonment. 
Where a public street, alley or other right-of-way is officially vacated or abandoned, the regulations applicable to the property to which it reverted shall apply to such vacated or abandoned public street, alley, or right-of-way. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
ARTICLE V. - NON-CONFORMING LOTS, BUILDINGS AND USES 

Sec. 501. - Purpose and intent. 
Within the districts established by this ordinance, there exist certain incompatible lots, buildings, structures, signs and uses of land which were lawful before these regulations were adopted but which would be prohibited, regulated or restricted under the terms of these regulations or future amendments. 
It is the intention of this Article to permit these non-conformities to continue, but not to encourage their survival. It is further the intent of these regulations that non-conformities shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended, nor be used as grounds for variances or for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 502. - Non-conforming lots of record. 
In any district, notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of these regulations, a single-family dwelling and customary accessory buildings or any other permitted use may be erected on any single lot of record existing at the effective date of adoption or amendment of these regulations, even though such lot fails to meet the requirements for area or width, or both, applicable to the particular district involved, provided that yard dimensions and other requirements of the lot shall conform to the regulations for the district in which the lot is located. 
Except for those lots described above, if two (2) or more lots or combinations of lots and portions of lots with continuous frontage in single ownership are of record at the time of adoption or amendment of these regulations, and if all or part of the lots do not meet the requirements for lot width and area as established by these regulations, the lands involved shall be considered an undivided parcel for the purposes of these regulations, and no portion of said parcel shall be used which does not meet lot width and area requirements established by these regulations, nor shall any division of the parcel be made which leaves remaining any lot with width or area below the applicable requirements. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 503. - Continuance of non-conforming use. 
The lawful use of any building, structure, sign or land existing at the time of enactment of these regulations may be continued, subject to the limitations of Section 504, even though such use does not conform with the provisions of these regulations, except that the use of a principal building, structure or land containing a non-conforming use shall not be: 
1.  Changed to another non-conforming use; 
2.  Reestablished after discontinuance or abandonment for six (6) months; 
3.  Expanded, enlarged or extended, unless such use is changed to a use permitted in the district in which such use is located; 
4.  Rebuilt, altered or repaired after damage exceeding fifty (50%) percent of its replacement cost at the time of destruction as determined by the Building Official, and provided such rebuilding, alteration or repair is completed within one (1) year of such damage; 
5.  Moved in whole or in part to any other portion of the lot occupied by such use, except in conformity with these regulations. 
Nothing in this Article shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition any building, structure, or portion thereof, declared to be unsafe by an official charged with protecting the public safety or health, upon order of such official. 
Changes in ownership or tenancy of a non-conforming use are permitted. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 504. - Expansion of non-conforming buildings. 
A non-conforming building which contains a conforming use may be expanded, enlarged or extended, provided that any such additions meet the applicable yard and building setbacks, buffer and landscape strip requirements and all other regulations for the district in which it is located. This section shall not, however, be construed as to authorize the expansion of a non-conforming building for a use which is not permitted by the regulations for the district within which such building is located. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 505. - Buildings under construction. 
Nothing in this Article shall be deemed to require a change in the plans, construction, or designated use of any building on which actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the adoption of these regulations. 
ARTICLE VI. - OFF-STREET PARKING, LOADING AND ACCESS REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 601. - Off-street parking and loading spaces required. 
Off-street automobile parking and loading spaces shall be provided, as specified in this Article, for uses and structures hereafter established in all districts at the time of initial construction of any principal building, unless otherwise exempted from this Article. For developments phased in timing, parking and loading requirements may also be phased in accordance with the requirements applying for each particular time phase of development. 
Any building or use that is subsequently enlarged or converted to another use shall meet the off-street parking and loading space requirements of this Article, for the enlarged or new use. 
Required parking and loading spaces shall be maintained and shall not be encroached upon by refuse containers, signs or other structures, unless an equal number of spaces are provided elsewhere in conformance with these regulations. 
Required parking and loading spaces shall be provided with vehicular access to a public street or alley, unless such access is prohibited by these regulations. 
Off-street parking and loading facilities required shall be located on the same lot as the principal building or use. However, as much as fifty (50%) percent of the required number of parking spaces may be located within four hundred (400) feet of the principal building or use, provided proof of ownership or a valid lease agreement for use of such premises is provided to the Zoning Administrative Officer. Such distance shall be measured between the nearest point of the parking facility and the nearest point of the principal building or use. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 602. - Minimum number of off-street parking spaces required. 
The minimum number of required off-street parking spaces for each type of permitted use shall be as indicated below. For uses not specifically listed, the off-street parking requirements shall be those of the most similar use as determined by the Zoning Administrative Officer. When the application of these parking requirements results in a fractional space requirement, the fractional space requirement shall be construed to mean one (1) additional space. 

 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ; Ord. No. 2018-08, 8-13-2018 ) 
Sec. 603. - Handicapped parking requirements. 
Each parking area of six (6) or more spaces devoted to uses other than residential shall provide handicapped parking spaces (a minimum of twelve feet in width), counted as a part of the total parking required, in accordance with the following scale: 

 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 604. - Minimum number of off-street loading spaces required. 
On the same lot with every building, structure or part thereof, erected or occupied for manufacturing, storage, warehouse, truck freight terminal, goods display, department store, wholesale store, market, hotel, hospital, mortuary, laundry, dry cleaning, retail business or other uses similarly involving the receipt or distribution of vehicles, materials or merchandise, there shall be provided and maintained on the lot adequate space for the standing, loading and unloading services to avoid undue interference with public use of streets and alleys. 
Such loading and unloading space, unless otherwise adequately provided for, shall be an area twelve (12) feet by sixty (60) feet, with fourteen-foot height clearance, and shall be provided according to the following schedule. 
For the above described uses, one (1) loading space shall be provided for the first 25,000 square feet of gross floor area or fractional part thereof. Uses in excess of 25,000 square feet shall provide loading spaces according to the following schedule: 

 
All plans for off-street loading areas shall be subject to the approval of the Zoning Administrative Officer. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 605. - Parking and loading area design requirements. 
605.1  Improvement of Parking Lots: 
All parking areas containing more than five (5) spaces shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  They shall be graded to insure proper drainage, surfaced with concrete or asphalt, and maintained in good condition free of obstructions. 
b.  Parking areas shall not be used for the sale, repair, dismantling or servicing of any vehicle, equipment, materials or supplies. 
c.  Each parking space shall be clearly marked, and directional arrows or signs shall be provided wherever necessary. Markers, directional arrows and signs shall be properly maintained at all times. 
d.  A parking lot pavement setback of ten (10) feet from any public street right-of-way and five (5) feet from any exterior property line shall be provided, except where access points and interconnections to other parcels have been approved. The parking lot pavement setback shall be increased to ten (10) feet where such lot abuts a residential district. Concrete or other suitable curb stops shall be installed so as to prevent vehicle encroachment onto setback areas. 
e.  Not less than ten (10%) percent of the total area devoted to parking shall be landscaped open space. 
f.  Any lighting facilities installed shall be so arranged to prevent the direct illumination of adjacent residential properties or public streets. 
g.  A site plan indicating property lines, parking areas, location of parking spaces, pavement setbacks, drainage facilities, paving materials, access and other features required to ensure compliance with this Article shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrative Officer. A permit shall be required prior to the construction of new parking areas, or for the expansion or alteration of existing parking areas. 
605.2  Curb Cut And Access Specifications: 
Access from public streets to all parking areas, regardless of the number of parking spaces provided, shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  Curb cuts or access breaks for service drives, entrances and exits on public streets shall not be located within fifty (50) feet of the intersections of two (2) curb lines, street pavement lines or such lines extended or any street intersection nor within forty (40) feet of another curb cut or access break on the same side of the street. 
b.  Curb cuts shall be no greater than forty (40) feet in width and no closer than twenty (20) feet to any property line, unless common use of driveways for an abutting lot is required or approved by the City Engineer. 
c.  No more than two (2) curb cuts or access breaks shall be permitted for any lot or parcel with a frontage of two hundred (200) feet or less on any one (1) street. 
d.  All curb cuts or access breaks onto public streets, except for those serving single-family detached residences, shall require a permit from the Building Official. 
e.  Curb cuts for driveways that serve commercial, office or industrial zoning districts shall not be permitted to pass through residential zoning districts or to access alleys that abut a residential zoning district. 
f.  Where the side of an accessed public street or alley does not contain curbing, such curbing or other method of approved access control shall be provided. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 606. - Exemption of B-3 Historical Business District. 
[Section previously] deleted. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 607. - Parking areas must be appropriately zoned. 
Parking areas, parking lots or parking garages which constitute the principal use of a lot shall only be permitted in B-2, B-3, CBD, and I zoning districts. In cases where parking areas, parking lots or parking garages exist or are proposed to serve as accessory parking for a particular building or use, regardless of whether such parking is required by this Article, such land, area or lot, including all access drives, shall require the same or less restrictive zoning district as that within which such building or use it serves is located. Similarly, in cases where accessory parking serves a building or use which requires, or was approved as, a conditional use, such parking area and access drives shall require the same conditional use approval as that for which such conditional use or building it serves. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
ARTICLE VII. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 701. - Use, occupancy and erection. 
No building, structure, land, open space or water shall hereafter be used or occupied and no building or structure or part thereof shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved, structurally altered or maintained, and no new use or change shall be made or maintained of any building, structure, land, open space or water, unless in conformity with all the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 702. - Minimum requirements. 
Within each district, the regulations set forth shall be minimum requirements and shall apply uniformly to each class or kind of building, structure or land. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 703. - Height limitations. 
No building or structure shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, or altered, except as otherwise specifically exempted in this ordinance, to exceed the story heights as laid out in figure 703.1 and 703.2; provided, however, that the Governing Body may permit buildings and structures to exceed these height limitations upon approval of a conditional use as specified in Article XXVII [Section 2608] of these regulations. Within the B-3, Historical Business District, no building or structure shall be erected to a height which is greater than the height of the existing building or structure with the greatest height within said district. Buildings erected within the R-1, R-2, R-3, B-1, I and MHP districts shall not exceed a building height of 35 feet. Buildings in B-2 and O-1 shall not exceed a height of 55 feet tall with the exception of South Park Street and Chestatee Street, which shall not exceed a building height of 35 feet. 
The height limitations established herein shall not apply to chimneys, smokestacks, church spires and steeples, domes, flag poles, public monuments, observation towers, water towers, non-commercial radio and television towers, electricity transmission towers, utility poles and similar structures. 


Definitions: 
Story Height: The height of each story is based on the ceiling height of the rooms plus the thickness of the floors between each pane. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ; Ord. No. 2018-13, 9-4-2018) 
Sec. 704. - Every use must be upon a lot. 
No building or structure shall be erected or use established unless upon a lot of record as defined by these regulations except as otherwise provided herein. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 705. - One principal building on a lot. 
Only one principal building and its accessory buildings may hereafter be erected on any one lot intended for such use; provided, however, that more than one multiple dwelling, office, institutional, commercial or industrial building may be located upon a lot, subject to setbacks and separation as provided in these regulations. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 706. - Separation between principal buildings. 
No principal building shall be located closer than twenty (20) feet to another principal building, except that in the B-3, Historical Business District, and CBD, Central Business District, such principal building separation shall not apply. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 707. - Reduction in lot size prohibited. 
No lot shall be reduced, divided or changed in size so that lot width, size of yards, lot area per dwelling unit or any other requirement of these regulations is not maintained, unless said reduction or division is necessary to provide land which is acquired for a public purpose. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 708. - Annexation. 
Any land area subsequently added to the incorporated area of Dahlonega shall automatically be classified R-1 (Single-Family Residential District) until or unless otherwise classified by amendment to the Official Zoning Map. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 709. - Street frontage requirement. 
No building or structure shall hereafter be erected on a lot that does not abut for at least thirty (30) feet on a public street unless the lot upon which the building permit is requested is an approved lot in an approved Planned Unit Development. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 710. - Use prohibited when not specified. 
Unless otherwise stated, any use not specifically permitted in a use district as provided in these regulations shall be prohibited in that district. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 711. - Accessory buildings and uses. 
Accessory buildings and uses shall be permitted only in side or rear yards, except as otherwise provided by these regulations. Accessory buildings, structures and uses shall be permitted only if they meet the following: 
1.  No accessory building shall be erected on a lot prior to the time of construction of the principal building to which it is accessory. 
2.  Only two (2) accessory buildings shall be permitted on a residential lot. 
3.  Accessory buildings and uses shall be setback a minimum of five (5) feet from any lot line. 
4.  Where an accessory building or structure is structurally attached to a principal building, it shall be subject to and must conform to all regulations applicable to the principal building. 
5.  In the case of double frontage lots, accessory buildings and structures shall observe front yard requirements on both streets. 
6.  Accessory buildings and structures in residential districts shall not be used for any type of commercial operation, whether permanent, part-time or as part of a home occupation. 
7.  No accessory building or structure on a residential lot shall exceed a height of twenty (20) feet. 
8.  Detached accessory buildings and structures shall be located a minimum often (10) feet from the principal building on a lot, except for ground-level structures such as patios and walkways. 
9.  In no instance shall an accessory building exceed the gross ground floor area of the principal building. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 712. - Regulations for specific accessory structures. 
The following specified structures shall conform to the following regulations: 
1.  Fences and Walls: 
All fences and walls shall conform to the following: 
a.  A permit shall be obtained from the Building Official. 
b.  No fence or wall shall exceed eight (8) feet in height, except for required retaining walls. 
c.  No fence or wall shall be erected closer than five (5) feet from a public right-of-way or in such a manner as to obstruct vision on a public right-of-way. 
d.  Barbed wire top strands six (6) feet above the ground may be permitted in commercial and industrial zoning districts. 
2.  Gasoline Pumps: 
Gasoline pumps and pump island shall be setback a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet from any public right-of-way or property line. 
3.  Canopies: 
Canopies and other attached or detached structures intended for cover shall be setback a minimum often (10) feet from any public right-of-way or property line. 
4.  Offices in Mobile Homes: 
Mobile homes or other temporary structures shall not be used as a permanent or temporary office in any district; provided, however that such mobile homes or structures may be used for a temporary construction office for a licensed contractor in any district, upon issuance of a permit by the Building Official. Said permit shall be temporary but renewable once after a period of six (6) months. 
5.  Satellite Dishes: 
Satellite receiving dish antennas shall be permitted as accessory structures only in rear yards unless it can be documented that reception is impaired by such a location. In such a case an antenna may be permitted in a side or front yard but not within a required front setback. Satellite dish antennas shall not be located on the roof of a single-family structure. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 713. - Home occupations. 
A home occupation as defined by these regulations shall conform to the following requirements: 
1.  Only residents of the dwelling may be engaged in the home occupation. Employment of person(s) not residing in the dwelling is expressly prohibited. 
2.  The home occupation shall be clearly incidental and secondary to the residential use of the dwelling and shall not change the residential character of the building or lot. 
3.  No storage or display of products or materials shall be visible from the adjoining street or adjacent properties, and only products produced on the premises may be sold on the premises. 
4.  Only vehicles used primarily as passenger vehicles shall be permitted in connection with the conduct of a home occupation. 
5.  No internal or external alterations of the dwelling solely for the accommodation of a home occupation are permitted. 
6.  No chemical, electrical, or mechanical equipment that is not normally a part of domestic or household equipment shall be used primarily for commercial purposes, other than reproduction equipment and other equipment approved by the Zoning Administrative Officer for permitted home occupations. 
7.  No business identification sign shall be permitted. 
8.  Use of a building for a home occupation shall not exceed ten (10%) percent of one (1) floor of the principal building. Home occupations are not permitted, in whole or part, within accessory buildings. 
9.  A business license shall be obtained from the City of Dahlonega prior to the operation of any home occupation. Said business license shall require approval by the Zoning Administrative Officer. 
10.  The following uses are allowable as home occupations (not all inclusive): Tutoring, consultation and instruction in music, dance, arts, crafts and similar subjects, limited to two (2) students at one time; day care centers serving six (6) or less persons; professional services (i.e., attorneys, architects, accountants, realtors, insurance and travel agents; secretarial services and answering services; mail order and general offices not involving storage of equipment, materials or vehicles; phone solicitations; beauty salons and barber shops limited to two patrons at a time; food catering). 
11.  The following uses are specifically prohibited as home occupations (not all inclusive): cabinet shops and or metal cutting; doctors, dentists or other medical professions; automobile repair or related work. The failure of a home occupation licensee to comply with any of the above conditions shall be reasonable grounds for revocation of a home occupation business license. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 714. - Visibility at intersections. 
No fence, wall, sign, hedge or planting which obstructs the sight lines at elevations between two (2) and twelve (12) feet above any roadway shall be placed or permitted to remain on any corner lot within the triangular area formed by the street right-of-way lines, or such lines extended, and a line connecting such right-of-way lines at points twenty-five (25) feet from the intersection of the right-of-way lines. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 715. - Parking or storage of recreational vehicles. 
Recreational equipment such as boats, boat trailers, travel trailers, pick-up campers or coaches, motorized dwellings, motor coaches, tent trailers and other vehicles may be parked or stored only in side yards, rear yards, carports, or in an enclosed building, provided however, that such equipment may be parked or stored anywhere on residential premises for a period not to exceed twenty-four (24) hours during loading and unloading. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 716. - Abandoned, wrecked or junked vehicles and materials. 
Except as otherwise expressly permitted, it shall be prohibited in all districts to park or continuously store abandoned, wrecked, junked or inoperable vehicles, power-driven construction equipment, used lumber or metal, or any other miscellaneous scrap material in quantity that is visible from a public street or adjacent or abutting property. Said prohibition shall not be construed as to prohibit the temporary repair or maintenance of automobiles owned by the property owner or the storage of such vehicles, equipment or other materials within an enclosed building, provided that such vehicles, equipment or materials are not for commercial sale. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 717. - Subdivision plats must meet zoning requirements. 
No proposed plat of a subdivision, nor any plat of re-subdivision, shall hereafter be approved by the Governing Body or by the Planning Commission unless the lots within such plat equal or exceed the minimum size and width requirements set forth in the various zoning districts in these regulations and unless such plat fully conforms with the statutes of the State of Georgia and regulations of the Governing Body. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 718. - Yard sales. 
Yard sales, are subject to the following requirements: 
1.  Yard sales may be allowed in the B-3 and CBD zoning districts by permit only, and may be held only by groups with non-profit status as classified by the Internal Revenue Service (IRS). 
2.  Yard sales will be allowed in all other zoning districts and may be held as frequently as once every month. 
3.  The duration of any yard sale shall not exceed forty-eight (48) hours. 
4.  Sales must be operated in such a manner so as not to be a nuisance to the neighbors or obstruct sidewalks or driveways, etc. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
ARTICLE VIII. - SIGN REGULATIONS 
This section is now regulated by Ordinance 2008-4 sign Ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
ARTICLE IX. - R-1, SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 901. - Purpose and intent. 
The Single-Family Residential District is intended to establish and preserve quiet, stable single-family residential neighborhoods at low densities (up to approximately one and one-half units per acre) free from other uses except those which are compatible with and convenient to the residents of such a district. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 902. - Permitted uses. 
1.  Single-family detached dwellings, but not including mobile homes, travel trailers used as residences, or modular homes. 
2.  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the principal residential use of the property, including home gardens, non-commercial greenhouses, and shelters or enclosures for three (3) or less household pets that meet applicable health requirements. The keeping of four (4) or more animals shall constitute a kennel. Non-commercial livestock is a permitted accessory use on lots with a minimum area of three (3) acres, provided that any buildings or enclosures for the maintenance or shelter of animals shall be setback a minimum of one hundred fifty (150) feet from any property line. 
3.  Churches, temples, synagogues and places of worship, and their solely owned and operated customary accessory facilities, including cemeteries, provided such uses are located on a lot with a minimum area of two (2) acres, principal buildings are setback a minimum of fifty (50) feet from any property line, and parking areas are located outside of the required front yard and separated from any side or rear property line by a minimum six (6) foot high, opaque fence or wall, or a densely planted landscape strip of at least ten (10) feet in width. 
4.  Home occupations, as defined in Article III and limited in Section 713. 
5.  Parks, playgrounds, community centers, tennis courts, swimming pools, golf courses and other recreational facilities, operated on a non-profit basis. 
6.  Public and semi-public buildings and uses, as defined in Article III. 
7.  Schools, public elementary, middle and secondary. 
8.  Schools, parochial and private offering courses in general education substantially similar to that of a public school, not offered for profit. 
9.  Community center. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ; Ord. No. 2018-08, 8-13-2018 ) 
ARTICLE X. - R-2, MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 1001. - Purpose and intent. 
The R-2, Multiple-Family Residential District is intended to provide suitable land for a variety of dwelling types at low to medium densities (up to five and one-half units per acre) in areas served by public water and sanitary sewer. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 1002. - Permitted uses. 
1.  Any use permitted in the R-1, Single-Family Residential District, as specified in Section 902. of these regulations and subject to the same restrictions, except as indicated in Article XX. 
2.  Single-family attached dwellings (townhouses), provided that no dwelling is located closer than fifty (50) feet to a R-1 District boundary, subject to the requirements of Section 1004. 
3.  Two family dwellings (duplexes). 
4.  Residential condominiums, provided that no dwelling is located closer than fifty (50) feet to a R-1 District boundary, subject to the requirements of Section 1005. 
5.  Modular homes, but not including mobile homes. 
6.  Apartments, provided that no dwelling is located closer than one hundred (100) feet to a R-1 District boundary. 
7.  Personal care homes, homes for the elderly, boarding homes, lodging houses and dormitories serving ten (10) residents or less, provided that no such buildings shall be located closer than one hundred (100) feet to a R-1 District boundary, and provided a copy of the approved state license or permit is filed with the Zoning Administrative Officer prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy. 
8.  Day care centers, kindergartens and nursery schools serving twelve (12) or less persons, provided that no such principal building shall be located closer than one hundred (100) feet to a R-1 District boundary, that all applicable regulations of the Georgia Department of Human Resources regarding fencing and play area are met, and provided a copy of the approved state license or permit is filed with the Zoning Administrative Officer prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy. 
9.  Community center. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ; Ord. No. 2018-08, 8-13-2018 ) 
Sec. 1003. - Conditional uses. 
1.  Personal care homes, homes for the elderly, boarding homes, lodging houses and dormitories serving more than ten (10) residents, provided that no such buildings shall be located closer than one hundred (100) feet to a R-1 District boundary, and provided a copy of the approved state license or permit is filed with the Zoning Administrative Officer prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy. 
2.  Day care centers, kindergartens and nursery schools serving more than twelve (12) persons, provided that no such principal buildings shall be located closer than one hundred (100) feet to a R-1 District boundary, that all applicable regulations of the Georgia Department of Human Resources regarding fencing and play area are met, and provided a copy of the approved state license or permit is filed with the Zoning Administrative Officer prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy. 
3.  Convalescent homes, nursing homes, group homes, rehabilitation centers, sanitariums and similar institutionalized residential facilities involving professional care and treatment, provided such use is located on property fronting an arterial or collector street, that no such dwelling is located closer than one hundred (100) feet to a R-1 District boundary, and provided a copy of the approved state license or permit is filed with the Zoning Administrative Officer prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 1004. - Townhouse development regulations. 
All developments containing fee-simple townhouses shall conform to the following requirements: 
1.  Lots. Each townhouse shall be located on its own lot of record, and subdivision plat approval shall be required in accordance with the City of Dahlonega Subdivision Regulations. 
2.  Minimum Lot Size, Frontage, Width. Each townhouse lot shall contain a minimum lot area of two thousand (2,000) square feet with an overall average of at least two thousand four hundred (2,400) square feet. The minimum lot width and frontage for each lot shall be eighteen (18) feet, but the minimum average width of a group of five (5) or more lots shall be twenty (20) feet. 
3.  Setbacks. Townhouses shall conform to the setbacks established for the zoning district in which it is located; provided however that zero lot line (no side building setback) is permitted between individual townhouse units forming the same building. Between buildings, there shall be a side yard of not less than ten (10) feet. The rear setback shall be a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet. Dwelling units which form a part of a single building shall have the front setbacks and rooflines varied/staggered by a minimum of two (2) feet. 
4.  Maximum Units Per Building. No more than ten (10) townhouses shall be permitted to form any one single building. 
5.  Streets. All streets within a townhouse development shall be built to City specifications as provided in the City of Dahlonega Subdivision Regulations and dedicated to the City. 
6.  Maximum Density. Townhouse developments shall not exceed the maximum density permitted within the particular zoning district. 
7.  Parking. Insofar as practicable, off-street parking facilities shall be grouped in bays, either adjacent to streets or in the interior of blocks. No off-street parking space shall be more than one hundred (100) feet by the most direct pedestrian route from a door of the dwelling unit it is intended to serve. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 1005. - Residential condominium development regulations. 
All developments containing residential condominiums shall conform to the following requirements: 
1.  Site plan approval by the Governing Body shall be required in accordance with Article XXVI. 
2.  Condominium developments shall meet all applicable state laws, including the Georgia Condominium Act. 
3.  Proposed condominium bylaws shall be submitted with the application for site plan approval. Format and content of the by-laws and declarations are subject to the approval of the City Attorney. 
4.  Residential condominiums shall conform to the setbacks established for the zoning district in which it is located; provided however that the rear setback for all residential condominium buildings shall be twenty-five (25) feet. 
5.  Maximum Density. Residential condominium developments shall not exceed the maximum density permitted within the particular zoning district. 
6.  Parking. Insofar as practicable, off-street parking facilities shall be grouped in bays, either adjacent to streets or in the interior of blocks. No off-street parking space shall be more than one hundred (100) feet by the most direct pedestrian route from a door of the dwelling unit it is intended to serve. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
ARTICLE XI. - R-3, MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 1101. - Purpose and intent. 
The R-3, Multiple-Family Residential District is intended to provide suitable land for a variety of dwelling types at medium to high densities (up to eight units per acre) in areas served by public water and sanitary sewer. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 1102. - Permitted uses. 
1.  Any use permitted in the R-2, Multiple-Family Residential District, as specified in Section 1002. of these regulations, subject to the same restrictions except as indicated in Article XX. 
2.  Any use permitted in the R-2, Multiple-Family Residential District, as specified in Section 1003. of these regulations, subject to the same restrictions except as indicated in Article XX and except that conditional use approval is not required. Townhouses and condominiums are subject to all provisions of Section 1004 and Section 1005, respectively. 
3.  Mobile homes on individual lots, subject to the requirements of the Subdivision Regulations of the City of Dahlonega. All mobile homes on individual lots hereafter established shall meet the requirements of Section 1204, Items 3—6, of these regulations regarding foundations and tie-downs, skirting, landing or deck and steps, and age of mobile home. 
4.  Community center. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ; Ord. No. 2018-08, 8-13-2018 ) 
ARTICLE XII. - MHP, MOBILE HOME PARK DISTRICT 

Sec. 1201. - Purpose and intent. 
The Mobile Home Park District is intended to provide areas for mobile home pads, which are leased rather than subdivided for individual ownership, that are served by public water, sanitary sewer and recreational amenities. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 1202. - Permitted uses. 
1.  Mobile homes within mobile home parks, but not including mobile homes on individual lots under separate ownership. Commercial uses or home occupations within individual mobile homes are not permitted. 
2.  Administration buildings and customary laundry and service buildings. 
3.  Community centers and recreation facilities intended to serve residents of the district. 
4.  Customary accessory uses and structures clearly incidental to one or more permitted uses and structures. 
5.  Public and semi-public buildings and uses. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 1203. - Mobile home park development regulations. 
Development for mobile home parks in the MHP District shall conform to the following regulations: 
1.  Site Plan Approval Required: 
All mobile home park developments shall require site plan approval by the Governing Body in accordance with the procedures and requirements established in Article XXVI, Amendment, Application and Procedural Requirements. 
2.  Location and Frontage: 
A Mobile Home Park District development shall be located on property with a minimum frontage of 200 feet on a public street. 
3.  Street Requirement: 
Interior roads serving the development shall be constructed to City standards as specified in the City of Dahlonega Subdivision Regulations, and in addition shall have a minimum pavement width of thirty (30) feet. If dedicated to the public, the roads within the development shall have a minimum right-of-way width of forty (40) feet. 
4.  Lot Area and Width: 
A Mobile Home District development shall have a minimum area of five (5) contiguous acres and a lot width of at least 200 feet. 
5.  Density: 
The maximum density of a Mobile Home District development is four (4) units per acre. 
6.  Recreation and Other Community Facilities: 
Not less than ten (10%) percent of the total area of the development shall be devoted to recreation and other community use facilities for those mobile home parks designed for or containing twenty-five (25) or more mobile homes. 
7.  Perimeter Setback Required: 
No mobile home or other building or structure shall be located closer than sixty (60) feet to any mobile home park perimeter property boundary. 
8.  Perimeter Screening Required: 
A landscaped screen consisting of dense evergreen trees and/or shrubs and having a minimum width often (10) feet along all property lines shall be required. A minimum six (6) foot high, opaque fence or wall may be erected along the perimeter in lieu of such landscaped screen. 
9.  Lighting: 
All mobile home parks shall have lighting of appropriate height, spacing and intensity so that each mobile home pad's access and parking is appropriately illuminated. 
10.  Utilities: 
All mobile home parks shall be served by public water and public sanitary sewer systems and shall be subject to approval by the Lumpkin County Health Department. 
11.  Refuse Collection: 
Each mobile home park shall provide community refuse collection areas at locations convenient to each mobile home space, but in no case more than 200 feet from any mobile home space. 
12.  Space Numbering: 
Each mobile home space shall be provided with a sign, not less than one (1) square foot in area, which indicates the appropriate space number or address. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 1204. - Mobile home and mobile home space requirements. 
Each mobile home shall be located on a separate pad in accordance with the following regulations: 
1.  Space Size and Width: 
Each mobile home space within the development shall contain a minimum space size of 8,000 square feet and a minimum space width of seventy (70) feet. 
2.  Setbacks: 
Each mobile home shall be setback a minimum of twenty (20) feet from the front space line or street right-of-way, fifteen (15) feet from the side space line, and twenty (20) feet from the rear space line. 
3.  Foundations and Tie-Downs: 
Each mobile home shall be supported by piers and foundations and shall be anchored to the ground in accordance with building code requirements, to secure the mobile home against uplift, sliding, rotation and overturning. 
4.  Skirting: 
The space beneath each mobile home shall be enclosed, with the exception of ventilation and access openings. The enclosing materials shall extend from the lower edge of the exterior walls of the mobile home to the ground surface level of the pad on which it is located. All such enclosures shall be permanently installed and consist of opaque, rust and rot resistant materials. All ventilation and access openings shall be covered with wire mesh screen. Such skirting shall not be required for those homes with a complete masonry perimeter foundation. 
5.  Landing or Deck and Steps: 
At the time of installation and set-up, each mobile home with a door threshold height of 14 inches or greater from the ground shall have attached and affixed at each such door a landing not smaller than 48 inches by 48 inches. If the floor of the deck is more than 32 inches from the ground at any point, a railing 42 inches in height with picket spacing not to exceed six inches shall also be required and installed, except for that part of the deck where steps lead to the ground. Steps shall be not less than 36 inches in width and shall be of accepted tread height and depth for residential use. 
At the time of installation and set-up, each mobile home with a door threshold height of 7 inches or greater from the ground, but less than fourteen inches from the ground, shall have attached and affixed at each such door a set of steps not less than 36 inches wide. The construction of the deck and steps must be of pressure treated wood, precast concrete, masonry construction or a reasonable equivalent. Steps constructed on flexible metal stands shall not be permitted. Loose stacks of block or brick steps shall not be permitted. 
6.  Age of Mobile Homes: 
A.  (1)  No mobile home with a Year of Manufacture lower than, or earlier than, the sixth calendar year prior to the current calendar year shall be brought into the City of Dahlonega for use as a dwelling or other structure. No installation permit shall be issued for any mobile home until the year of manufacture has been adequately shown to be in compliance with this ordinance. The year model as shown on the title or previous tax bill shall be sufficient to create a presumption of year of manufacture. 
a)  No mobile home mover, to include an owner moving an owned home, shall move an older, non-complying, mobile home into the City of Dahlonega for use as a dwelling or other structure. Any mover moving such a non-complying mobile home as prohibited by this section shall be guilty of a violation of this ordinance and shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500.00 per occurrence and to a sentence not to exceed five days in jail. 
b)  No mobile home installer, to include an owner installing an owned home, shall install an older, non-complying, mobile home into the City of Dahlonega for use as a dwelling or other structure. Any installer installing such a non-complying mobile home as prohibited by this section shall be guilty of a violation of this ordinance and shall be subject to a fine not be exceed $500.00 per occurrence and to a sentence not to exceed five days in jail. 
c)  It is the intent of the ordinance that the moving and the installation shall, for the purpose of determining any violation of the terms of this ordinance, be considered separate acts each punishable as provided. 
(2)  Upon determination that any mobile home in the City of Dahlonega is in violation of this ordinance, each day shall be a separate violation of this ordinance and any owner, broker, lessee, renter, bailee or other person in possession shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500.00 per day. 
(3)  If any owner, broker, lessee, renter, bailee or other person in possession of a mobile home willfully violates this ordinance, such person or entity shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500.00 for each day and to a sentence not to exceed one day in jail for each day. 
(4)  Any mobile home whose year of manufacture is earlier than the year as provided above, but which mobile home was properly installed with an approved installation in the City of Dahlonega at the time this ordinance becomes effective and was occupied as a dwelling or other structure, and was properly returned for taxes as required by law, then such usage shall be "grandfathered" and may be continued. 
a)  Such a mobile home may be moved to any new location within the City upon proper application for installation permit, and if required, moving permit. 
b)  Any such mobile home not complying with the provisions of this paragraph may have the title transferred to a new owner, but may not be moved except for relocation outside City of Dahlonega. 
c)  Any person violating this section of the ordinance, or attempting to violate this section, or conspiring to violate this section, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500.00 and to a sentence not to exceed thirty days in jail. 
(5)  The Planning Commission, upon unanimous vote, may recommend to the City Council that a variance be granted for good cause, to include hardship, after the following conditions are met: 
a)  Notice of request for variance, setting out the reasons for the request, the year of the mobile home and the location in which the home is to be located, shall be published in the official organ of the municipality for fifteen days prior to the regular meeting at which the request is to be considered. 
b)  The Planning Commission shall hear the request in open meeting prior to the vote on the recommendation to the City Council. 
c)  Upon recommendation, unless the public safety requires otherwise, as set out in a written finding of fact, the City shall grant the variance. 
B.  (1)  The movement of site built structures built outside the City of Dahlonega and the movement of other existing structures, to include manufactured housing, into the City of Dahlonega shall be subject to the same regulations and restrictions as hereinabove provided for mobile homes. 
(2)  Violation of this section of the ordinance shall be punished as provided above. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
ARTICLE XIII. - PUD, PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT 

Sec. 1301. - Purpose and intent. 
The Planned Unit Development District is intended to provide flexibility in the application of area, height, bulk, placement, and other zoning controls; provide for mixing a wide variety of residential housing types and arrangements; provide for the mixing of compatible residential, office, commercial and industrial land uses; encourage imaginative and innovative design for the unified development of tracts of land; provide an alternative for more efficient use of land, resulting in smaller networks of utilities and streets, thereby resulting in lower construction and maintenance costs to the public; preserve the natural amenities of the land by encouraging scenic and functional open areas within the development; and to promote land development in proper relation to the surrounding neighborhood. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 1302. - Permitted uses. 
Any land uses and combinations thereof, including signs and accessory buildings and uses, which have been specifically proposed by the applicant and approved by the Governing Body as a part of a Planned Unit Development site plan, report, and/or other supporting information. 
1.  Community Center. 
2.  Conference/Convention Center. 
3.  Cultural Facility. 
4.  Event Center. 
5.  Banquet Hall. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ; Ord. No. 2018-08, 8-13-2018 ) 
Sec. 1303. - Development summary report required. 
Applications for rezoning to, or development within a Planned Unit Development District shall require a written report which explains the type, nature, size, intent and characteristics of the proposed development. 
As a minimum, the report shall include the following: 
1.  A complete listing of every land use proposed within the development, including total acreage and the amount of acreage devoted to each use. All uses not specifically included in the report or site plan and approved by the Governing Body are prohibited unless subsequently the application is amended in accordance with applicable procedures. 
2.  Proposed development standards including minimum lot sizes, minimum lot widths, minimum lot frontages, minimum floor areas or residential dwelling unit sizes, maximum number of dwelling units, maximum square footage figures for non-residential developments, minimum yards/building setbacks, landscape strips and buffers, height limitations, restrictive covenants, and any other such applicable standard or requirement. The report should also indicate any proposed exceptions or variations from the size, setback, frontage, density or other standards which are required in other conventional zoning districts, along with justification for such proposed exceptions or variations. 
3.  Time frame of development and provisions for ownership and management of the development. 
4.  Intended plans for the provision of utilities, including water, sewer and drainage facilities. 
5.  All streets and common open spaces not proposed for dedication to the public shall have the proposed maintenance and ownership agreements explained in detail. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 1304. - Site plan approval required. 
Applications for rezoning to, or development within a Planned Unit Development District shall require a site plan including, as a minimum, those items enumerated in Section 2606, Site Plan Requirements, of these regulations. The Zoning Administrative Officer, Planning Commission and/or City Council may require, in addition, such other information, studies, plats, plans, or architectural elevations deemed necessary to perform an adequate review of the proposed application. 
Site plans shall be prepared by a professional engineer, architect, land surveyor, land planner or landscape architect, and his/her seal of registration or professional initials shall be indicated on such plans. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 1305. - Report and site plan are minimum requirements. 
The approved development summary report, site plan, and all other information, studies, plats, plans or architectural elevations submitted in the application, or required to be submitted by the Governing Body, shall establish the standards and minimum requirements for the subject property and shall become the zoning regulations that apply to the subject property, regardless of changes in property ownership. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 1306. - Revisions to approved PUD application. 
Any additions in the types of land uses, increases in square footage or density, decreases in lot sizes, changes in the location or dimensions of streets, decreases in dwelling unit floor areas, major alterations in the land use patterns, or other substantial changes which, in the opinion of the Zoning Administrative Officer, result in a development of such intent and character which has not been conceptually approved by the Governing Body shall require additional approval in accordance with procedures established in Article XXVI. Otherwise minor changes may be approved by the Zoning Administrative Officer prior to issuance of building permits. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 1307. - Minimum site area and frontage required. 
The minimum site area for a Planned Unit Development District shall be two (2) contiguous acres, a minimum lot width of one hundred (100) feet and the site must have a minimum of one hundred (100) feet of frontage on a public street, which shall provide access to such public street. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ; Ord. No. 2018-09, 8-13-2018 ) 
Sec. 1308. - Suggested site planning guidelines. 
The following specifications are not regulations, but recommended guidelines to be utilized in preparation of site plans for Planned Unit Developments: 
1.  Land uses which have traditionally been viewed as incompatible (e.g. single-family subdivision and a manufacturing plant) should not be proposed in the same Planned Unit Development unless considerable screening and physical separation is provided. 
2.  Office, commercial and/or industrial uses should be located adjacent to major thoroughfares or in other areas with suitable access that will not result in traffic through residential areas. 
3.  Lot sizes, lot widths, unit sizes and other characteristics of residential development within the Planned Unit Development should be similar to those characteristics of adjacent or nearby residential subdivisions or provide a suitable transition from such adjacent uses. 
4.  Location of land uses should conform substantially with land use plan goals, policies and suggested types of uses. 
5.  Street lengths, alignments, patterns and other characteristics should conform to city subdivision regulations or standard planning principles. 
6.  Proposed developments should make maximum use of natural features of the land. 
7.  For developments that are predominantly residential, only limited commercial uses (up to 10,000 square feet, or 10% of the total development site area) of a convenience retail nature, internally oriented and intended to serve the needs of the residents of the development, should be proposed. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
ARTICLE XIV. - B-1, NEIGHBORHOOD BUSINESS DISTRICT 

Sec. 1401. - Purpose and intent. 
The Neighborhood Business District is intended to provide areas for limited small-scale commercial uses of a convenience nature serving nearby residential neighborhoods as opposed to a regional market. The district is not intended to accommodate automotive or other types of more intensive commercial activities that are of such magnitude or type that would result in the generation of excessive traffic, noise, odors, pollution, safety hazards, or other adverse impacts which would detract from the desirability of adjacent properties for residential use. In general, the neighborhood business district includes offices and retail and service establishments but excludes those highway-oriented uses which involve use of chemicals and outside sales, storage or display. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 1402. - Permitted uses. 
1.  Accessory uses and structures normally incidental to principal permitted uses and structures. 
2.  Antique shops. 
3.  Art and school supply stores. 
4.  Automated car washes, as accessory to convenience stores with retail gasoline sales. 
5.  Bake shops and bakeries, but not including wholesale. 
6.  Banks and financial institutions, including drive-in, drive-through and automatic teller facilities as accessory or principal uses, not to exceed 10,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
7.  Barber shops and beauty shops. 
8.  Book or stationary stores. 
9.  Churches, temples, synagogues and places of worship, and their customary accessory uses and structures, including cemeteries. 
10.  Clubs, lodges, fraternal institutions and other places of public assembly for membership groups, non-profit or for profit, not to exceed 10,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
11.  Clothes pressing, repair, sale and rental, but not including department stores. 
12.  Convenience food and retail stores with or without retail gasoline sales. 
12.1.  Cultural facility. 
13.  Day care centers. 
14.  Dressmaking, millinery, sewing and tailor shops. 
15.  Drug stores. 
16.  Dry-cleaners and laundromats not exceeding 2,500 square feet of total floor area. 
17.  Electronic equipment sales. 
18.  Food and grocery stores. 
19.  Food catering establishments. 
20.  Florist shops. 
21.  Gift shops. 
22.  Hardware stores. 
23.  Hobby shops. 
24.  Ice cream and yogurt shops. 
25.  Instructional studios, such as music, dance, gymnastics aerobics and martial arts. 
26.  Interior decorating shops. 
27.  Jewelry stores. 
28.  Libraries, museums and art galleries. 
29.  Locksmith shops. 
30.  Music stores. 
31.  Offices, business, medical, professional, insurance and real estate, and general. 
32.  Paint stores. 
33.  Photocopying, printing and reproduction services not exceeding 2,500 square feet of total floor area. 
34.  Photography shops and studios. 
35.  Public and semi-public buildings and uses. 
36.  Radio and television repair and sales stores. 
37.  Record, tape, and video rental and sales stores. 
38.  Recycling collection centers, but not including processing of recyclable materials. 
39.  Residences, single-family detached, but not including mobile homes. Home occupations are permitted as accessory uses. 
40.  Restaurants, but not including drive-in or drive-through facilities. 
41.  Schools, public elementary, middle and secondary, and public and private colleges and universities. 
42.  Schools, parochial, private vocational, technical & others, non-profit or operated for profit. 
43.  Small appliance repair shops. 
44.  Snack and sandwich shops, but not including drive-in or drive-through facilities. 
45.  Sporting goods stores. 
46.  Toy stores. 
47.  Travel agencies. 
48.  Watch and clock sales and repair shops. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ; Ord. No. 2018-08, 8-13-2018 ) 
Sec. 1403. - Outdoor sales, storage and display prohibited. 
Outdoor display of goods shall be allowed as an accessory use for all uses requiring site plan approval. It is the intent of this Ordinance to allow the display of merchandise for sale, but not where the display of such items impedes the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or creates an unsafe condition. Outdoor sales/display is allowed by permit if applicant complies with the following conditions: 
1.  All outdoor sales must be conducted solely and exclusively on private property. 
2.  The business seeking to conduct outdoor sales must be in full compliance with all existing City of Dahlonega codes including but not limited to sign and zoning regulations. 
3.  The business must absolutely meet or exceed the applicable offstreet parking regulations for said business, and no portion of the required offstreet parking spaces for the business may be used for the conducting of outdoor sales; 
4.  All outdoor display of goods shall be located immediately adjacent to the store front and not in loading zones or fire lanes. All outdoor display areas must be contiguous to one another. 
5.  No goods shall be attached to a building's wall surface and all goods offered for outdoor sale shall be goods owned by the applicant and sold in the normal course of the applicant's business; 
6.  At least 5 feet along the perimeter of the display shall be maintained free of obstruction to allow for pedestrian and handicap movement, such that handicapped pedestrians and others do not have to enter the parking lot or drive aisle to "walk around" the display. 
7.  The area used for outdoor display and sale of goods shall be limited to no more than ½ of the length of the store front. Additionally, in the case of a shopping center, the storefront shall include the entire frontage of each shopping center block, meaning that the total amount of display and sale area for all the in-line tenants combined in that block shall not exceed 50% of the aggregate storefront of the overall shopping center; 
8.  The area of outdoor display and sale shall not encompass the width of the entrance doors to the facility as projected straight out from the facility. For example, if the width of the entrance doors is 20 feet, then there shall be at least a 10-foot clearance from the doors as projected straight out and away from the facility; 
9.  The approval of outdoor display and sales shall be made by the City Planning Department staff. All new development plans must show the location of outdoor display and sales areas in accordance with this Section. Existing non-residential uses that desire to have outdoor display and sales areas must submit a plan showing the location of the display areas and how the requirements of this Section are being met. 
10.  The area of existing parking lots set aside for outdoor sales and display must be limited to pedestrian traffic only. 
11.  There shall be no outdoor sales of hazardous or inflammable items such as gasoline, oil, antifreeze, kerosene, pesticides and similar items. 
12.  All permits for outdoor sales shall expire one year from issuance. 
13.  The fee for outside sales permits shall be $100.00 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
ARTICLE XV. - B-2, HIGHWAY BUSINESS DISTRICT 

Sec. 1501. - Purpose and intent. 
The Highway Business District is intended to provide adequate space for various types of general business uses that serve residents on a community level rather than neighborhood level, including the retailing of major goods and services of large scale, automotive and other types of more intensive commercial activities and establishments that rely on highway-oriented, passer-by traffic. It is the intent of this district not to permit unenclosed display, sales and/or storage, except for automobile, boat, recreational vehicle, farm vehicle, and mobile home sales and rental. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 1502. - Permitted uses. 
1.  Any use permitted in the B-1, Neighborhood Business District as enumerated in Section 1402 and any use permitted in the CBD Central Business District as enumerated in Section 1702 of these regulations, but not subject to any specified square footage limitations except as provided in Article XX. 
2.  Accessory uses and structures normally incidental to permitted principal uses. 
3.  Agricultural implement and equipment sales, service, rental and repair. 
4.  Amphitheaters and stadiums. 
5.  Animal hospitals and veterinary clinics. 
6.  Assembly halls, auditoriums and meeting halls. 
7.  Automobile, boat, truck, motorcycle, bicycle and other vehicle rental, repair, service and sales. 
8.  Automobile, boat, truck, motorcycle, bicycle and other vehicle parts sales. 
9.  Automobile car washes, including automated, full-service or self-service. 
10.  Banks and financial institutions. 
10.1.  Banquet Hall. 
11.  Billiard halls, poolrooms and amusement/video arcades. 
12.  Blueprinting establishments. 
13.  Bowling alleys. 
14.  Building materials sales and lumber yards. 
15.  Bus passenger stations, terminals. 
16.  Cabinet shops. 
17.  Camper and recreational vehicle sales, service and repair. 
18.  Christmas tree sales. 
18.1.  Conference/Convention Center. 
19.  Contractor's establishments, building, electrical and plumbing. 
20.  Convalescent homes, nursing homes, group homes, rehabilitation centers, sanitariums and similar institutionalized residential facilities involving professional care and treatment. 
21.  Department stores. 
22.  Dry-cleaning establishments, laundromats and laundries. 
23.  Equipment rental, sales and service. 
23.1.  Event Center. 
24.  Exterminators and pest control businesses. 
25.  Firearms sales and service, including gun clubs and indoor shooting ranges. 
26.  Firewood sales. 
27.  Flea markets. 
28.  Floor covering stores. 
29.  Funeral homes, mortuaries and mausoleums. 
30.  Furniture, fixtures and home furnishing stores, including rental, finishing, repair and sales but not manufacturing. 
31.  Garden supply centers, greenhouses and landscaping services. 
32.  Golf courses, golf driving ranges, miniature golf courses, and baseball batting cages. 
33.  Health clubs and spas. 
34.  Heliports and helistops. 
35.  Hospitals and clinics. 
36.  Hotels, motels, and bed and breakfast inns. 
37.  Kennels. 
38.  Lawn mower rental, repair and sales and service shops. 
39.  Machine shops. 
40.  Mini-warehouses and mini-storage facilities, where no individual storage stall or compartment exceeds 500 square feet of total floor area. 
41.  Mobile home and mobile building sales, but not including residential occupancy of mobile homes. 
42.  Monument sales establishments. 
43.  Palm reading and fortune telling establishments. 
44.  Parking garages and parking lots. 
45.  Pawn shops. 
46.  Pet stores and grooming establishments. 
47.  Printing establishments. 
48.  Private clubs operated for profit. 
49.  Race tracks for animals or motor-driven vehicles, provided the site contains a minimum of fifteen (15) acres. 
50.  Radio and television studios, and cable television stations, including broadcasting towers and satellite receiving antennas as accessory uses. 
51.  Recycling collection centers, but not including the processing of recyclable materials. 
52.  Repair of household appliances. 
53.  Research and scientific laboratories. 
54.  Residences, single-family detached, attached, duplexes, townhouses, condominiums and apartments. Townhouses and condominiums are subject to all provisions of Section 1004 and Section 1005, respectively. 
55.  Restaurants, including drive-in and drive-through facilities. 
56.  Sign fabrication and painting shops, occupying not more than 2,500 square feet of floor area. 
57.  Skating rinks. 
58.  Tattoo Parlors. 
59.  Taxi-cab and limousine services. 
60.  Taxidermist shops. 
61.  Theaters, indoor and outdoor. 
62.  Truck stops and truck terminals. 
63.  Welding shops. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ; Ord. No. 2018-08, 8-13-2018 ) 
Sec. 1503. - Conditional uses. 
1.  Building materials and lumber sales with open air or unenclosed storage. 
2.  Auction facilities. 
3.  Circus. 
4.  Open storage yards, subject to the screening requirements set forth in Section 2109. 
5.  Residences for a caretaker or night watchman. 
6.  Warehousing and storage uses which occupy no more than 10,000 square feet of floor area. 
7.  Wholesale establishments which occupy no more than 10,000 square feet of floor area. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 1504. - Outdoor sales, storage, and display prohibited. 
Except as otherwise provided by specific ordinance of the City of Dahlonega, it shall be unlawful in the B-2 highway Business District, to provide any outdoor storage, outdoor display or outdoor sales on any portion of a subject lot; provided, however, that said prohibition shall not apply to automobile, boat, recreational, farm and mobile home and other vehicle rental and sales, nor shall it apply to restaurants which desire to sell outdoors provided that any restaurant who holds an alcohol license of any kind must restrict outdoor sales as follows: 
1.  Sales shall occur only within an area of the zoned premises approved by the Planning Director of the City of Dahlonega and that Limits access to the outdoor dining area. 
2.  Approved signage must be displayed within said area to advise patrons that alcoholic beverages cannot be removed from the outdoor dining area under any circumstances. 
3.  Any alcohol sold cannot be served in bottles, cans, plastic cups or any other disposable containers, but only in glass containers. 
4.  Sidewalks and other public rights of way may not be utilized in this district for outdoor dining. 
5.  Any restaurant seeking to implement outdoor dining of any kind must comply with Ordinance 2004-4 which comprises the City of Dahlonega regulations regarding outdoor food sales. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
ARTICLE XVI. - B-3, HISTORICAL BUSINESS DISTRICT 

Sec. 1601. - Purpose and intent. 
The Historical Business District is intended to protect and promote the educational, cultural, economic, and general welfare of the public through the preservation and protection of the old, historic, architecturally worthy structures in historic areas or neighborhoods which exhibit a distinct aspect of the community and which serve as visible reminders of the history and cultural heritage of the community, state or nation. The district is also intended to assure that new structures and uses within such districts will be architecturally in keeping with the character to be preserved or enhanced. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 1602. - Permitted uses. 
1.  Accessory uses and structures customarily incidental to one or more principal permitted uses. 
2.  Antique shops. 
3.  Art and school supply stores. 
4.  Automated car washes, as accessory to convenience stores with retail gasoline sales. 
5.  Bake shops and bakeries. 
6.  Banks and financial institutions, including drive-in, drive-through and automatic teller facilities as accessory uses. 
6.1.  Banquet Hall. 
7.  Barber shops and beauty shops. 
8.  Book or stationery stores. 
9.  Churches, temples, synagogues and places of worship. 
10.  Clubs, lodges, fraternal institutions and other places of public assembly for membership groups, non profit or for profit. 
11.  Clothes pressing, repair, sale and rental. 
11.1.  Community Center. 
11.2.  Conference/Convention Center. 
12.  Convenience food and retail stores with or without retail gasoline sales. 
12.1.  Cultural Facility. 
13.  Dressmaking, millinery, sewing and tailor shops. 
14.  Drug stores. 
15.  Dry-cleaners and Laundromats not exceeding 2,500 square feet of total floor area. 
16.  Electronic equipment sales. 
16.1.  Event Center. 
17.  Food and grocery stores. 
18.  Food catering establishments. 
19.  Florist shops. 
20.  Gift shops. 
21.  Hardware stores. 
22.  Hobby shops. 
23.  Hotels, motels, and bed and breakfast inns. 
24.  Ice cream and yogurt shops. 
25.  Instructional studios, such as music, dance, gymnastics, aerobics and martial arts. 
26.  Interior decorating shops. 
27.  Jewelry stores. 
28.  Libraries, museums and art galleries. 
29.  Locksmith shops. 
30.  Music stores. 
31.  Offices, business, medical, professional, insurance and real estate, and general. 
32.  Parking garages and parking lots. 
33.  Photocopying, printing and reproduction services not exceeding 2,500 square feet of total floor area. 
34.  Photography shops and studios. 
35.  Public and semi-public buildings and uses. 
36.  Radio and television repair and sales stores. 
37.  Radio and television studios, but not including broadcasting towers. 
38.  Record, tape, and video rental and sales stores. 
39.  Residences, single-family detached, attached, duplexes, townhouses, condominiums and apartments. Townhouses and condominiums are subject to all provisions of Section 1004 and Section 1005, respectively. 
40.  Restaurants but not including drive-in or drive-thru facilities. 
41.  Schools, public elementary, middle and secondary, and public and private colleges and universities. 
42.  Schools, parochial, private vocational, and technical, non-profit or operated for profit. 
43.  Small appliance repair shops. 
44.  Snack and sandwich shops, but not including drive-in or drive-through facilities. 
45.  Sporting goods stores. 
46.  Toy stores. 
47.  Travel agencies. 
48.  Watch and clock sales and repair shops. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ; Ord. No. 2018-08, 8-13-2018 ) 
Sec. 1603. - Conditional uses. 
1.  Commercial-Residential Group Projects, as defined in Article III. 
2.  Farmers' markets, flea markets, roadside stands and other similar seasonal or temporary activities. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 1604. - Outdoor sales, storage and display prohibited. 
Except as otherwise provided, by specific ordinance of the City of Dahlonega, it shall be unlawful in the B3-Historical Business District, to provide and outdoor storage, outdoor display or outdoor sales on any portion of a subject lot; provided, however, that said prohibition shall not apply to restaurants which desire to sell outdoors provided that any restaurant who holds an alcohol license of any kind must restrict outdoor food sales as follows: 
1.  Sales shall occur only within an area of the zoned premises approved by the Planning Director of the City of Dahlonega and that limits access to the outdoor dining area. 
2.  Approved signage must be displayed within said area to advise patrons that alcoholic beverages cannot be removed from the outdoor dining area under any circumstances. 
3.  Any alcohol sold cannot be served in bottles, cans, plastic cups, or any other disposable containers, but only in glass containers. 
4.  Any restaurant utilizing sidewalk right of way must comply with the regulations of the City of Dahlonega concerning such sidewalk dining facilities. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 1605. - Alteration of structures or buildings. 
Any material change in appearance (including painting), demolition, relocation, or removal of an existing structure of building in whole or in part, or new construction of a structure or building, in the B3, Historical Business district, is subject to the provisions of Article XXV, Historic Properties and Districts. 
Sec. 1606. - Signs. 
This section now regulated by Ordinance 2008-4, Sign Ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
ARTICLE XVII. - CBD, CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT 

Sec. 1701. - Purpose and intent. 
The intent of this Article is to establish and preserve a compact central business district convenient and attractive for a wide range of retail uses, business transactions, government and professional offices, places of amusement, employment activities, and services to the public designed primarily to meet the day-to-day shopping and service needs of residents of the City of Dahlonega. 
It is further the intent of this Article to ensure that development within the Central Business District is consistent or compatible with development in the B-3, Historical Business District. The Governing Body finds that, due to the proximity of the Central Business District (CBD) to the historic downtown square, that development within the Central Business District could either substantially enhance or threaten the character and economic conditions of the historic downtown square, depending upon the type, nature and architectural character of such development. Because of the potential impact development within the CBD could have on the long term economic vitality of properties within the B-3, Historical Business District, which such historical properties are found to be of utmost importance to tourism and the economies of Dahlonega and Lumpkin County, the Governing Body finds that all alterations to structures and development of new structures within this district shall require a review according to the guidelines of the City of Dahlonega Historic Preservation Ordinance. This is required to ensure the integrity, stability and enhancement of the B-3, Historical Business District. (See Section 1705.) 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 1702. - Permitted uses. 
1.  Any use permitted in the B-1, Neighborhood Business District, as enumerated in Section 1402 and any use permitted in the B3 Historical Business District as enumerated in Section 1602 of these regulations, but not subject to any specified square footage limitations except as provided in Article XX. 
1.5.  Banquet Hall. 
2.  Bus stations and terminals. 
3.  Commercial recreation facilities conducted entirely within an enclosed building. 
3.1.  Community Center. 
3.2.  Conference/Convention Center. 
3.3.  Cultural Facility. 
3.4.  Event Center. 
4.  Hospitals and clinics. 
5.  Hotels, motels, and bed and breakfast inns. 
6.  Manufacturing and fabrication shops which occupy no more than one thousand (1,000) square feet of floor area. 
7.  Parking garages and parking lots. 
8.  Recycling collection centers, but not including the processing of recyclable materials. 
9.  Restaurants, including drive-in or drive-thru facilities. 
10.  Residences, single-family attached, duplexes, townhouses, condominiums and apartments. Townhouses and condominiums are subject to all provisions of Section 1004 and 1005, respectively. 
11.  Taxi-cab and limousine services. 
12.  Theaters, indoor only. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ; Ord. No. 2018-08, 8-13-2018 ) 
Sec. 1703. - Conditional uses. 
1.  Circuses and carnivals. 
2.  Commercial-Residential Group Projects, as defined in Article III. 
3.  Farmers' markets, flea markets, roadside stands and other similar seasonal or temporary activities. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 1704. - Outdoor sales, storage and display prohibited. 
Except as otherwise provided, it shall be unlawful in the CBD, Central Business District, to provide any outdoor storage, outdoor display, or outdoor sales on any portion of a subject lot; provided, however that said prohibition shall not apply to restaurants which desire to sell outdoors provided that any restaurant who holds an alcohol license of any kind must restrict outdoor food sales as follows: 
1.  Sales shall occur only within an area of the zoned premises approved by the Planning Director of the City of Dahlonega and that limits access to the outdoor dining area. 
2.  Approved signage must be displayed within said area to advise patrons that alcoholic beverages cannot be removed from the outdoor dining area under any circumstances. 
3.  Any alcohol sold cannot be served in bottles, cans, plastic cups, or any other disposable containers, but only in glass containers. 
4.  Any restaurant utilizing sidewalk right of way must comply with the regulations of the City of Dahlonega concerning such sidewalk dining facilities. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 1705. - Alteration of structures, new construction. 
Any material change in appearance (including painting), demolition, relocation, or removal of an existing structure of building in whole or in part or new construction of a structure or building, in the CBD Central Business District, is subject to the provisions of Article XXV, Historic Properties and Districts. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
ARTICLE XVIII. - O-I, OFFICE INSTITUTIONAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 1801. - Purpose and intent. 
The Office-Institutional District is intended to establish and preserve a compatible land use arrangement relative to the needs of North Georgia College and provide suitable areas for the development of offices and professional enterprises, medical and dental facilities, and institutions. This district is also intended to apply to areas with a transitional character, where such permitted uses provide a buffer or transition between more intensive non-residential and residential districts. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 1802. - Permitted uses. 
1.  Any use permitted within the R-1, Single-Family Residential District, as enumerated in Section 902 of these regulations and subject to the same restrictions except as indicated in Article XX. 
2.  Colleges and universities. 
3.  Convalescent homes, nursing homes, group homes, rehabilitation centers, sanitariums and similar institutionalized residential facilities involving professional care and treatment, provided such use is located on property fronting an arterial or collector street, that no such dwelling is located closer than one hundred (100) feet to a R-1 District boundary, and provided a copy of the approved state license or permit is filed with the Zoning Administrative Officer prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy. 
4.  Day care centers, kindergartens and nursery schools, provided that no such principal building shall be located closer than one hundred (100) feet to a R-1 District boundary, that all applicable regulations of the Georgia Department of Human Resources regarding fencing and play area are met, and provided a copy of the approved state license or permit is filed with the Zoning Administrative Officer prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy. 
5.  Instructional studios, such as music, dance, gymnastics, aerobics and martial arts. 
6.  Lodges, clubs, fraternal institutions and other places of public assembly for membership groups, operated on a non-profit basis. 
7.  Offices, medical, professional, insurance, real estate and general, but not involving retail sales of any kind. 
8.  Personal care homes, homes for the elderly, boarding homes, lodging houses and dormitories, provided that no such buildings shall be located closer than one hundred (100) feet to a R-1 District boundary, provided a copy of the approved state license or permit is filed with the Zoning Administrative Officer prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy. 
9.  Photographic studios, but not involving the retail sale of film or photographic equipment. 
10.  Schools, non-profit or operated for profit. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
ARTICLE XIX. - I, INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 1901. - Purpose and intent. 
The Industrial District is established with the purpose of reserving certain areas with relatively level topography, adequate water and sewerage facilities, and access to arterial streets for industrial operations, but where such areas' proximity to residential and other districts makes it desirable to limit industrial operations to those that are not objectionable by reason of the emission of noise, vibration, smoke, dust, gas, fumes, odors or radiation and that do not create fire or explosion hazards or other objectionable conditions. Uses within this district do not require substantial quantities of water for manufacturing operations and do not necessarily require rail, air and water transportation. Certain commercial uses having an open storage characteristic, or which are most appropriately located as neighbors of industrial uses, are also included within this district. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 1902. - Permitted uses. 
1.  Accessory uses and structures normally incidental to permitted principal uses, including offices, showrooms and administrative facilities. 
2.  Agricultural implement rental, repair, sales and service, and farm supply stores and storage yards. 
3.  Airports and accessory facilities. 
4.  Blueprinting and printing establishments. 
5.  Building material and other outside storage yards. 
6.  Bus passenger stations, terminals. 
7.  Cabinet shops. 
8.  Contractor's establishments. 
9.  Distribution of products and merchandise. 
10.  Dry-cleaning plants. 
11.  Exterminators and pest control businesses. 
12.  Heliports and helistops. 
13.  Junkyards and used auto parts yards, subject to screening requirements set forth in Section 2109. on all four (4) sides of the lot on which said use is located. 
14.  Kennels. 
15.  Lumber yards, planing and sawmills. 
16.  Machine shops. 
17.  Mini-warehouse and mini-storage facilities. 
18.  Parking garages and parking lots. 
19.  Race tracks for animals or motor-driven vehicles, provided the site contains a minimum of fifteen (15) acres. 
20.  Radio and television broadcasting towers. 
21.  Repair of household appliances. 
22.  Recycling plants, including any processing activities. 
23.  Research and scientific laboratories. 
24.  Sign fabrication and painting shops. 
25.  Storage buildings and storage yards. 
26.  Soft drink bottling and distributing plants. 
27.  Truck stops and truck terminals. 
28.  Welding shops. 
29.  Wholesaling and warehousing facilities. 
30.  Wrecked motor vehicle compounds. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 1903. - Conditional uses. 
1.  Asphalt plants. 
2.  Canning establishments. 
3.  Ceramic production facilities. 
4.  Cold storage, frozen food lockers and ice manufacture. 
5.  Concrete, cement, clay, mortar and plaster production. 
6.  Extraction or removal of sand, gravel, top soil, clay, dirt, precious metals, gems, or other natural resources. 
7.  Feed, grain, or fertilizer manufacture or storage. 
8.  Food processing plants, including fish and poultry facilities. 
9.  Landfills. 
10.  Manufacturing, processing and assembling of the following products: chemicals, floor coverings, glass, machinery, metals, rubber, textiles, tobacco, and wood. 
11.  Residences for a caretaker or night watchman. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 1904. - Industrial performance standards. 
All uses hereafter established in the I, Industrial District, shall conform to the following performance standards: 
Lighting: 
Exterior illumination on a particular site shall not exceed 1.2 footcandles of illumination at any property line, nor will the light source be directly visible from adjoining residential properties. 
1.  Noise: 
Within an I District, the loudness or energy level of sound resulting from machinery or activities shall not exceed 70 decibels (dB) for more than five minutes during any one (1) hour, as measured at any given property line abutting a residential district. 
2.  Electromagnetic Interference: 
No use, activity or process shall be conducted which produces electromagnetic interference with radio or television reception in adjacent or neighboring residential areas. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
ARTICLE XX. - MINIMUM DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 2001. - Minimum setback requirements by zoning district (in feet). 
NOTE: Additional setbacks may be required for specific uses; for more information refer to section for each particular zoning district. Additional setback and buffer may also be required in accordance with Article XXI and with the City of Dahlonega's Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Ordinance. * 

 
NOTES: 
* An additional setback and buffer may be required in accordance with Section 2102. 
** For townhouses and condominiums, a rear setback of twenty-five (25) feet is required as provided in Section 1004 and Section 1005, respectively. 
Additional setbacks may be required for specific uses as provided in permitted uses sections of particular zoning districts. 
See Section 711 Accessory Buildings and Uses. 
See Section 706 Separation Between Principal Buildings. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 2002. - Minimum lot width, lot size, floor area and density standards. 

 
Notes: 
Minimum lot width and minimum lot sizes apply to non-residential uses as well as residential uses. 
* 30,000 square feet is required for a two-family dwelling (duplex). 
** 20,000 square feet is required for a two-family dwelling (duplex). 
See Section 709 Street Frontage Requirement. 
See City of Dahlonega Comprehensive Development Regulations. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
ARTICLE XXI. - BUFFER, LANDSCAPE, SCREENING AND OPEN SPACE REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 2101. - Purpose and intent. 
The following regulations are designed to promote the health, safety, order, aesthetics and general welfare by protecting against incompatible uses of land, providing for a more attractive urban environment, assuring adequate open space, and reducing noise, night lighting, glare, odor, objectionable views, loss of privacy and other adverse impacts and nuisances through the use of buffers and landscaping. These regulations are also designed to encourage the protection and planting of trees, which are declared to be beneficial public resources, and to prevent the needless, wasteful or purposeless destruction of trees in order to better control problems of flooding, soil erosion and air pollution. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 2102. - Buffer Required. 
Property zoned for commercial and industrial uses shall provide a buffer, as defined by these regulations, along any rear or side property lines abutting a residential district or abutting an alley across from a specified residential district, provided that no buffer shall extend within fifteen (15) feet of a public right-of-way line. Minimum buffer widths shall be established in accordance with the following schedule: 
1.  When a B-1 or O-I District abuts a R-1 or R-2 District, a setback of forty (40) feet shall be provided, including a thirty (30) foot buffer, except Residential use in the B-1 or O-I District would be subject to setbacks provided in Section 2001. 
2.  When a B-2 District abuts a R-1 or R-2 District, a setback of sixty (60) feet shall be provided, including a fifty (50) foot buffer, except Residential use in the B-2 District would be subject to setbacks provided in Section 2001. 
3.  When an I District abuts a R-1, R-2, R-3, MHP, or PUD District, a setback of one hundred (100) feet shall be provided, including a ninety (90) foot buffer 
It shall be the responsibility of the developer, upon installation of utilities, streets, etc., to designate required buffers on construction plans and to ensure that existing vegetation within required buffers is maintained unless disturbance of the buffer is approved by the Zoning Administrative Officer as specifically provided herein. 
It shall be the responsibility of the property owner of the lot to be used or built upon to maintain existing vegetation within required buffers and to replant where sparsely vegetated or install fencing, walls, etc. as approved to achieve the desired screening. Installation of vegetation, fencing, walls, etc. may be phased in accordance with approved building plans. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 2103. - Buffer specifications. 
All buffers required by these regulations shall conform to the following provisions: 
1.  Utilization will be made of existing vegetation where it has been determined by the Zoning Administrative Officer that existing vegetation is appropriate for inclusion within the buffer, or when found not appropriate, shall be supplemented with approved, additional plantings. 
2.  Disturbance or modification of the natural topography of the land for property improvements or during construction and maintenance activities is to be minimized, except in the following instances that have been approved by the Zoning Administrative Officer: 
a.  Where the land must be cleared and graded as required by the application of laws to prevent soil erosion or sedimentation; 
b.  Where regulations for storm drainage improvements require alteration of the topography; 
c.  Where necessary to prevent a nuisance, or to thin natural growth that has become so dense as to prohibit normal growth, or to remove diseased, misshapen, or dangerous or decayed growth; 
d.  Where access and/or utility crossings have been approved. 
3.  Vegetation, except for ground covers, shall be of such type as to be a height of not less than three (3) feet when planted and which will, in normal growth, attain a height of six (6) feet within three (3) years; provided, however that such plant materials can form a hardy screen, dense enough and high enough both to interrupt vision and to reduce the transmission of sound. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 2104. - Landscape strip required. 
All properties except those containing single-family detached or attached residences and two-family residences shall provide a landscape strip, as defined by these regulations, often (10) feet in width along the developed portion abutting any public street and five (5) feet in width along the developed portion of side property lines. A five (5) foot wide landscape strip along a side property line may be relocated if required to share a common access drive along said side property line. 
It shall be the responsibility of the property owner of a lot to be used or built upon to install the required landscape strips. Installation of landscape strips may be phased in accordance with approved building plans. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 2105. - Acceptable plant materials. 
In those instances where the natural vegetation and topography are insufficient to achieve the desired level of screening required by these regulations, a planted buffer shall be provided and shall consist of plant material of such growth characteristics as will provide an acoustical and visual screen. Planted materials shall conform to the following specifications: 
1.  Trees used for screening purposes should be native to the region and shall not be deciduous. Trees should be at least three (3) feet in height above the ground when planted or which will, in normal growth, attain a height of six (6) feet within three (3) years. 
2.  Shrubs that are used to form hedges shall not be deciduous. Shrubs shall be a least three (3) feet above the ground level when planted. They should be spaced in such a way that, when mature, they will form a continuous visual screen (hedge) that is at least six (6) feet in height. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 2106. - Maintenance of buffers and landscape strips. 
The owner and/or user of the property shall be responsible for installing the trees and shrubs and maintaining them in a neat and orderly appearance. This includes irrigating or watering, fertilizing, pruning and replanting where necessary. In cases of non-compliance, the Building Official shall be empowered to take action as provided by law to ensure maintenance of all plant and landscaping materials. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 2107. - Tree protection zone. 
Within the tree protection zone, as defined by these regulations, no more than twenty (20%) percent of the mature, healthy, existing trees, as defined, shall be cut, damaged, or destroyed; provided, however that additional trees may be removed upon approval by the Zoning Administrative Officer if one (1) tree is planted and maintained for each one (1) tree removed. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 2108. - Parking area landscaping requirements. 
Interior landscaping for parking areas shall be required for parking lots designed and constructed for more than five (5) or more spaces. Such interior landscaping shall not be less than ten (10%) percent of the total area devoted to parking on the lot, and no parking space shall be located more than one hundred (100) feet from a landscape island or other area devoted to landscaped open space. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 2109. - Screening of outdoor storage areas required. 
In districts where permitted, all outside storage areas shall be screened from all public rights-of-way with a 100% opaque, solid wooden fence or masonry wall at least six (6) feet in height, or a densely planted landscape strip of at least ten (10) feet in width. The insertion of plastic or metal weaving into chain link fences shall not be considered to comply with the requirements of this Section. Access driveways serving open storage areas shall be provided with a gate that is 100% opaque. In cases where the Governing Body approves an open storage area as a conditional use in the B-2, Highway Business District, the Governing Body may require screening in addition to the requirements of this Section. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 2110. - Screening of dumpsters required. 
In all zoning districts, dumpsters and trash receptacles shall be screened from view from all public rights-of-way, either by locating said dumpsters to the rear of a building, or by erection of a 100% opaque, solid wooden fence or masonry wall on three (3) sides of said dumpster. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 2111. - Administration and enforcement. 
Where buffers are required, the applicant must demonstrate, whether on appropriate plans or after inspection by the Zoning Administrative Officer, that the plant materials in place or installed achieve the required screening. All site plans, plot plans and grading and drainage plans shall indicate all required buffers and landscape strips. 
Required buffers, landscape strips, and parking lot landscaping shall be installed in accordance with approved plans prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy. However, owing to special conditions or exceptional circumstance such as drought, said buffers and landscape strips may be installed within ninety (90) days after the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy, provided that a letter of credit, escrow money, performance bond or other approved alternative is submitted to the Zoning Administrative Officer prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
ARTICLE XXII. - FLOOD HAZARD AREA REGULATIONS 

Sec. 2201. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this Article is to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by the application of regulations designed to: Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities; require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; control the alteration of natural flood plains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of flood waters; control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase erosion or flood damage; and prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands. 
It is further the intent of this Article to: Protect human life and health; minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; minimize prolonged business interruptions; minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in flood plains; help maintain a stable tax base by promoting the sound use and development of flood-prone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas; and to insure that potential home buyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 2202. - Application of regulations. 
The provisions of this Article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard, as defined by these regulations, within the jurisdiction of the City of Dahlonega 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 2203. - Establishment of special flood hazard areas. 
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in its Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM) Revision, dated January 23, 1976, with accompanying maps and any revision thereto, are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this Ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 2204. - Establishment of base flood elevations. 
Where the Flood Insurance Study and accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps and Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps establish base flood elevations, such elevations shall govern. However, in the event base flood elevations are not provided by said study and maps, or in the event a study by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers or other reputable engineering studies prepared by a current state-registered professional engineer establishes base flood elevations for a more specific land area, then said specific elevations prepared by the Corps or registered engineer shall govern, upon acceptance by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) and amendment of appropriate maps. When base flood elevations cannot be established by these means, the base flood elevations may be determined by data submitted by a registered land surveyor based on the best information available, subject to the approval of the Building Official. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 2205. - Encroachment within floodway prohibited. 
Within any floodway, as defined by these regulations, no encroachments, including fill, new construction substantial improvements and other development shall be permitted unless certification (with supporting technical data) by a state registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during occurrence of the base flood. All such construction must be in conformance with the provisions of these regulations. No structure or land shall hereafter be located or extended, converted or structurally altered without full compliance with the terms of this Article. Mobile or manufactured homes shall not be permitted in designated floodways. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 2206. - Permitted uses within special flood hazard areas. 
Notwithstanding the uses permitted by the zoning district applying to the property, only the following uses shall be permitted within a special flood hazard area: 
1.  Agriculture, including forestry and livestock raising, requiring no structure. 
2.  Dams, provided they are constructed in accordance with the requirements of this Article and with all applicable State and Federal Regulations. 
3.  Fences having sufficient open area to permit the free flow of water and/or debris. 
4.  Grading and other construction necessary to raise a building site above the flood plain, provided that said activities are accomplished in conformance with the development standards of these regulations and all applicable State and Federal Regulations. 
5.  Identification, regulatory and warning signs. 
6.  Public, private and commercial parks and recreational areas including boat ramps and docks but not including any temporary or permanent buildings, provided such use is approved by the City Engineer and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
7.  Parking lots. 
8.  Public utility poles, towers, pipelines, sewers, streets, and similar facilities, provided they are constructed in such a manner as to permit the free flow of flood waters. 
9.  Other uses may be permitted upon approval of a conditional use in accordance with the procedures established in Article XXVI. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 2207. - Permit requirements and procedures. 
In all developments that involve change, modification, or alteration of a special flood hazard area, except such agricultural activities as plowing, tilling, seeding and planting, such development shall require a development permit in accordance with Section 2703 from the Building Official prior to the commencement of activities. No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or structurally altered without full compliance with the terms of this Ordinance and other applicable regulations. 
Application for a Development Permit shall be made to the City of Dahlonega Building Official on forms furnished by him or her prior to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to, the following plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, earthen fill, storage of materials or equipment, drainage facilities, and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required: 
2207.1.  Application Stage. 
1.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the proposed lowest floor (including basement) of all buildings; 
2.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-residential building will be floodproofed; 
3.  Certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the non-residential floodproofed building will meet the floodproofing criteria in this Article. 
4.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. 
2207.2.  Construction Stage. 
Provide a floor elevation or flood-proofing certification after the lowest floor is completed, or instances where the building is subject to the regulations applicable to Coastal High Hazard Areas, after placement of the horizontal structural members of the lowest floor. Upon placement of the lowest floor, or flood-proofing by whatever construction means, or upon placement of the horizontal structural members of the lowest floor, whichever is applicable, it shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to the City of Dahlonega Building Inspector a certification of the elevation of the lowest floor, flood-proofed elevation, or the elevation of the lowest portion of the horizontal structural members of the lowest floor, whichever is applicable, as built, in relation to mean sea level. Said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When flood-proofing is utilized for a particular building, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. Any work undertaken prior to submission of the certification shall be at the permit holder's risk. The City of Dahlonega Building Official shall review the floor elevation survey data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being permitted to proceed. Failure to submit the survey or failure to make said corrections required hereby, shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 2208. - Duties and responsibilities of the City of Dahlonega Building Official. 
Duties of the City of Dahlonega Building Official with regard to this Article shall include, but not be limited to: 
1.  Review all development permits to assure that the permit requirements of this Ordinance have been satisfied; 
2.  Advise permittee that additional federal or state permits may be required, and if specific federal or state permit requirements are known, require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file with the development permit. 
3.  Notify adjacent communities and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
4.  Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished. 
5.  Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean seal level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved buildings, in accordance with this Article. 
6.  Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the new or substantially improved buildings have been floodproofed, in accordance with this Article. 
7.  When floodproofing is utilized for a particular building, the City of Dahlonega Building Official shall obtain certification from a registered professional engineer or architect, in accordance with this Article. 
8.  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the City of Dahlonega Building Official shall make the necessary interpretation. The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this Article. 
9.  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with this Article, then the City of Dahlonega Building Official shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of this Article. 
10.  All records pertaining to the provisions of this Ordinance shall be maintained in the office of the City of Dahlonega Building Official and shall be open for public inspection. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 2209. - Development provisions. 
Development within special flood hazard areas shall conform to the following regulations: 
2209.1.  General Requirement For New Construction and Substantial Improvements. 
New construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; constructed with materials and equipment resistant to flood damage; constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage. Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a building which is in compliance with the provisions of this Article, shall meet the requirements for new construction as contained in this Article. 
2209.2.  River and Stream Channels. 
Relocation or realignment of river or stream channels shall be prohibited if such action would reduce the floodway capacity with respect to the base flood elevation, or significantly alter water flow characteristics so as to create a hazard. Prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, adjacent communities and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources shall be notified, and written evidence of such notification shall be submitted to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
2209.3.  Non-Conforming Uses. 
Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a building which is not in compliance with the provisions of this Article, if permitted by these regulations, shall be undertaken only if said non-conformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. 
2209.4.  Residential Structures. 
Any new residential structure or substantial improvement thereof, or mobile or manufactured home in all areas of a special flood hazard area, if permitted by these regulations, shall have its lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than three (3) feet above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with this Article. 
2209.5.  Non-Residential Structures. 
Any new construction or substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial or other non-residential structure (including mobile or manufactured home), if permitted by these regulations, shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than three (3) feet above the base flood elevation. Buildings located in all A-zones, if permitted by these regulations, may be flood proofed in lieu of being elevated provided that all areas of the building below the required elevation are water tight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and use structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic or hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the standards of this Article are satisfied. 
2209.6.  Elevated Buildings. 
New construction or substantial improvements of elevated buildings, if permitted by these regulations, that include fully enclosed areas formed by foundation and other exterior walls below the base flood elevation shall be designed to preclude finished living space and designed to allow for the entry and exit of floodwaters to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls. 
a)  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
1)  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2)  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and 
3)  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in both directions. 
b)  Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow for parking of vehicles (garage door) or limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises (standard exterior door) or entry to the living area (stairway or elevator); and 
c)  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
2209.7.  Filling in Flood Hazard Area. 
Lands may be removed from a special flood hazard area by raising the elevation of such land above the base flood elevation, provided the raising of such land is accomplished in accordance with the requirements of this Article and any State and Federal regulations. 
2209.8.  Residential Lot Area and Subdivision Requirements. 
In zoning districts which permit residential use, at least fifty (50%) percent of the required minimum lot area established by the zoning district shall be above the base flood elevation. Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals (including mobile and manufactured home parks and subdivisions) and other proposed development which is greater than the lesser of fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres. All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage, shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage, and shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
2209.9.  Certain Development Prohibited. 
No construction, including grading and filling, shall be permitted which would: raise the base flood elevation beyond the boundaries of the property being developed; reduce the flood storage capacity of the floodway; impede the movement of flood waters; or increase the velocity of flood waters. 
2209.10.  Utilities and Equipment. 
All new and replacement water supply systems and sanitary sewerage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters. On site sewage disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
2209.11.  Standards for Manufactured Homes and Recreational Vehicles. 
a)  All manufactured homes, if permitted by these regulations, placed, or substantially improved, on individual lots or parcels, in expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions, or in substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions, must meet all the requirements for new construction, including elevation and anchoring. 
b)  All manufactured homes, if permitted by these regulations, placed or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision must be elevated so that: 
1)  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than three (3) feet above the level of the base flood elevation, or 
2)  The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength, of no less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
3)  The manufactured home must be securely anchored to the adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces. 
4)  In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, any manufactured home placed or substantially improved must meet the standards of Article XXII, Section 2209., 2209.11. (b) (1) and (3) above. 
c)  All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
1)  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, or 
2)  The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for new construction, including anchoring and elevation requirements of Article XXII, Section 2209, 2209.11(a) or (b)(1) and (3) above. 
A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security services and has no permanently attached structures. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 2210. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection provided by this Article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and do occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This Article does not imply that land outside of the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This Article shall not create liability on the part of the City of Dahlonega, or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this Article or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 2211. - Appeals. 
In the case of an alleged error in determination or act of an official in the administration or enforcement of this Article, such aggrieved person may appeal said determination or action to the Board of Zoning Appeals in accordance with Article XXIV of these regulations. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 2212. - Variances. 
The Board of Zoning Appeals shall hear and decide requests for variances from the requirements of this Article, in accordance with Article XXIV of these regulations. Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 2213. - Criteria for granting variances to provisions of this Article. 
In passing upon such applications, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards specified in other sections of this Ordinance, and: 
1.  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
2.  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
3.  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
4.  The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community; 
5.  The necessity of the facility to a waterfront location, in the case of a functionally dependent facility; 
6.  The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use; 
7.  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
8.  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area; 
9.  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
10.  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site, and; 
11.  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and bridges. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 2214. - Conditions of variance and limits on variance authority. 
1.  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
2.  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and in the instance of a historical building, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building; 
3.  Variances shall only be issued upon (a) showing of good and sufficient cause, (b) a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship, and; (c) a determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
4.  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation to which the building is to be built and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduces lowest floor elevation. 
5.  The City of Dahlonega Building Official shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 2215. - Standards for streams without established base flood elevation and/or floodways. 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in this Article, where streams exist but where no base flood data has been provided without floodways, the following provisions apply: 
2215.1. No encroachments, including fill material or structures shall be located within areas of special flood hazard, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. The engineering certification should be supported by technical data that conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles. 
2215.2. New construction or substantial improvements of buildings shall be elevated or flood-proofed to elevations established in accordance with this Article. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
ARTICLE XXIII. - PLANNING COMMISSION 

Sec. 2301. - Creation and appointment. 
The Planning Commission for the City of Dahlonega is hereby created. The Planning Commission shall be composed of seven (7) members appointed by the Governing Body in such a manner as hereinafter provided. Four (4) members present shall be required to constitute a quorum. One (1) such member shall be annually elected chairman of the Planning Commission by the Planning Commission members, and the Chairman shall not vote except in cases of a tie-vote between the other members. In cases of a tie-vote and the Chairman excuses himself from voting, then such tie-vote shall constitute denial of said motion, application or action. All members appointed to the Planning Commission shall be residents of the City. The members shall serve staggered terms, with three (3) members serving a term of three (3) years, two (2) members serving a term of two (2) years, and two (2) members serving a term of one (1) year. Thereafter, the members of the Planning Commission shall be appointed for a term of three (3) years and shall serve until their successors are appointed. The compensation of the members of the Planning Commission shall be as established by the Governing Body. Any vacancy in the membership of the Planning Commission shall be filled for the unexpired term of such vacancy in the same manner as the original appointment. The Governing Body may remove any member of the Planning Commission for due cause after written notice to such member and after a public hearing. Members of the Planning Commission shall appoint a secretary, or in lieu of such appointment, the Zoning Administrative Officer shall serve as the secretary of the Planning Commission 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 2302. - Meetings and records. 
The Planning Commission shall meet at least one (1) time each month at the call of the chairman, or at such other times as the Planning Commission may determine, and all such meetings shall be open to the public. The Planning Commission shall adopt rules for the transaction of business, or in lieu of such rules, the Commission shall follow "Robert's Rules of Order," latest edition. The Planning Commission shall keep record of its resolutions, recommendations, transactions, findings, and determinations, and all such records shall be public record and available for purchase by interested parties at a reasonable cost. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 2303. - Powers and duties. 
The Planning Commission shall have the following functions, powers and duties: 
1.  Cooperate with, contract with, or accept funds from federal, state, regional, or local public or semi-public agencies or private individuals or corporations; expend such funds; and carry out such cooperative undertakings or contracts. 
2.  Make expenditures for the purchase of required equipment and supplies. Expenditures, exclusive of gifts to the Planning Commission or contract receipts, shall be within the amounts appropriated for the purpose by the Governing Body. 
3.  Conduct surveys and studies of existing conditions and probable future developments and to prepare and recommend to the Governing Body any plans for physical, social and economic growth as will best promote the public health, safety, order, convenience, aesthetics, prosperity or the general welfare of the City of Dahlonega. 
4.  Prepare and recommend for adoption by the Governing Body zoning regulations and official zoning map, subdivision regulations and other such land use regulations; prepare and recommend for adoption by the Governing Body amendments to any of the land use regulations; and to review and make recommendations concerning applications for zoning map amendment, conditional use approvals, variances, annexation or other such applications. 
5.  Perform other planning functions and duties as may be required by the Governing Body. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
ARTICLE XXIV. - BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS 

Sec. 2401. - Creation and appointment. 
A Board of Zoning Appeals is hereby established. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall perform all of its duties and exercise all of its powers in such a way that the purpose and intent of the zoning regulations shall be accomplished, public health, safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. 
The Governing Body shall serve as the Board of Zoning Appeals. Four (4) members present shall be required to constitute a quorum. One (1) such member shall be annually elected chairman by the members of the Board of Zoning Appeals, or in lieu or such election, the Mayor shall preside over such meetings. The Chairman shall not vote except in cases of a tie-vote between the other members. In cases of a tie-vote and the Chairman excuses himself from voting, then such tie-vote shall constitute denial of said motion, application or action. A secretary shall be appointed, or in lieu of such appointment, the Zoning Administrative Officer shall serve as the secretary of the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 2402. - Meetings and records. 
The Board of Zoning Appeals shall meet at least one (1) time each month at the call of the chairman, or at such other times as the Board of Zoning Appeals may determine, and all such meetings shall be open to the public. Meetings of the Board of Zoning Appeals may be conducted on the same calendar day as a regular meeting of the Mayor and City Council. However, such meeting shall take place separate from such regular meeting and shall be adjourned or convened before or after such regular meeting. The Board shall adopt rules for the transaction of business, or in lieu of such rules, the Board shall follow "Robert's Rules of Order," latest edition. The Board shall keep record of its findings, proceedings and official determinations, which shall be kept separate from minutes of any other meetings of the Governing Body, showing the vote of each member on each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and such records shall be public record and available for purchase by interested parties at a reasonable cost. The Board shall have the power to subpoena and require the attendance of witnesses, administer oaths, compel testimony, and the production of books, papers, files and other evidence pertinent to the matters before it. On all appeals, applications and matters before the Board, said Board shall inform in writing all parties involved in its decision. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 2403. - Powers and duties limited. 
The Board of Zoning Appeals is a body of limited powers, and its actions are taken in a quasi-judicial capacity rather than a legislative capacity. Failure to adopt written findings justifying all decisions shall render such decision null and void. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 2404. - Appeals. 
The Board is empowered to hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the Zoning Administrative Officer, Building Official, or City Engineer in the interpretation or enforcement of these zoning regulations. 
The Board is empowered to hear an appeal made by any person, firm, or corporation, or by any officer, department, board, or bureau affected by any decisions of the Historic Commission, Zoning Administrative Officer, Building Official or other employee based on the zoning regulations. 
Such appeal shall be taken within sixty (60) days, or as provided by the rules of the Board, by filing with the Zoning Administrative Officer notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. All papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken shall forthwith be transmitted to the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
The Board shall select a reasonable time and place for the hearing of the appeal and give at least fifteen (15) days of public notice thereof and due notice to the parties in interest and shall render a decision on the appeal within a reasonable time. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 2405. - Determination of district boundaries. 
The Board of Zoning Appeals shall have original jurisdiction to, upon application, determine the location of a particular district boundary in question as specified in Section 404 of these regulations. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 2406. - Variances. 
The Board of Zoning Appeals is hereby empowered to authorize upon application in specific cases such variance from the terms of these regulations as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of these regulations will in an individual case, result in unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of these regulations shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. The existence of a non-conforming use of neighboring land, buildings or structures in the same zoning district or of permitted or non-conforming uses in other districts shall not constitute a reason for the requested variance. A variance may be granted in an individual case of unnecessary hardship, after appropriate application in accordance with Article XXVI, upon specific findings that all of the following conditions exist. The absence of any one (1) of the conditions shall be grounds for denial of the application for variance. 
1.  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape or topography that are not applicable to other land or structures in the same district; and 
2.  A literal interpretation of the provisions of these zoning regulations would create an unnecessary hardship and would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other property owners within the district in which the property is located; and 
3.  Granting the variance requested will not confer upon the property of the applicant any special privileges that are denied to other properties of the district in which the applicant's property is located; and 
4.  Relief, if granted, will be in harmony with the purpose and intent of these regulations and will not be injurious to the neighborhood or general welfare in such a manner as will interfere with or discourage the appropriate development and use of adjacent land and buildings or unreasonable affect their value; and 
5.  The special circumstances are not the result of the actions of the applicant; and 
6.  The variance requested is the minimum variance that will make possible the legal use of the land, building, or structure; and 
7.  The variance is not a request to permit a use of land, building or structures which are not permitted by right in the district involved. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 2407. - Conditional approval permitted. 
In exercising the powers to grant appeals and approve variances, the Board may attach any conditions to its approval which it finds necessary to accomplish the reasonable application of the requirements of these regulations. 
In exercising its powers, the Board of Zoning Appeals may, in conformity with the provisions of these regulations, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination, and to that end shall have all of the powers of the Zoning Administrative Officer and Building Official and may issue or direct the issuance of a permit. The concurring vote of four (4) members of the Board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of the Zoning Administrative Officer, Building Official, or City Engineer. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 2408. - Approval period limited. 
No order of the Board permitting the erection or alteration of a building or other variance shall be valid for a period of longer than six (6) months unless such use is established within such period; provided, however that such order by the Board shall continue in force and effect if a building permit for said erection or alteration is obtained within such period, and such erection or alteration is started and proceeds to completion in accordance with such permit. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 2409. - Application, hearings and notice. 
Applications for variance shall be made in accordance with all applicable provisions of Article XXVI. 
ARTICLE XXV. - HISTORIC PROPERTIES AND DISTRICTS 

Sec. 2501. - Application of requirements. 
The requirements of this Article apply to all properties within a historic district or individual historic property, as designated by the Governing body under the provisions of the Historic Preservation Ordinance of the City of Dahlonega, Georgia. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 2502. - Alteration of structures and buildings; new construction. 
Within any designated Historic district, prior to any material change in appearance (including painting), demolition, relocation, or removal of an existing structure or building in whole or in part, or new construction of a structure or building, a design review shall be conducted by the Preservation Commission in accordance with the City of Dahlonega Historic Preservation Ordinance and the preservation Commission's adopted Rules of Procedure. A Certificate of Appropriateness approved by the Preservation Commission shall be required as a precedent to such material change in appearance, demolition, relocation, removal or new construction, and for issuance of a building permit as may be required to authorize any such activity. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 2503. - Exemption for ordinary maintenance and repair; public safety. 
Nothing in this Article shall be construed to prevent the ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior elements of any structure or building to correct deterioration or decay, or to sustain the existing architectural form, and that does not involve a material change in appearance of the structure of building. Nothing in this Article shall be construed to prevent the construction, reconstruction, alteration or demolition of any such elements which any authorize public official shall certify as required by imminent threat to public health or safety. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 2504. - Exemption for signs. 
For the purpose of this Article, signs shall not be considered structures, and issuance of a sign permit within a designated Historic District shall not require that a Certificate of Appropriateness be approved by the Preservation Commission. All signs and other advertising devices are regulated according to the City of Dahlonega sign Ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 2505. - Historic districts and properties to be shown on zoning map. 
The boundaries of each historic district, and the location of each individual historic property, as designated by the Governing Body under the provisions of the Historic Preservation Ordinance of the City of Dahlonega, Georgia, shall be shown on the Official Zoning Map. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
ARTICLE XXVI. - AMENDMENT, APPLICATION AND PROCEDURAL REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 2601. - Authority to amend. 
The Governing Body may from time to time amend the number, shape, boundary or area of any district, or may amend any regulation pertaining to any district; or may amend any Article or Section of these regulations. The procedure for amending these regulations shall be as provided in this Article. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 2602. - Initiation of zoning amendments. 
A petition to amend the text of these zoning regulations or the official zoning map may be initiated by the Governing Body, the Planning Commission, or any person, firm, corporation or agency that owns property involved in a petition for amendment, subject to the provisions established herein. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 2603. - Frequency of application. 
The Governing Body or the Planning Commission may at any time file, in its own name, an application for amendment to the text of the zoning regulations or the official zoning map, except that if a zoning decision of the Governing Body is for the rezoning of property and the amendment to the zoning ordinance and map to accomplish the rezoning is defeated by the Governing Body, then the same property may not again be considered for rezoning until the expiration of at least six (6) months immediately following the defeat of the rezoning by the Governing Body. 
A property owner or subsequent property owner shall not initiate action for a map amendment, conditional use permit, or variance affecting the same or any portion of property more often than once every twelve (12) months from the date of any previous decision rendered by the Governing Body; provided, however, that a property owner may petition for the alteration, modification or deletion of conditions of zoning in accordance with the provisions of this Article. 
A property owner or subsequent property owner shall not initiate action for a text amendment affecting the same or any portion of property more often than once every twelve (12) months from the date of any previous decision rendered by the Governing Body. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 2604. - Withdrawal of amendment application. 
Any petition for an amendment to the zoning regulations, official zoning map, conditional use approval, or variance may be withdrawn, at the discretion of the person or agency initiating such a request, at any time prior to final action by the Governing Body upon written notice to the Zoning Administrative Officer. Any required application fees shall be refunded to the applicant only if such application has not been prepared and submitted for advertisement as determined by the Zoning Administrative Officer. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 2605. - Application requirements. 
Application materials specified in this section shall be required for the following petitions: amendments to the official zoning map, alterations or extensions of conditional zoning, conditional use permits, development plan approvals within the Planned Unit Development (PUD) District, Mobile Home Park (MHP) District, applications for condominium site plan approval, variances or appeals to the Board of Zoning Appeals: 
1.  An application form furnished by the Zoning Administrative Officer; and 
2.  A legal description of the property to be considered in the application. The legal description shall be by metes and bounds unless an alternative legal description is accepted by the Zoning Administrative Officer. Boundary surveys of the property should be submitted with the application whenever available; and 
3.  A letter of intent which describes general characteristics of the proposed development such as type and time frame of development, background information in support of such application, and any other information deemed pertinent by the applicant. For variance applications, the letter of intent shall address the criteria specified in Section 2406. of these regulations. For zoning map amendment applications, the letter of intent shall address the standards specified in Section 2607. of these regulations. For conditional use permit applications, the letter of intent shall address the standards specified in Section 2608. of these regulations. For PUD applications the letter of intent shall take the form of a development plan summary report which shall also address the items enumerated in Section 1303. 
4.  A site plan with all information specified in Section 2606. except that zoning map amendment applications for R-1 zoning shall not require a site plan. Unless otherwise noted in the approval, the site plan submitted in support of an approved application shall be considered a part of the approval and must be followed. 
5.  A fee for said application as established by the Governing Body from time to time. 
6.  Applications for conditional use permits to exceed the height limitations, applications for conditional signs, and applications for Certificates of Appropriateness shall also require architectural elevations of all proposed structures and buildings requested for approval. 
7.  Applications which require action by the Governing Body shall also require disclosure of any conflicts of interest as specified in Chapter 67A of the Georgia Code, "Conflict of Interest in Zoning Actions." 
Applicants shall submit fifteen (15) copies of any required site plans, development plans, elevation drawings and letters of intent to the Zoning Administrative Officer for distribution to the applicable bodies and/or review agencies. The Zoning Administrative Officer may require more or less copies depending on the nature and extent of required review. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 2606. - Site plan requirements. 
All site plans required by this Article shall, at a minimum, contain the following information: 
1.  Title of the proposed development and the name, address and telephone number of the property owner. 
2.  The name, address and telephone number of the architect, engineer or other designer of the proposed development. 
3.  Scale, date, north arrow, and general location map showing relationship of the site to streets or natural landmarks. 
4.  Boundaries of the subject property, all existing and proposed streets, including right-of-way and street pavement widths; buildings; water courses; parking and loading areas; and other physical characteristics of the property and proposed development. 
5.  Building setbacks, buffers, landscape strips, and tree protection zone. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 2607. - Criteria to consider for map amendments (rezonings). 
In exercising the zoning powers granted to the Mayor and City Council by State Law, the City Council shall apply the following standards in making zoning decisions, weighing each standard to the extent appropriate or relevant to each zoning decision: 
a)  Standards for consideration of rezonings: 
1)  Whether the zoning proposal will permit a use that is suitable in view of the use and development of adjacent and nearby property. 
2)  Whether the zoning proposal will adversely affect the existing use or usability of adjacent or nearby property. 
3)  Whether the zoning proposal will result in a use that will or could cause an excessive or burdensome use of existing streets, transportation facilities, utilities, or schools. 
4)  Whether the zoning proposal is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan, transportation plans, or other plans adopted for guiding development within the City of Dahlonega. 
5)  Whether there are other existing or changing conditions affecting the use and development of property that give supporting grounds for either approval or disapproval of the zoning or special use proposal. 
b)  Standards for considering the adoption of or amendment to Ordinance 91-9 Amended or other "zoning" ordinances: 
1)  Is the proposal consistent with the purpose and intent of the ordinance or regulation under consideration? 
2)  Does the proposal further or is it compatible with the purpose and intent of the Comprehensive Plan? 
3)  Is the proposal required to adequately address new or changing conditions or to properly implement the Comprehensive Plan? 
4)  Does the proposal reasonably promote the public health, safety, morality or general welfare? 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 2608. - Criteria to consider for conditional uses. 
The applicant, staff, Planning Commission and Governing Body should review applications for conditional uses with regard to the following criteria: 
1.  Off-street parking and loading facilities are adequate in terms of location, amount and design to serve the use. 
2.  The number, size and type of signs proposed are compatible with the surrounding area. 
3.  The amount and location of open space and the provision of screening is such that buffering of incompatible uses is achieved. 
4.  Ingress and egress to the property is suitable and safe, and the effect of the proposed activity on traffic flow along adjoining streets is not adverse. 
5.  The location and intensity of outdoor lighting is such that it does not cast light on adjacent, adjoining or neighboring properties. 
6.  Hours and manner of operation of the proposed use are not inconsistent with adjacent and nearby uses. 
7.  Public facilities and utilities are capable of adequately serving the proposed use. 
8.  The proposed use will not have a significant adverse effect on the level of property values or the general character of adjacent land uses or the general area. 
9.  The physical conditions of the site, including size, shape, topography and drainage, are suitable for the proposed development. 
10.  The proposed use is consistent with the goals and objectives of the Comprehensive Plan of the City of Dahlonega. 
The staff, Planning Commission and Governing Body may consider other factors deemed relevant before formulating recommendations and taking action on a particular conditional use application. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 2609. - Public notice and public hearing required. 
This section shall apply to all applications for amendments to the text of the zoning regulations, amendments to the official zoning map, petitions for variances and appeals to the Board of Zoning Appeals, requests for conditional use approval, requests for alteration or extension of conditional zoning, applications for site plan approval in the MHP District, and petitions for development approval for property within the PUD, Planned Unit Development District, and applications for condominium site plan approval. 
Prior to making any zoning decision, the City Council shall conduct a Public hearing. The public hearing shall be called and a public notice provided in accordance with the provisions of Ordinance 91-9 as amended and in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 36-66-4. Public Hearing Notice, as follows: 
a)  A notice of time and place of the hearing shall be published at least 15 Days, but not more than 45 days, prior to said Public hearing in the official legal organ of the City of Dahlonega or another newspaper of general circulation within the territorial boundaries of the city. The notice shall state the time, place and purpose of the hearing in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 36-66-4. If the proposed amendment is a rezoning of property or special use initiated by a party other than the City Council, then: 
1)  The published notice, in addition to the foregoing, shall include the location of the property, the present zoning classification of the property, and the proposed zoning classification of the property; and 
2)  A sign or signs containing that same information shall be placed on the property by the City not less than 15 days, nor more than 45 days, prior to the date of the hearing. The sign or signs shall be placed in a conspicuous location on the property frontage in such manner as to be legible from the public road. On lots with more than one road frontage, a sign will be placed facing each Public road. If the property has no road frontage, a sign shall be placed at a location on each road where access will be gained to the property. 
All required public hearings shall be held by the Governing Body, and no action shall be taken on said applications until a public hearing has been held by the Governing Body. 
Public hearings regarding variances and appeals shall be held by the Board of Zoning Appeals, and no action shall be taken on said applications until a public hearing has been held by the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
Public hearings may be delayed, rescheduled or continued at another time and date, provided announcement is given at the time and place of the initially scheduled and advertised public hearing, and provided such date, time and location of the public hearing to be delayed, rescheduled or continued is given. If the applicant of a petition before the Planning Commission or Governing Body fails to attend the public hearing, then the Planning commission or Governing Body may require re-advertisement of the subject petition at the expense of the applicant. If there is no quorum of the Planning Commission or Governing Body at the scheduled public hearing, then the public hearing(s) shall be rescheduled and re-advertised at the City of Dahlonega's expense. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 2610. - Recommendation by zoning administrative officer. 
The Zoning Administrative Officer will, as appropriate, customarily submit to the recommending and/or decision making body, prior to a scheduled public hearing, copies of the site plan and letter of intent along with a written recommendation for approval, disapproval, deferral, withdrawal or other recommendation. Said recommendation shall include reasons for said recommendations, considered within the context of the appropriate criteria as specified by these regulations. The recommendations of the Zoning Administrative Officer shall have an advisory effect only and shall not be binding on the Governing Body. Copies of the Zoning Administrative Officer's recommendations shall be made available to the applicant and other interested parties upon completion and distribution to the appropriate bodies and at the public hearing. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 2611. - Planning commission recommendation. 
Prior to the public hearing held by the Governing Body, the Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on all applications for amendment to the text of the zoning regulations, amendments to the official zoning map, conditional use permit applications, petitions for alteration or extension of conditional zoning, requests for development plan approval within the PUD, Planned Unit Development District, request for site plan approval in the MHP, Mobile Home Park District, requests for condominium site plan approval and variances for properties located in all zoning districts. 
After completing its studies of the particular petition, the Planning Commission shall submit a recommended action in writing to the Governing Body. The Planning Commission may submit any additional report it deems appropriate. The recommendations of the Planning Commission shall have an advisory effect only and shall not be binding on the Governing Body. Copies of the Planning Commission's recommendations and reports shall be made available to the applicant and other interested parties upon completion and distribution to the Governing Body and at the public hearing before the Governing Body. 
The Planning Commission shall have thirty (30) days within which to submit its recommendations. The Governing Body shall not take action on any of said applications, until it has received the recommendation of the Planning Commission within the specified time period. If the Planning Commission fails to submit a recommendation within the thirty (30) day period, it shall be deemed to have approved the proposed application. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 2612. - Conduct of public hearings. 
All public hearings regarding applications considered by the Board of Zoning Appeals, Planning Commission, and Governing Body shall be held in accordance with any procedures adopted by said body and, in addition, shall be governed by the following procedure: 
1.  As a preliminary matter, the applicant and any opponents to the zoning decision shall acquaint themselves with the provisions of Section 3 of the Conflict of Interest in Zoning Actions Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-67A regarding disclosure of campaign contributions and shall comply with the provisions of that statute. 
2.  The presiding officer (as used herein the presiding officer shall mean the chair of the body or the City Attorney) shall open the hearing by stating the specific application being considered at the public hearing. At this time the presiding officer may summarize the public hearing procedures. The applicant may, upon recognition and upon statement of name and address, present and explain his application. The applicant shall be provided a full opportunity to be heard and may present any evidence, information or materials which the applicant desires for the body to consider in arriving at its determination. The applicant, or his designated agent, shall be required to attend the public hearing unless written notice of hardship is received prior to such meeting. Failure of the applicant or agent to attend the public hearing or meeting, except in cases of hardship, may be due cause for dismissal or denial of such application. A time limitation may be imposed at the discretion of the presiding officer, but in no event shall such time limitation provide for less than ten minutes, nor shall it be any less than the time allowed for those persons speaking in opposition to the application. 
3.  Persons who oppose the application will be asked to comment next. All interested parties after being recognized shall be afforded an opportunity to address the proposed application by standing before the appropriate body and identifying their name and address along with any comments on the proposed application. A time limitation may be imposed at the discretion of the presiding officer, but in no event shall such time limitation provide for less than ten minutes, nor shall it be any less than the time allowed for those persons speaking in favor of the application. Public comments will be accepted and individuals making public comments may present any evidence, information and/or materials that the individual desires for the body to consider in arriving at its determination. 
4.  All comments shall be directed to the body and shall be made in an orderly manner. 
5.  The applicant shall then have an opportunity for summary remarks and rebuttal concerning the proposed application. 
6.  Upon the completion of any comments from interested parties and the summary by the applicant, the public hearing shall be completed and adjourned. 
7.  A member of the City staff will then briefly summarize the requested application and staff shall respond to any questions from the body regarding the staff recommendation related to the proposed application, any applicable background material, and the recommendations and reports of the Planning Commission if appropriate. All public comments having been heard, the members of the body considering the application may discuss the request among themselves. During this discussion period, the members of the body may call on the applicant or other interested parties to clarify points made previously or to answer questions. Said applicant or interested parties may respond upon recognition. 
8.  The Mayor and Council will then take the matter under consideration for voting but may ask questions of the Staff, Consultants, Applicant or other persons in attendance during the voting process. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 2613. - Action by the appropriate body. 
After completion of the public hearing, if so required by these regulations, the Governing Body may take action to approve or deny the request, refer the application back to the Zoning Administrative Officer, or Planning Commission for further study, or the Governing Body may table or defer action until a later meeting. The Board of Zoning Appeals, after the public hearing has been completed, may take action to approve or deny the request, or defer action until a later meeting. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 2614. - Conditional approval permitted. 
The Zoning Administrative Officer and Planning Commission may recommend, and the Governing Body may approve, applications for zoning map amendments, conditional use permits, applications for development approval within the PUD, Planned Unit Development District, and application for condominium site plan approval, subject to certain conditions, provided that said conditions are set forth in the ordinance regarding approval of such application. Said conditions of approval may reduce the number or type of permitted uses, limit the nature or scope of permitted uses, restrict certain activities on the property, restrict the number and kind of improvements which can be made on the property, stipulate specific acts which the property owner will perform, or any other conditions directly related to the physical use of land and which are designed to render the proposed zoning or use compatible with nearby properties. Applications for alteration or extension of conditional zoning shall be made in accordance with the requirements of this Article. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 2615. - Reversion of conditional zoning and/or conditional use approval. 
If, after twenty-four (24) months from the date the Governing Body approves a map amendment or conditional use permit, action has not been taken to utilize the property, pursuant to such conditions, such as securing a development permit, the approval shall expire. The Governing Body shall, by official action, cause the conditional use approval to expire or the zoning district to revert to the district classification assigned to the property immediately prior to the approval. 
The Zoning Administrative Officer shall notify all property owners in question of pending action to rescind or revoke approvals, and such notice shall be by certified mail, dated at least fifteen (15) days prior to the date of the Governing Body's scheduled meeting, and directed to the owner's address as it appears on the tax rolls of the Governing Body. 
Prior to notification by the Zoning Administrative Officer of any reversion of approval, the owner of the property in question may petition the Governing Body for a modification or extension of zoning or conditional use approval. Any such extension shall be valid for twenty-four (24) months from the date of approval. Only one (1) such extension shall be permitted. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 2616. - Approval required by appropriate body. 
Applications for amendments to the text of the zoning regulations, zoning map amendments, alterations or extensions of conditional zoning, conditional use permits, development within the PUD, Planned Unit Development District, and MHP, Mobile Home Park District, and condominium site plans require approval by the Governing Body before development may be initiated or before such application is made effective. Applications for variances and appeals shall require approval by the Board of Zoning Appeals before development may be initiated or before such application is made effective. Applications for variances and appeals shall require approval by the Board of Zoning Appeals before development may be initiated or before such application is made effective. Applications for Certificates of Appropriateness require review and approval by the Preservation Commission before development, demolition or alteration may be initiated or before such application is made effective. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 2617. - Procedure for approved zoning ordinance text amendments. 
The date of all approved amendments to the text of the zoning ordinance shall be indicated on the title/cover page of the text, and any sections within the zoning ordinance text hereafter amended or repealed shall be so indicated in text and concurring footnote providing the date such amendment was approved. All such text amendments shall be incorporated within the text without unreasonable delay. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 2618. - Designation of approved applications on official zoning map. 
Rezoning changes/zoning map amendments shall be entered onto the Official Zoning Map is accordance with Section 402. In addition, all conditional use approvals, variances, site plan approvals and Certificates of Appropriateness shall also be indicated on said Official Zoning Map, with an abbreviation of application type and number (i.e. CU, Z, V, CA, SP) (e.g., 2-90-01). Such entries shall be made on the Official Zoning Map without unreasonable delay. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
ARTICLE XXVII. - ADMINISTRATION, INTERPRETATION, ENFORCEMENT, PENALTIES AND REMEDIES 

Sec. 2701. - Administration and interpretation. 
The provisions of this ordinance shall be administered by the Zoning Administrative Officer who shall be appointed by the Governing Body and serve at its pleasure. The Zoning Administrative Officer shall be responsible for interpretation of the provisions of these regulations and for maintenance of the official zoning map. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 2702. - Enforcement. 
The provisions of these regulations shall be enforced by the Building Official and Zoning Administrative Officer. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 2703. - Development permit required. 
A development permit shall be required for any proposed use of land(s) or building(s) to indicate and insure compliance with all provisions of these regulations before any building permit is issued or any improvement, grading, land disturbing activity or alteration of land(s) or building(s) commences; provided, however, that development permits for individual structures within approved single-family residential subdivisions or for single-family dwelling units on individual lots shall not be required. Approval of a preliminary plat in accordance with all applicable provisions of the Subdivision Regulations shall constitute approval of the development permit for each subdivision, and plan approval of a planned unit development, mobile home park, or condominium development as specified in these regulations shall constitute approval of a development permit. 
All development permits shall be issued by the Building Official only after prior approval by the Zoning Administrative Officer, who shall in no case approve a development permit for the use, construction, or alteration of any land or building if the land or building as proposed to be used, constructed or altered would be in violation of any of the provisions of these regulations or any other codes and laws. Development permits shall be valid for two (2) years from its issuance. If work described in any development permit has not begun within one hundred twenty (120) days from the date of issuance thereof, said permit shall expire, and further work shall not proceed until a new development permit has been obtained. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 2704. - Building permit required. 
No building, structure or sign, except as specifically exempted by these regulations, shall be erected, moved, extended, enlarged or structurally altered, nor shall any excavation or filling of any lot for the construction of any building be commenced until the Building Official has issued a building permit for such work in conformity with the provisions of these regulations. 
All building permits shall be issued by the Building Official. In cases of uncertainty regarding whether a proposed building or structure conforms to any provisions within these regulations, the Building Official shall consult with the Zoning Administrative Officer for his interpretation and ruling. Building permits shall become invalid unless the work authorized by it shall have been commenced within ninety (90) days of its date of issue, or if the work authorized by it is suspended or abandoned for a period of six (6) months or more. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 2705. - Certificate of occupancy required. 
A Certificate of Occupancy issued by the Building Official is required in advance of occupancy or use of any lot or change or extension in the use of any lot; any building or structure hereafter erected; or any change in the use of an existing building or structure. 
All Certificates of Occupancy shall be issued by the Building Official, and no such Certificate shall be issued unless the proposed use of a building or land conforms to the applicable provisions of these regulations. Business licenses shall not be issued until the business conforms to the regulations of the district in which it is located and a valid Certificate of Occupancy is issued. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 2706. - Penalties for violation. 
Any person, firm or corporation violating, neglecting or refusing to comply with any of the provisions of these regulations shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined not less than fifty ($50.00) dollars nor more than two hundred ($200.00) dollars for each offense, or as determined by the court of proper jurisdiction. Each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 2707. - Remedies. 
In case any building or structure is or is proposed to be erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, converted or maintained, or any building structure or land is or is proposed to be used in violation of any provision of these regulations, the Building Official, Zoning Administrative Officer or any other appropriate authority may, in addition to other remedies, and after due notice to the owner of the violation, issue a citation for violation of these regulations requiring the presence of the violator in the court of proper jurisdiction; institute injunction, or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, maintenance or use to correct or abate such violation or to prevent the occupancy of such building, structure or land. Where a violation of these regulations exists with respect to a structure or land, the Building Official may, in addition to other remedies, require that utility service be withheld therefrom until such time as the structure or premises is no longer in violation of these regulations. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
ARTICLE XXVIII. - LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS 

Sec. 2801. - Conflict with other laws. 
Whenever the provisions of these regulations impose more restrictive standards than are required in or under any other statute, the provisions of these regulations shall govern. Whenever the provisions of any other statute require more restrictive standards than are required by these regulations, the provisions of such statute shall govern. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 2802. - Severability. 
In the event that any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this Ordinance shall be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall in no manner affect the other sections, sentences, clauses, or phrases of this Ordinance, which shall remain in full force and effect, as if the section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase so declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional were not originally a part thereof. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 2803. - Repealer. 
Whenever the provisions of this Ordinance impose more restrictive standards than are required in or under any other ordinance or regulation, the provisions of this Ordinance shall govern. Whenever the provisions of any other ordinance or regulation require more restrictive standards than are required by this Ordinance, the provisions of such ordinance or regulation shall govern. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 2804. - Effective date. 
This Ordinance shall be effective upon its adoption by the Mayor and City Council of the City of Dahlonega, Georgia and shall be enforced thereafter. 
( Ord. No. 91-9(Amd. 21), 9-6-2016 ) 
Appendix C - TELECOMMUNICATIONS[1] 
ORDINANCE 98-14 
AN ORDINANCE TO REGULATE THE PLACEMENT OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS AND ANTENNAE WITHIN THE JURISDICTIONAL LIMITS OF THE CITY; TO ESTABLISH PROCEDURES AND CRITERIA FOR OBTAINING A BUILDING PERMIT TO BUILD A TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWER OR AFFIX AN ANTENNA WITHIN THE JURISDICTIONAL LIMITS OF THE CITY; TO ESTABLISH PROCEDURES AND CRITERIA FOR OBTAINING A SPECIAL USE PERMIT TO BUILD A TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWER OR AFFIX AN ANTENNA WITHIN THE JURISDICTIONAL LIMITS OF THE CITY; TO ESTABLISH OTHER PROVISIONS REGARDING COMMUNICATIONS TOWERS AND ANTENNAE; TO PROVIDE AN EFFECTIVE DATE; AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES. 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is Ord. No. 98-14, adopted November 9, 1998. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original ordinance. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings and catchlines has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

Sec. 1. - This ordinance shall be known as: 
"CITY OF DAHLONEGA STANDARDS FOR TELECOMMUNICATIONS ANTENNAE AND TOWERS" 
I.  PURPOSES. This ordinance is designed and intended to balance the interests of the residents of the City of Dahlonega, telecommunications providers, and telecommunications customers in the siting of telecommunications facilities within the City of Dahlonega so as to protect the health, safety and integrity of residential neighborhoods and foster, through appropriate zoning and land use controls, a competitive environment for telecommunications carriers that does not unreasonably discriminate among providers of functionally equivalent personal wireless services and shall not prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of personal wireless services, and so as to promote the City of Dahlonega as a proactive city in the availability of personal wireless telecommunications service. To that end, this ordinance shall: 
A.  Provide for the appropriate location and development of telecommunications facilities in the City of Dahlonega; 
B.  Protect the City of Dahlonega's built and natural environment by promoting compatible design standards for telecommunications facilities; 
C.  Minimize adverse visual impacts of telecommunications facilities through careful design, siting, landscape screening and innovative camouflaging techniques; 
D.  Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower or antennae failure through engineering and careful siting of telecommunications tower structures and antennae; 
E.  Maximize use of any new and existing telecommunications towers so as to minimize the need to construct new towers and minimize the total number of towers throughout the City; 
F.  Maximize and encourage use of alternative telecommunication tower structures as a (sic) 
G.  Encourage and promote the location of new telecommunications facilities in areas which are not zoned for residential use. 
II.  Definitions. As used in this ordinance, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
A.  "Antenna" means any exterior apparatus designed for the sending and/or receiving of electromagnetic waves for telephonic, radio, television, or personal wireless services. For the purposes of this ordinance the term "antenna" does not include any tower and antenna under seventy (70) feet in total height which is owned and operated by an amateur radio operator licensed by the Federal Communications Commission, any device designed for over-the-air reception of radio or television broadcast signals, multi-channel multipoint distribution service or direct broadcast satellite service, or any cable television head end or hub towers and antennae used solely for cable television services. 
B.  "Director" means the City Manager of the City of Dahlonega or his designee. 
C.  "Governing body" means the City Council for the City of Dahlonega. 
D.  "Micro telecommunications facilities" are those which are located on existing buildings, poles or other existing support structures where antennae do not project more than three feet (3') above the top of the structure and there are no more than six (6) antennae per site. 
E.  "Macro telecommunications facilities" are those which are located on existing buildings, poles or other existing support structures and which project more than three feet (3') above the top of the structure but no more than ten feet (10') above the roof line, parapet or top of the structure. Macro telecommunication facilities may exceed the height limitation specified for the zoning district. 
F.  "Monopole tower" means a telecommunications tower consisting of a single pole, constructed without guy wires or ground anchors. 
G.  "Telecommunications facilities" refers to antennae and towers, either individually or together. 
H.  "Tower" means a structure, such as a lattice tower, guy tower, or monopole tower, constructed as a free-standing structure or in association with a building, other permanent structure or equipment, on which is located one or more antennae intended for transmitting or receiving analog, digital, microwave, cellular, telephone, personal wireless service or similar forms of electronic communication. The term includes microwave towers, common camera towers, and cellular telephone towers. 
III.  Exclusions. The following shall be exempt from this ordinance. 
A.  Any tower and antenna under seventy (70) feet in total height which is owned and operated by an amateur radio operator licensed by the Federal Communications Commission; 
B.  Any device designed for over-the-air reception of television broadcast signals, multichannel multipoint distribution service or direct broadcast satellite service; or 
C.  Any telecommunications facilities located on property owned, leased or otherwise controlled by the City of Dahlonega provided a license or lease authorizing the telecommunications facility has been approved by the Governing Body. 
D.  Any cable television head end or hub towers and antennae used solely for cable television services. 
IV.  Placement of Telecommunications Facilities by Zoning District. 
A.  In the I zoning district Micro and Macro telecommunications facilities shall be allowed as a use by right. Telecommunications towers designed and intended to accommodate at least one user are permitted as a use of right up to a height of eighty feet (80') following design review by and receipt of a building permit from the Director. Telecommunications towers designed and intended to accommodate at least two users are permitted as a use of right up to a height of one hundred feet (100') following design review by and receipt of a building permit from the Director, Telecommunications towers designed and intended to accommodate at least three users are permitted as a use of right up to a height of one hundred twenty feet (120') following design review by and receipt of a building permit from the Director. 
B.  In the CBD, B-2 and 0-I zoning districts Micro and Macro telecommunications facilities shall be allowed as a use by right following design review by and receipt of a building permit from the Director. Monopole towers up to a height of fifty feet (50') feet are permitted as a special use following design review by and receipt of a building permit from the Director and monopole towers up at a height of eighty feet (80') designed and intended to accommodate at least two (2) users are permitted as a special use following design review by and receipt of a building permit from the Director. 
C.  Zones R-2 and R-3 zoning districts Micro and Macro telecommunications facilities shall be allowed as a use by right following design review by and receipt of a building permit from the Director. Monopole towers up to a height of fifty feet (50') feet are permitted as a special use following design review by and receipt of a building permit from the Director. 
D.  Zones R-1 and PUD zoning districts, Micro telecommunications facilities shall be allowed as a use as of right on nonresidential structures following design review by and receipt of a building permit from the Director. Macro telecommunications facilities shall be allowed as a special use on nonresidential structures following design review by and receipt of a building permit from the Director. 
E.  Telecommunications facilities outside the guidelines listed above may only be built after approval of a variance in accordance with the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Dahlonega as well as receipt of a building permit. 
V.  Preferred and Disfavored Location Sites 
A.  Preferred Location Sites 
1.  Co-Location Sites: Any existing telecommunications towers currently being used for transmitting or receiving analog, digital, microwave, cellular, telephone, personal wireless service or similar forms of electronic communication shall be a Preferred Location Site regardless of the underlying zoning designation of the site, provided, however, that locations which meet this criteria shall be subject to the design and siting components of this ordinance and co-location sites shall not become an "antenna farm" or otherwise be deemed by the Director or the Governing Authority to be visually obtrusive. 
2.  Publicly-used structures: Publicly-used structures are preferred locations throughout the city because they appear in virtually all neighborhoods, are dispersed throughout the city, and due to their institutional or infrastructure uses are generally similar in appearance to or readily adaptable for telecommunications facilities. Therefore, telecommunications facilities should be less noticeable when placed on publicly-used structures than when placed on commercial or residential structures. Publicly-used structures include, but are not limited to, facilities such as community centers, civic centers, utility structures, water towers, elevated roadways, bridges, flag poles, schools, hospitals, clock or bell towers, light poles and churches but excluding police and fire stations, libraries and courthouses. 
3.  Industrial and Commercial Structures: Wholly industrial and commercial structures such as warehouses, factories, retail outlets, supermarkets, banks, garages, or service stations shall be Preferred Locations particularly where existing visual obstructions or clutter on the roof or along a roofline can and will be removed as part of the installation of the telecommunications facility. 
4.  Mixed Use Buildings in High Density Districts: Mixed use buildings (housing above commercial or other non-residential space) are also Preferred Location sites. 
B.  Disfavored Location Sites: Any single-family residential structure or site or multi-family duplex shall be a disfavored site for the location of telecommunications facilities. 
VI.  Requirements for Telecommunications Facilities 
A.  General Requirements for All Telecommunications Facilities: The requirements set forth in this Section shall govern the location and construction of all telecommunications facilities governed by this ordinance. 
1.  Building Codes and Safety Standards: To ensure the structural integrity of telecommunications facilities, the owner of a telecommunications facility shall ensure that it is maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable local building codes and the applicable standards for such telecommunications facilities, as amended from time to time. Owners of telecommunications facilities shall conduct periodic inspections of such facilities at least once every year to ensure structural integrity. Inspections shall be conducted by a qualified, independent engineer licensed to practice in Georgia. The results of such inspection shall be provided to the Director. 
2.  Regulatory Compliance: 
a.  All telecommunications facilities must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA., the FCC and any other agency of the state or federal government with the authority to regulate telecommunications facilities. If such standards and regulations are changed then the owners of the telecommunications facilities governed by this ordinance shall bring such telecommunications facilities into compliance with such revised standards and regulations within the date established by the agency promulgating the standards or regulations. 
b.  Owners of telecommunications facilities shall provide documentation showing that each telecommunications facility is in compliance with all applicable federal and state requirements. Evidence of compliance must be submitted every 12 months. 
3.  Security: All telecommunications facilities shall be equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing device or other similar protective device to prevent unauthorized access to the telecommunications facility. 
4.  Lighting: No illumination is permitted on telecommunications facilities unless required by the FCC, FAA or other state or federal agency of competent jurisdiction or unless necessary for air traffic safety. If lighting is required or necessary, the Director may review the available lighting alternatives and approve the design that would cause the least disturbance to the surrounding uses and views. 
5.  Advertising: No advertising is permitted on telecommunications facilities. However, a whip antenna may be allowed on any legally permitted permanent billboard or outdoor advertising sign as long as the other requirements of this ordinance are met. 
6.  Visual Impact 
a.  Telecommunications facilities shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish or, subject to any applicable standards of the FAA or other applicable federal or state agency, be painted a neutral color or painted and/or textured to match the existing structure so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness. 
b.  If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the antenna and associated electrical and mechanical equipment must be of a neutral color that is identical to, or closely compatible with, the color of the supporting structure so as to make the antenna and related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible. Roof-mounted antennas shall be made visually unobtrusive by screening to match existing air conditioning units, stairs, elevator towers or other background. 
c.  Where feasible, telecommunications facilities should be placed directly above, below or incorporated with vertical design elements of a building to help in camouflaging. 
d.  Telecommunications facilities shall not be placed in a direct line of sight with historic or scenic view corridors as designated by the Governing Body or by any state or federal law or agency. 
e.  Any equipment shelter or cabinet that supports telecommunications facilities must be concealed from public view or made compatible with the architecture of the surrounding structures or placed underground. Equipment shelters or cabinets shall be screened from public view by using landscaping or materials and colors consistent with the surrounding backdrop. The shelter or cabinet must be regularly maintained. 
7.  Landscaping 
a.  Landscaping shall be used to effectively screen the view of the telecommunications facility from adjacent public ways, public property and residential property. 
b.  Native vegetation on the site shall be preserved to the greatest practical extent. The applicant shall provide a site plan showing existing significant vegetation to be removed, and vegetation to be replanted to replace that lost. 
c.  The Director may waive or modify the landscaping requirement where lesser requirements are desirable for adequate visibility for security purposes, for continued operation of existing bona fide agricultural or forest uses such as farms, nurseries and tree farms or where an antenna is placed on an existing structure. In certain locations where the visual impact of the tower would be minimal, such as remote agricultural or rural locations or developed heavy industrial areas, the landscaping requirement may be modified or waived by the Director. 
8.  Maintenance Impacts. Equipment at a transmission facility shall be automated to the greatest extent possible to reduce traffic and congestion. Where the site abuts or has access to a collector or local street, access for maintenance vehicles shall be exclusively by means of the collector or local street. 
9.  Principal, Accessory and Joint Uses 
a.  Accessory structures used in direct support of a telecommunications facility shall be allowed but not be used for offices, vehicle storage or other outdoor storage. Mobile or immobile equipment not used in direct support of a telecommunications facility shall not be stored or parked on the site of the telecommunications facility. 
b.  Telecommunications facilities may be located on sites containing another principal use in the same build able area. 
10.  Lot Size and Setbacks. 
a.  The following setback requirements shall apply to all telecommunications facilities, provided however, that the Director may reduce the standard setback requirements of this section if the goals of this ordinance would be better served thereby. 
i.  Telecommunications towers must be set back a distance equal to the height of the tower from any off-site residential structure. 
ii.  Towers, guy wires and accessory facilities must satisfy the minimum (sic) 
iii.  Telecommunications facilities must be setback from any property line a sufficient distance to protect adjoining property from the potential impact of telecommunications facility failure by being large enough to accommodate such failure on the site, based on the engineer's analysis required in Section VII. 
b.  For antennas attached to the roof or a supporting structure on a rooftop, a 1:1 setback ratio (example: ten foot (10') high antenna and supporting structure requires ten foot (10') setback from edge of roof) shall be maintained unless an alternative placement is shown to reduce visual impact. 
B.  Additional Requirements For Towers: 
1.  Site location and development shall preserve the preexisting character of the surrounding buildings and land uses and the zone district as much as possible. Personal wireless telecommunication towers shall be integrated through location and design to blend in with existing characteristics of the site to the extent practical. 
2.  Existing on-site vegetation shall be preserved or improved, and disturbance of the existing topography shall be minimized, unless such disturbance would result in less visual impact of the site to the surrounding area. 
3.  At a tower site the design of the buildings and related structures shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening, and landscaping that will blend the tower and related facilities to the natural setting and built environment. 
4.  Towers shall not be located any closer than 1500 feet from an existing tower unless technologically required or visually preferable. 
5.  When a tower is adjacent to a residential use, it must be set back from the nearest residential lot line a distance at least equal to its total height. 
6.  In no case shall a tower be located in the required front yard, back yard or side yard in a residential district. 
7.  Towers shall not be sited where they will negatively affect historic or scenic view corridors as designated by the Governing Body or any state or federal law or agency or where they will create visual clutter. 
8.  Towers shall be enclosed by decay-resistant security fencing not less than six (6) feet in height and shall be equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing device or other similar protective device designed to prevent tower access. 
9.  Placement of more than one tower on a lot shall be permitted, provided all setback, design and landscape requirements are met as to each tower. Structures may be located as close to each other as technically feasible, provided tower failure characteristics of the towers on the site will not lead to multiple failures in the event that one fails. 
VII.  Application Procedures 
A.  General Application Requirements for All Building and Special Use Permits. Application for a building permit or special use permit for any telecommunications facility shall be made to the Director by the person, company or organization that will own and operate the telecommunications facility. An application will not be considered until it is complete. The following information shall be submitted when applying for any building permit, special use permit or other permit or variance included in this ordinance and must be submitted for an application to be considered complete: 
1.  Basic Information 
a.  Site plan or plans to scale specifying the location of telecommunications facilities, transmission building and/or other accessory uses, access, parking, fences, landscaped areas, and adjacent land uses. Applicants shall submit both a paper location map and a digitized location map in a format compatible with the GIS software currently utilized by the City of Dahlonega Information Technology Services Department. 
b.  Landscape plan to scale indicating size, spacing and type of plantings required in Section VI(A)(7). 
c.  A full description of the environment surrounding the proposed telecommunications facility, including any adjacent residential structures and districts, structures and sites of historic significance, streetscapes or scenic view corridors. 
d.  A description of anticipated maintenance needs for the telecommunications facility, including frequency of service, personnel needs, equipment needs, and traffic, noise or safety impacts of such maintenance. 
e.  Report from a qualified, independent engineer licensed in the State of Georgia, documenting the following: 
i.  Telecommunications facility height and design, including technical, engineering, economic, and other pertinent factors governing selection of the proposed design; 
ii.  Total anticipated capacity of the telecommunications facility, including number and types of antennae which can be accommodated; in 
iii.  Evidence of structural integrity of the tower structure; and 
iv.  Structural failure characteristics of the telecommunications facility and demonstration that site and setbacks are of adequate size to contain debris. 
f.  A definition of the area of service to be served by the antenna or tower and whether such antenna or tower is needed for coverage or capacity. 
g.  Information showing the proposed facility would provide the needed coverage or capacity. 
h.  The identity of a community liaison officer appointed by the applicant to resolve issues of concern to neighbors and residents relating to the construction and operation of the facility. Include name, address, telephone number, facsimile number and electronic mail address, if applicable. 
i.  Identification of the geographic service area for the subject installation, including a map showing the site and the nearest or associated telecommunications facility sites within the network. Describe the distance between the telecommunications facility sites. Describe how this service area fits into and is necessary for the service network. 
j.  Designation of which Location Preference, identified in Section V, above, the proposed facility is meeting. If the proposed location is not a Preferred Location 1 through 4 or is a Disfavored Site, describe: (a) what publicly-used building, co-location site or other Preferred Location Sites are located within the geographic service area. Provide a list (by address with lot and block number noted) and a map at 1:200 scale of all such buildings within the service area; (b) what good faith efforts and measures were taken to secure each of these Preferred Location sites; (c) why each such site was not technologically, legally or economically feasible and why such efforts were unsuccessful; and (d) how and why the proposed site is essential to meet service demands for the geographic service area and citywide network. 
2.  Five Year Plan and Site Inventory. Each application shall include a five-year facilities plan and site inventory including the following: 
a.  A list of all existing, existing to be upgraded or replaced, and proposed telecommunications facility sites within the city limits and within one mile of the city limits and a map showing these sites. The list must include the following information for each site: 
i.  Street address; 
ii.  Assessor's Block and Lot or other applicable ad valorem tax identification number; 
iii.  Zoning district; 
iv.  Type of building (commercial, residential, mixed use) and number of stories; 
v.  The number of antennas and base transceiver stations per site and the location and type of antenna installation (standalone rooftop, building facade, etc.) and location of the base transceiver station installation(s); 
vi.  The height from grade to the top of the antenna installation; and 
vii.  The radio frequency range in megahertz, the wattage output of the equipment and effective radiated power. 
b.  If the applicant does not know specific future tower and antenna site locations but does know of areas where telecommunications facilities will be needed within the next five years to provide service, the applicant shall list the Assessor's Blocks contained within the anticipated geographic service area and identify each geographic service area with a number that will correspond to the future telecommunication facility site. 
3.  Additional Information Requirements for Towers: 
a.  If the proposed site is zoned R-1 through R-3, PUD, 0-I, or Historical Business, and there are alternative sites in other zoning categories, applicants must justify why those alternate sites have not been proposed. The Director will review with special care justifications that appeal only to undue expense and/or to undue difficulties in entering into a lease agreement. The Director shall carefully weigh such claims, and the evidence presented in favor of them, against a project's negative impacts at the proposed site. 
b.  Applicants must identify all existing towers and all towers for which there are applications currently on file with the Director. Applicants must provide evidence of the lack of space on all suitable existing towers to locate the proposed antenna and of the lack of space on existing tower sites to construct a tower for the proposed antenna. If co-location on any such towers would result in less visual impact than the visual impact of the proposed tower, applicants must justify why such collocation is not being proposed. If co-location on any such tower would increase negative visual impact, then the applicant must so state and demonstrate. The Director will review with special care justifications that appeal only to undue expense and/or to undue difficulties in entering into a lease agreement. The Director shall carefully weigh such claims, and the evidence presented in favor of them, against a project's negative impacts at the proposed site. 
c.  In all zones, applicants must demonstrate that they cannot provide personal wireless communication service without the use of a telecommunications tower. 
d.  The applicant shall quantify the additional tower capacity anticipated, including the approximate number and types of antennae. The applicant shall provide a drawing for each tower showing existing and proposed antennae locations. The applicant shall also describe any limitations on the ability of the tower to accommodate other uses, e.g., radio frequency interference, mass height, frequency or other characteristics. The applicant shall describe the technical options available to overcome those limitations and reasons why the technical options considered were not chosen to be incorporated. The Director shall approve those limitations if they cannot be overcome by reasonable technical means. 
e.  The applicant must provide a utilities inventory showing the locations of all water, sewage, drainage and power lines impacting the proposed tower site. 
4.  The applicant must provide any other information which may be requested by the Director to fully evaluate and review the application and the potential impact of a proposed telecommunications facility. 
B.  Expedited Review for Building Permits Only 
When a telecommunications facility will be a use as of right pursuant to Section IV of this ordinance and requires only a building permit and design review before it may be erected, the Director will expedite review of the application and render a decision on the application within three (3) business days after receipt of a complete application. 
C.  Special Use Permits 
1.  A request for a special use permit shall be initiated by application to the Director and handled in accordance with the special use permit provision of the City of Dahlonega Zoning Ordinance. The City Council may issue a special use permit under this section provided it shall have determined that all of the requirements of Section VI have been satisfied and, further, that the benefits of and need for the proposed tower are greater than any possible depreciating effects and damage to the neighboring properties. 
2.  In granting a special use permit, the City Council may impose additional zoning conditions to the extent determined necessary to buffer or otherwise minimize adverse effects of the proposed tower or antenna on surrounding properties. 
VIII.  Co-location 
Applicant and owner shall allow other future personal wireless service companies, including public and quasi-public agencies, using functionally equivalent personal wireless technology to co-locate antennae, equipment and facilities on a telecommunications facility unless specific technical constraints prohibit said co-location. Applicant and other personal wireless carriers shall provide a mechanism for the construction and maintenance of shared facilities and infrastructure and shall provide for equitable sharing of cost in accordance with industry standards. 
IX.  Appeals 
Appeals from any decision of the Director may be taken by any person aggrieved or any official of the city affected by the decision of the Director. Such appeal shall be as specified in the City of Dahlonega Zoning Ordinance. Any decision by the Director or by the City Council denying a request to place, construct or modify a telecommunications facility shall be in writing and supported by substantial evidence in a written record. Any decision by the Governing Body denying or approving a request to place, construct or modify a telecommunications facility shall be in writing and supported by substantial evidence in a written record. 
X.  Nuisances 
Telecommunications facilities, including, without limitation, power source, ventilation and cooling, shall be operated at all times within the limits of the City of Dahlonega Noise Ordinance, shall not be operated so as to cause the generation of heat that adversely affects a building occupant and shall not be maintained or operated in such a manner as to be a nuisance. 
XI.  Removal of Antennae and Towers 
All telecommunications facilities shall be maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable building and technical codes so as to ensure the structural integrity of such facilities. If upon inspection by the Director any such telecommunications facility is determined not to comply with the code standards or to constitute a danger to persons or property, then upon notice being provided to the owner of the facility and the owner of the property if such owner is different, such owners shall have thirty (30) days to bring such facility into compliance. In the event such telecommunications facility is not brought into compliance within thirty (30) days, the City may provide notice to the owners requiring the telecommunications facility to be removed. In the event such telecommunications facility is not removed within thirty (30) days of receipt of such notice, the City may remove such facility and place a lien upon the property for the costs of removal. Delay by the City in taking action shall not in any way waive the City's right to take action. The City may pursue all legal remedies available to it to insure that telecommunications facilities not in compliance with the code standards or which constitute a danger to persons or property are brought into compliance or removed. The City may seek to have the telecommunications facility removed regardless of the owner's or operator's intent to operate the tower or antenna and regardless of any permits, federal, state or otherwise, which may have been granted. 
XII.  Abandoned Towers 
A.  Any telecommunications facility that is not operated for a continuous period of twelve (12) months shall be considered abandoned, whether or not the owner or operator intends to make use of it or any part of it. The owner of a telecommunications facility and the owner of the property where the facility is located shall be under a duty to remove the abandoned telecommunications facility. If such antenna and/or tower is not removed within sixty (60) days of receipt of notice from the City notifying the owner(s) of such abandonment, the City may remove such tower and/or antenna and place a lien upon the property for the costs of removal. The City may pursue all legal remedies available to it to insure that abandoned telecommunications facilities are-removed. Delay by the City in taking action shall not in any way waive the City's right to take action. The City may seek to have the telecommunications facility removed regardless of the owner's or operator's intent to operate the tower or antenna and regardless of any permits, federal, state or otherwise, which may have been granted. 
B.  If the owner of an abandoned tower or antenna wishes to use such abandoned tower or antenna, the owner first must apply for and receive all applicable permits and meet all of the conditions of this ordinance as if such tower or antenna were a new tower or antenna. 
XIII.  Pre-Existing Towers/Non-Conforming Uses 
A.  All telecommunications facilities operative on January 1, 1998 shall be allowed to continue their present usage as a non-conforming use and shall be treated as a non-conforming use in accordance with the City of Dahlonega Zoning Ordinance. Routine maintenance, including replacement with a new tower or antenna of like construction and height, shall be permitted on such existing telecommunications facilities. New construction other than routine maintenance shall comply with the requirements of this ordinance. 
B.  A telecommunications facility that has received City approval as of June 1, 1998, in the form of either a building permit or special use exception, but has not yet been constructed or placed in operation shall be considered an existing telecommunications facility so long as such approval is current and not expired. 
C.  Placement of an antenna on a nonconforming structure shall not be considered an expansion of the nonconforming structure. 
XIV.  Penalty for Violation of Ordinance 
A.  Any person who attempts to erect or erects a telecommunications facility covered by this ordinance without having first obtained the necessary building permit, special use permit or variance in the manner provided in this ordinance shall be deemed in violation of this ordinance. Any responsible party or other persons convicted by a court of competent jurisdiction of violating any provision of this ordinance shall be guilty of violating a duly adopted ordinance of the city and shall be punished either by a fine not to exceed $500.00 or by imprisonment not to exceed 30 days or both. The court shall have the power and authority to place any person guilty of violation of this ordinance on probation and to suspend or modify any fine or sentence. As a condition of such suspension, the court may require payment of restitution or impose other punishment allowed by law. 
B.  If any structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained in violation of this ordinance or without obtaining that required permits, or if any building, structure or land is used in violation of this article, the City Attorney, in addition to any other remedies, may institute proceedings to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, maintenance or use or to correct or abate such violations. Each and every day such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, maintenance or use continues may be deemed a separate offense. 
XV.  Coordination with Federal Law 
Whenever the Governing Authority finds that the application of this ordinance would unreasonably discriminate among providers of functionally equivalent personal wireless services or prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of personal wireless services, a conditional use permit waiving any or all of the provisions of this ordinance may be granted." 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - LEGISLATION 
This is a chronological listing of the ordinances of the city used in this Code. 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within the Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated (O.C.G.A.). 

 