ZONING CODE AND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS CITY OF EAST POINT, GEORGIA 2009 
____________ 
Published in 2009 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 
Adopted and Effective March 2, 2009 
____________ 

> 
PREFACE 
This Zoning Code and Development Regulations constitute a complete republication of Part 10 of the East Point Code of Ordinances as a separate volume. 
Source materials used in the preparation of these regulations were Exhibit "A" of Ord. No. 003-09, adopted March 2, 2009, which repealed in its entirety former Part 10, Planning and Development, of the East Point Code of Ordinances and enacted new provisions as set out in this volume. Provisions enacted or amended after March 2, 2009 include a history note appearing in parentheses at the end of the affected sections. 
Article and Section Numbering System 
The chapter, article and section numbering system used in this volume reproduces the numbering system used by the city's publication. The "10" before the dash in the section number refers to Part 10 of the East Point Code of Ordinances. The sections of chapters generally start in increments of a thousand—The first section of Chapter 1 is 10-1001; the sixth section of Chapter 4 is 10-4006; the nineteenth section of Chapter 14 is 10-14019. Articles within chapters are numbered alphabetically, and divisions in articles are numbered sequentially with Roman numerals. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in the the Zoning Code and Development Regulations is a prefix system. The number to the right of the hyphen represents the number of the page in that portion. The following are examples of this system and their corresponding prefixes: 

 
Index 
The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Robert S. Hornyak, Supplement Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to Marge Hansen and other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Zoning Code and Development Regulations are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of East Point, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of East Point, Georgia. 
© Copyrighted material.  Municipal Code Corporation and the City of East Point, Georgia. 2009. 
ORDINANCE NO. 003-09 
An Ordinance of Delete and Replace in Its Entirety, Part 10 - Planning and Development, of the Code of Ordinances for the City of East Point, Georgia; to Provide an Effective Date; to Repeal Conflicting Ordinances; and for Other Purposes 
Application No. 2008Z-006-04 
Whereas, the duly elected governing authority of the City of East Point, Georgia is the Mayor and Council thereof; 
Whereas, the governing authority desires to amend the East Point City Code of Ordinances; 
Whereas, the amendments contained herein will help to balance growth of residential development within the City; 
Be it ordained by the City Council of East Point, Georgia as follows: 
Section 1. The Code of Ordinances of the City of East Point, Georgia Part 10, Planning and Development is deleted and replaced in its entirety as delineated and attached as Exhibit "A" (Zoning Ordinance of East Point, Georgia). 
Section 2. This Ordinance shall be codified in a manner consistent with the laws of the State of Georgia and the City of East Point. 
Section 3. (a) It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Mayor and Council that all sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Ordinance are or were, upon their enactment, believed by the Mayor and Council to be fully valid, enforceable and constitutional. 
(b)  It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Mayor and Council that, to the greatest extent allowed by law, each and every section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this Ordinance is severable from every other section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this Ordinance. It is hereby further declared to be the intention of the Mayor and Council that, to the greatest extent allowed by law, no section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this Ordinance is mutually dependent upon any other section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this Ordinance. 
(c)  In the event that any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Ordinance shall, for any reason whatsoever, be declared invalid, unconstitutional or otherwise unenforceable by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, it is the express intent of the Mayor and Council that such invalidity, unconstitutionally or unenforceability shall, to the greatest extent allowed by law, not render invalid, unconstitutional or otherwise unenforceable any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs or sections of the Ordinance and that, to the greatest extent allowed by law, all remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of the Ordinance shall remain valid, constitutional, enforceable, and of full force and effect. 
Section 4. All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby expressly repealed. 
Section 5. Penalties in effect for violations of Part 10 of the Code of Ordinances, City of East Point, Georgia at the time of the effective date of this Ordinance shall be and are hereby made applicable to this Ordinance and shall remain in full force and effect. 
Section 6. The effective date of this Ordinance shall be the date of adoption unless otherwise specified herein. 
Approved this 2nd of March, 2009 
_____
Joseph L. Macon, Mayor 
Approved as to Form:  Attest: 
_______________________  _____ 
Nina Hickson, City Attorney  Brenda James, City Clerk 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code and are considered "Omitted." 
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

 
Chapter 1 - PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION 

Sec. 10-1001. - Established; duties. 
Pursuant to the Constitution and Laws of Georgia, the City Council of the City of East Point established a Planning and Zoning Commission. The duly appointed Planning and Zoning Commission shall carry out all of the duties imposed upon it by the laws of the State of Georgia and by ordinances of the City. 
Sec. 10-1002. - Organization. 
(a)  There shall be a Planning and Zoning Commission which shall be composed of nine persons appointed by the City Council of the City of East Point. The Mayor and each other council member of the City Council shall be entitled to nominate one person for appointment and such person's nomination shall be confirmed by the City Council. New appointments to these positions shall be made for a term to run concurrent with the term of the Mayor or council member nominating said appointment. 
(b)  If a vacancy should occur on the Planning and Zoning Commission leaving an unexpired term, the vacancy shall be filled by the City Council in the manner prescribed for appointments to boards and commissions, for the balance of the unexpired term. 
(c)  Appointments to the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be made from all segments of the community without permitting any special interest group to gain control of the Commission. 
(Ord. No. 021-09, § 1, 12-21-09) 
Sec. 10-1003. - Chairperson, vice-chairperson and provisional chairperson. 
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall at its second meeting of each year, elect from its members a chairperson, vice-chairperson, provisional chairperson and such other offices and titles as it deems necessary. 
Sec. 10-1004. - Quorum and procedures for meetings. 
The attendance of five members at a regular or specially called meeting of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business at such meeting. 
Sec. 10-1005. - Regular and special meetings. 
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall meet monthly on the third Thursday of each month at 7:00 p.m. in a location owned and/or operated by the City of East Point. The Planning and Zoning Commission may schedule the regular monthly meeting at any other time and/or place where it deems necessary. The Planning and Zoning Commission may meet specially at such other times and places as it may deem necessary. 
Sec. 10-1006. - Promulgation of rules, procedures for meetings. 
The Planning and Zoning Commission is authorized to promulgate such rules and procedures as are designed to expedite and improve the functions of the Commission. 
Sec. 10-1007. - Compensation. 
Each member of the Planning and Zoning Commission present at a regularly scheduled meeting (does not include work session) shall be compensated by the City of East Point at the rate of $50.00. Compensation shall be remitted to Commissioners present at regularly scheduled meetings on a monthly basis. Each member present at any special call meeting shall be compensated at the rate of $50.00 for each such meeting. 
(Ord. No. 005-11, § 1, 4-18-11) 
Sec. 10-1008. - Maintenance of land use map. 
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall maintain in current condition a Future Land Use Map which shall be updated every five years and submitted to the City Council at a specially called meeting for its consideration. 
Sec. 10-1009. - Transmittal of commission results to mayor and city council. 
Every recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission to the Mayor and Council of the City of East Point shall be transmitted to the Mayor and Council, along with a complete file related to such action, in time for the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Mayor and Council. 
Sec. 10-1010. - Director of planning and zoning and city engineer to attend meetings. 
It shall be the duty of the Director of Planning and Zoning and the City Engineer to attend, or have representatives from their offices to attend, all meetings of the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
Sec. 10-1011. - Planning and zoning commission powers and duties. 
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall have the following powers and duties in administration of the zoning ordinance. 
(1)  Review and recommendation on proposed zoning amendments. To review all proposed amendments to the zoning ordinance text or map, and to make recommendations thereon to the City Council. 
(2)  Administrative review. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the Director of Planning and Zoning in the enforcement of the Zoning Ordinance. Requests for administrative review shall be filed in writing and transmitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission on forms and in the manner provided by the Director of Planning and Zoning. 
(3)  Variances. To hear and decide applications for primary variance requests. 
(4)  Variances. Variances from the provisions or requirements of the Ordinance shall be authorized only upon making all of the following findings: 
a.  By reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness, or shape of a specific lot, or by reason of exceptional topographic conditions, which were not created by the owner or applicant, the strict application of the requirements of this Ordinance would deprive the property owner of rights and privileges enjoyed by other property owners in the same zoning district; 
b.  The requested variance does not go beyond the minimum necessary to afford relief, and does not constitute a grant of special privilege inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the zoning district in which the subject property is located; 
c.  Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public good or impair the purposes and intent of this Ordinance. No variance may be granted for a use of land or building or structure that is prohibited by this Ordinance. No variance may be granted that would conflict with or alter a stipulation or condition imposed by the Planning and Zoning Commission or City Council. No variance shall be granted to extend the time period for a temporary outdoor social, religious, entertainment or recreation activity approved by the City Council. 
d.  No variance shall be granted by the Planning and Zoning Commission that permits the expansion or enlargement of any nonconforming use of land and buildings in combination, nonconforming use of land and structures in combination, or nonconforming use requiring special land use permit; 
e.  No variance shall permit the reestablishment of any nonconforming use of land, nonconforming use of land and buildings in combination, nonconforming use of land and structures in combination, or nonconforming use requiring special land use permit where such use has lapsed pursuant the requirements and limitations of 10-2017; or 
f.  Conditions resulting from existing foliage or structures bring about a hardship whereby a sign meeting minimum letter size, square footage and height requirements cannot be read from an adjoining public road. 
(5)  Reconsideration of denied or rejected variance application. Any application for variance request may not be reconsidered for a period of six months after it has been rejected or denied by the Planning and Zoning Commission, unless by court order or pursuant to a settlement of litigation approved by the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 2012Z-016-08, § 1, 9-17-12) 
Sec. 10-1012. - Action on requests for administrative review, special exception permits and variances. 
Powers and duties. 
(a)  In exercising its powers, the Planning and Zoning Commission in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance may reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or may modify the order, requirements, decisions or determination of the Director of Planning and Zoning and may issue, or direct the issuance of a permit. 
(b)  Application or appeal to the Planning and Zoning Commission for relief may be made by any person aggrieved by any decision of the Director of Planning and Zoning or other city official, based on this ordinance; 
(1)  Every appeal for administrative review, special use permit or variance shall be filed on forms and in the manner prescribed by the Director of Planning and Zoning within 30 days of the decision or determination by the Director of Planning and Zoning or other city official that provides the basis for such appeal. 
(2)  An application form, provided by the Director of Planning and Zoning and completed by the applicant, together with all papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken shall forthwith be transmitted via the Director of Planning and Zoning to the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
(3)  All requests for administrative review, for special exceptions, or for variances shall be accompanied by other information required by the zoning ordinance, plus a legal description of the land area which is the subject of the proposed administrative review, special use permit or variance, and a current plat of the land area made by a registered land surveyor as specified in and in conformity with the provisions of section 10-2207, paragraph B. Twenty-three copies of the completed application form and all accompanying materials and information shall be filed by the applicant with the Director of Planning and Zoning. 
Sec. 10-1013. - Owner's authorization. 
Every application for administrative review, a special exception, or a variance shall be accompanied by authorization by the owner for the application to be made by the applicant. 
Sec. 10-1014. - Fee for administrative reviews, special use permits and variance applications. 
When an appeal for administrative review or an application for a special use permit or for a variance is made, the appellant or applicant shall pay a fee to the City to cover and defray administrative and processing costs. The amount of such fee shall be as set forth in the Zoning Fee Schedule available in the office of Planning and Zoning. 
Sec. 10-1015. - Public hearings on appeals. 
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall fix a reasonable time for holding public hearings on applications, appeals or other matters referred to it, and give at least 15 days public notice thereof in a newspaper of general circulation, and decide same within a reasonable time. Upon a hearing, any party may appear in person, by agent, or by attorney. The dates of such hearings shall be set forth in the hearing schedule available in the office of the Planning and Zoning. 
Sec. 10-1016. - Stay of proceedings. 
An application or appeal for relief filed with the Planning and Zoning Commission stays all legal proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the Director certifies to the Planning and Zoning Commission after the notice of appeals shall have been filed with him or her that, by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his or her opinion, cause imminent peril to life and property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by restraining order which may be granted by the Planning and Zoning Commission or by court of record on application, on notice to the official from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown. 
Sec. 10-1017. - Explanation of decisions. 
On all appeals, applications and other matters brought before it, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall inform all the parties involved of its decision and the reasons therefore. 
Sec. 10-1018. - Appeals. 
Any person or persons severally or jointly aggrieved by any decision of the Planning and Zoning Commission may present an appeal to the Superior Court of Fulton County. Such an appeal to the Superior Court shall be by writ of certiorari and filed within 30 days from the date of the decision of the Planning and Zoning Commission. Upon failure to file the appeal within 30 days, the decision of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be final. 
Chapter 2 - ZONING REGULATIONS 
ARTICLE A. - DEFINITIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 061-016, § 1(Exh A), adopted Sept. 19, 2016, repealed former Article A, §§ 10-2001—10-2003, in its entirety and enacted new provisions as herein set out. Former Art. A pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 003-09, 3-2009; Ord. No. 005-11, § 1, 4-18-11; Ord. No. 009-13, § 1, 4-15-13; Ord. No. 001-014, § 1, 1-21-14 ; Ord. No. 041-15, § 1, 10-19-15 ; Ord. No. 057-016, § 1, 6-20-16 . 

Sec. 10-2001. - Scope. 
Words not defined herein shall be construed to have the meaning given by Merriam Webster's Collegiate Dictionary, eleventh edition or later edition. 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 1(Exh. A), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2002. - Use and interpretation. 
The following shall apply to the use of all words in this Ordinance: 
(a)  Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense. 
(b)  Words used in the singular shall include the plural and vice versa. 
(c)  The word "shall" is mandatory. 
(d)  The word "may" is permissive. 
(e)  The nouns "zone," "zoning district" and "district" have the same meaning and refer to the Zoning Districts established by this Ordinance. 
(f)  The phrase "used" for shall include the phrases "arranged for," "designed for," "intended for," "maintained for" and "occupied for." 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 1(Exh. A), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2003. - Definitions. 
A 
Accessory site feature. Mechanical, electrical and ancillary equipment, cooling towers, mechanical penthouses, heating and air conditioning units and/or pads, exterior ladders, storage tanks, processing equipment, service yards, storage yards, exterior work areas, loading docks, maintenance areas, dumpsters, recycling bins, and any other equipment, structure or storage area located on a roof, ground or building. 
Adjoin. To have a common border with. Adjoin may also mean coterminous, contiguous, abutting and adjacent. 
Administrative minor variance. A variance to the minimum district yard requirements of not more than one foot, granted administratively by the Director of the Department of Planning and Community Development or his or her appointee. 
Administrative modification. A change to an approved condition of zoning that constitutes only a technical change and does not involve significant public interest as determined by the Director of the Department of Planning and Community Development. 
Administrative variance. A request for relief from: 1) the standards contained in Chapter 3, Subdivision Regulations, 2) a request to reduce the ten foot improvement setback adjacent to buffers or 3) a request for 10 percent reduction of parking spaces as required in Chapter 2 Article E. 
Adult bookstore. See Part 11 Chapter 6 of the East Point Code of Ordinances. 
Adult day center. A facility serving aging adults that provides adult day care or adult day health services for compensation to three or more persons. Adult day centers may operate in more than one location if classified and approved by the Georgia Department of Community Health as a mobile adult day center. This term shall not include a respite care services program. Aging adults are persons 60 years of age or older or mature adults below the age of 60 whose needs and interests are substantially similar to persons 60 years of age or older who have physical or mental limitations that restrict their abilities to perform the normal activities of daily living and impede independent living. 
Adult entertainment. See Part 11 Chapter 6 of the East Point Code of Ordinances. 
Adult entertainment establishment. See Part 11 Chapter 6 of the East Point Code of Ordinances. 
Alternative antenna support structure. Clock towers, campaniles, free standing steeples, light structures and other alternative designed support structures that camouflage or conceal antennas as an architectural or natural feature. 
Amateur radio antenna. Radio communication facility that is an accessory structure to a single family residential dwelling operated for non-commercial purposes by a Federal Communication Commission licensed amateur radio operator. The term antenna shall include both the electronic system and any structures it is affixed to for primary support. 
Amusement/indoor commercial. A use, not otherwise specifically identified, where recreational activity such as movie theaters, arcades, billiards, game rooms, sporting activities and other recreational amusements are conducted within a building. This use specifically does not include adult entertainment uses. 
Amusement/outdoor commercial. A use, not otherwise specifically identified, where recreational activities such as skating rinks, batting cages, miniature golf, drive-in theaters and other recreational activities or amusements that are conducted outside a building. 
Antenna. Any exterior apparatus designed for telephone, radio, or television communications through the sending and/or receiving of electromagnetic waves. 
Apartment. A building which contains three or more dwelling units either attached to the side, above or below another unit. Apartment may also refer to a dwelling unit attached to a nonresidential building. (See Dwelling, Multi-Family) 
Appeal. A request for relief from a decision made by the Director of the Department of Planning and Community Development, other department directors, the Planning and Zoning Commission, and/or the City Council. 
Artisans workshop. A building or portion thereof less than 2,000 square feet for the creation of artistic products such as but not limited to metal work, jewelry making, sculpture, glasswork, ceramics and pottery or woodworking. 
Assisted living communities. Personal care homes which choose to serve 25 residents or more and which provide assisted living care which consists of the provision of personal services, the administration of medications by a certified medication aide and the provision of assisted self-preservation. Personal services include but are not limited to individual assistance with and supervision of self-administered medications and essential activities or daily living such as eating, bathing, grooming, dressing and toileting. 
Attic. An unheated storage area located immediately below the roof. 
Automotive garage. A use primarily for the repair, replacement, modification, adjustment, or servicing of the power plant or drive-train or major components of automobiles and motorized vehicles. The repair of heavy trucks, equipment and automobile body work shall not be included in this use. The outside storage of unlicensed and unregistered vehicles is prohibited as part of this use. 
B 
Banner. A sign other than a flag with or without characters, letters, illustrations or ornamentation applied to cloth, paper, or fabric that is intended to be hung either with a frame or without a frame. Neither flags nor canopy signs are considered banners. 
Bar. An establishment having a minimum capacity of 25 persons and a maximum capacity of 100 persons per the City of East Point Fire Code that does not meet the definition of a restaurant, nightclub, lounge, hotel, brewpub, open air cafe or sidewalk cafe, that is primarily devoted to selling and dispensing alcoholic beverages by the drink for on-premises consumption. The bar must make food available to its patrons. 
Basement. A level below a floor of a building with a minimum of one-half (½) of the total wall area below grade. A basement is not a story. The term basement is synonymous with cellar. 
Beacon. Any light with one or more beams directed into the atmosphere or directed at one or more points not on the same lot as the light source; also any light with one or more beams that rotate or move. 
Bed and breakfast inn. A residence in which the frequency and volume of visitors are incidental to the primary use as a private residence and where guest rooms are made available for visitors for fewer than 14 consecutive days. Breakfast is the only meal served and is included in the charge for the room. Use allowed in non-residential districts and permitted in AG-1 with a Use Permit. 
Berm. A planted earthen mound. 
Big-box retail establishment. A singular retail or wholesale user, who occupies no less than 75,000 square feet of gross floor area, typically requires high parking to building area ratios, and has a regional sales market. Regional retail/wholesale sales are included but are not limited to membership warehouse clubs that emphasize bulk sales, discount stores, and department stores. 
Billboard. A sign which may be supported by a pole structure, with an area of more than 72 square feet but not more than 672 square feet. 
Biomedical waste. Any solid waste which contains pathological waste, biological waste, cultures, and stocks of infectious agents and associated biologicals, contaminated animal carcasses (body parts, their bedding, and other waste from such animals), chemotherapy waste, discarded medical equipment and parts, not including expendable supplies and materials, which have not been decontaminated. 
Boarding house. A residential use other than a hotel or motel in which lodging may be provided to non-household members and which includes the provision of meals. 
Brewpub. An accessory use to a permitted restaurant where distilled spirits, malt beverages or wines are licensed to sell and where beer or malt beverages are manufactured or brewed for consumption on the premise and solely in draft form. 
Buffer, state waters. See Chapter 12 Stream Buffer Protection. 
Buffer, zoning. A natural undisturbed portion of a lot, except for approved access and utility crossings, which is set aside to achieve a visual barrier between the use on the lot and adjacent lots and/or uses. A buffer is achieved with natural vegetation and must be replanted subject to the approval of the Director of the Department of Planning and Community Development or his/her designated agent(s) when sparsely vegetated. Clearing of undergrowth from a buffer is prohibited except when accomplished under the supervision of the Director of the Public Works or his/her designated agent(s). 
Buildable area. The portion of a parcel of land where a building may be located and which shall contain enough square footage to meet the minimum required by the zoning district. That portion which is not located in the minimum setbacks, utility corridors, driveways, slopes to build streets, tree save areas, landscape strips, specimen tree areas, state water buffers, zoning buffers, wetlands, storm water and sanitary sewer easements. 
Building. Any structure with a roof, designed or built for the support, enclosure, shelter, or protection of persons, animals, or property of any kind. 
Building line. Is an imaginary line which is no closer to a property line than the minimum yard (setback) requirements. 
Business. A usually commercial, mercantile or industrial enterprise activity engaged in as a means of livelihood. 
C 
Canopy. A roof-like cover, excluding carports, that either projects from the wall of a building or is freestanding. 
Car wash, principal. A primary or main use which provides space for cleaning vehicles. 
Car wash, accessory. A customarily incidental use of an attached or detached bay for cleaning vehicles. 
Cellar. See basement. 
Cemetery, human. The use of property as a burial place for human remains. Such a property may contain a mausoleum. 
Cemetery, pet. The use of property as a burial place for the remains of pets. Such a property may contain a mausoleum. 
Check casher. An individual, partnership, association, or corporation engaged in cashing checks, money orders, or other drafts for a fee. Such fee may be payable in cash, in the form of exchange of value in excess of regular retail value, in the form of mandatory purchase of goods or services by patrons on a regular basis, which shall mean the check casher conducts such services more than ten times in any calendar month, or in the form of the purchase catalog items or coupons or other items indicating the ability to receive goods, services, or catalog items. 
Check cashing establishment. Any establishment licensed by the State of Georgia pursuant to O.C.G.A. sections 7-1-700 et seq. 
Child care learning center. A program operated by a person, society, agency, corporation, institution or group that receives pay for group care. It provides child care for 19 or more children less than 18 years of age for less than 24 hours per day. Child care learning centers are licensed by the State Department of Early Care and Learning pursuant to Rules and Regulations of the State of Georgia 591-1-1.02. 
Church, temple or place of worship. A facility in which persons regularly assemble for religious ceremonies. This shall include, on the same lot, accessory structures and uses such as minister's and caretaker's residences, and other uses identified under the provisions for Administrative and Use Permits. 
Clear cutting. The removal of all vegetation from a property, whether by cutting or other means, excluding stream buffer requirements. 
Clinic. A use where medical examination and treatment is administered to persons on an outpatient basis. No patient shall be lodged on an overnight basis. 
Club. A social, educational, or recreational use normally involving community centers, public swimming pools and/or courts, civic clubhouses, lodge halls, fraternal organizations, country clubs or similar facilities. Club, as defined herein, does not include nightclubs, health clubs, warehouse clubs, neighborhood clubs or stand alone recreational fields. 
Commercial amusement/indoor. A use where recreational activity such as movie theaters, arcades, billiards, game rooms, sporting activities and other recreational amusements are conducted within a building. 
Commercial amusement/outdoor. A use where recreational activities such as skating rinks, batting cages, miniature golf, drive-in theaters and other recreational activities or amusements that are conducted outside a building. 
Community living arrangement. A residence, whether operated for profit or not, that undertakes through its ownership or management to provide or arrange for the provision of daily personal services, support, care, or treatment exclusively for two or more adults who are not related to the owner or administrator by blood or marriage and whose residential services are financially supported, in whole or in part, by funds designated through the Department of Human Resources, Division of Mental Health, Developmental Disabilities, and Addictive Diseases. 
Composting. A processing operation for the treatment of vegetative matter into humus-like material that can be recycled as a soil fertilizer amendment such as trees, leaves and plant material. Organic animal waste, food, municipal sludge, solid waste, and other non-farm or vegetative type wastes are not included. 
Condominium. A form of ownership as defined by State law in which common elements are jointly owned. A condominium is not a building type. 
Conservation subdivision. See Part 10 Chapter 4 Subdivision Regulations. 
Construction material. Building materials and rubble resulting from construction, remodeling, repair, and/or demolition operations on pavements, houses, commercial buildings and other structures. Such materials include, but are not limited to, asbestos containing waste (waste only), wood, bricks, metal, concrete, wall board, paper, cardboard, inert waste landfill material, and other nonputrescible wastes which have a low potential for groundwater contamination. 
Construction/demolition waste. Any waste building materials and rubble resulting from construction, remodeling, repair, and demolition operations on pavements, houses, commercial buildings and other structures. Such waste include, but are not limited to asbestos containing waste, wood, bricks, metal, concrete, wall board, paper, cardboard, inert waste landfill material, and other nonputrescible wastes which have a low potential for groundwater contamination. 
Convalescent center. A state licensed use in which domiciliary care is provided to convalescing, chronically or terminally ill persons who are provided with food, shelter and care and not meeting the test of family. This use shall not include hospitals, clinics, or similar institutions devoted primarily to the diagnosis and treatment of the sick or injured. The term shall include nursing home, hospice, and personal care home. 
Convenience store. A use offering a limited variety of groceries, household goods, and personal care items, occasionally in association with the dispensing of motor fuels as an accessory use, but in all cases excluding vehicle service, maintenance and repair and which occupies a maximum of 7,499 square feet of gross floor area. 
Convenient location and time. Suitable time and easily accessible place for applicants to meet with interested parties to discuss rezoning and/or use permit petitions. 
Country inn. A facility, with the owner or innkeepers residing on the premises, where guest rooms are made available for visitors for fewer than 30 consecutive days. A Country Inn is distinguished from a Bed and Breakfast category in that it serves both breakfast and lunch or dinner. 
Courtyard. An open air area, other than a yard, that is bounded by the walls of a building. Courtyards are used primarily for supplying pedestrian access, light, and air to the abutting building(s). Site furniture, lighting and landscaping are appropriate for courtyards. Vehicular access allowed for unloading and loading only. No vehicular parking or vehicular storage is allowed. 
Cul-de-sac. A street having only one connection to another street, and is terminated by a vehicular turn-around. 
Curb cut. A connection between a roadway and a property for vehicular access. Curb cut applies to access regardless of the existence of curbing. 
Cutoff. A luminaire light distribution where the emission does not exceed 2.5 percent of the lamp lumens at an angle of 90 degrees above nadir and does not exceed ten percent at a vertical angle of 80 degrees above nadir. 
Cutoff luminaries. A luminaire light distribution where the candela per 1,000 lamp lumens does not numerically exceed 25 (2.5 percent) at or above a vertical angle of 90 degrees above nadir, and 100 (10 percent) at or above a vertical angle of 80 degrees above nadir. This applies to all lateral angles around the luminaire. 
D 
Day care facility. See Child Day Care Center 
Day-night average sound level (DNL). The day-night average sound level (DNL) is the 24-hour average sound level, in decibels, obtained from the accumulation of all events with the addition of ten decibels to sound levels in the night from 10 p.m. to 7 a.m. The weighing of nighttime events accounts for the usual increased interfering effects of noise during the night, when ambient levels are lower and people are trying to sleep. DNL is a weighted average measured in decibels (db). 
Deck. A structure abutting a dwelling with no roof or walls except for visual partitions and railings not to exceed 42 inches above finished floor which is constructed on piers or a foundation above-grade for use as an outdoor living area. 
Department. Department of Planning and Community Development. 
Development, duplex. A development of two-family houses. 
Development, multifamily. An apartment building designed, arranged or used for occupancy by three or more families living independently of each other. 
Development of regional impact (DRI) study. A review by the Atlanta Regional Commission and the Georgia Regional Transportation Authority of large scale projects that are of sufficient size that they are likely to create impacts beyond the jurisdiction in which each project will be located. 
Development, single family. A development of single family dwelling units, with each dwelling unit including accessory structures, on a separate lot of record. 
Development standards. Dimensional measurements as specified in zoning districts relating to such standards as yard setbacks, lot area, lot frontage, lot width, height and floor area. 
Development, townhouse. A development of usually single-family houses of two or sometimes three stories that is usually connected to a similar house by a common sidewall. 
Director. Director of the Department of Planning and Community Development. 
Distribution line. A pipeline other than a gathering or transmission line. 
District, nonresidential. A term used to identify C-1, C-2, CL, CR, I-1, I-2, BP, POP, and O-I-T. 
District, residential. A term which applies to R-1, R-1A, RL, RT, R-2, R-3, R-4, and R-5, and residential portions of a MIX, CUP and AG-1. 
Drainage facility. A facility which provides for the collection, removal and detention of surface water or groundwater from land by drains, water course or other means. 
Drive-in/up/thru restaurant. A restaurant designed for customers to park and place and receive food orders while remaining in their motor vehicles. 
Driveway. A vehicular access way. 
Dwelling. Any building or portion thereof which is designed for or used for residential purposes for periods of more than 30 consecutive days. 
Dwelling unit. One or more rooms constructed with cooking, sleeping and sanitary facilities designed for and limited to use as living quarters. 
E 
Environmentally adverse. Any use or activity which poses a potential or immediate threat to the environment and/or is physically harmful or destructive to living beings as described in the Executive Order 12898 regarding Environmental Justice. 
Environmentally stressed community. A community exposed to a minimum of two environmentally adverse conditions resulting from public and private municipal (e.g., solid waste and wastewater treatment facilities, utilities, airports, and railroads) and industrial (e.g., landfills, quarries and manufacturing facilities) uses. 
F 
Family. Family means one or more persons related by blood, marriage, adoption, guardianship or other duly authorized custodial relationship, or up to four unrelated persons, occupying a dwelling unit and living as a single housekeeping unit, as distinguished from persons occupying a rooming, boarding or lodging house, or a hotel. 
Family day care home. A program operated in a private residential home to provide child care for children less than 18 years of age for less than 24 hours per day. Family day care home providers are licensed by the State Department of Early Care and Learning pursuant to State of Georgia Rules and Regulations 290-2-3.03 to care for three, but not more than six children for a fee. 
Farm. A parcel of land which is used for the raising of animals (including fish) on a commercial basis, such as ranching, dairy farming, piggeries, poultry farming and fish farming; a facility for the business of boarding or renting horses to the public; or a site used for the raising or harvesting of agricultural crops such as wheat, field forage and other plant crops intended for food or fiber. 
Fast food restaurant. See Restaurant, Fast Food. 
Financial institutions as used herein include banks, trust companies, building and loan associations, credit unions, savings and loan companies, mortgage brokers and lenders licensed by the Georgia Department of Banking and Finance and industrial loan companies licensed by the Georgia Insurance Commissioner. The definition however specifically excludes check cashing establishments licensed by the State of Georgia Insurance Commissioner pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 7-1-700 et seq. and does not include pawnshops or title pawn establishments. 
Fixed seat or seating. Chairs, benches or other forms of seating permanently affixed to the floor of a structure. 18 inches of bench length shall be treated as one fixed seat. 
Flag lot. A lot where frontage to a public street is provided via a narrow strip of land forming a pole or stem to the buildable portion of the lot. Prohibited Citywide 
Flood lamp. A form of lighting designed to direct its output in a specific direction with a reflector formed from the glass envelope of the lamp itself. Such lamps are so designated by the manufacturers and are typically used in residential outdoor area lighting. Prohibited Citywide 
Flood light. A form of lighting designed to direct its output in a diffuse, more or less specific direction, with reflecting or refracting elements located external to the lamp. 
Flood plain management terms. The following definitions apply to Sections of the Zoning Ordinance on Flood Plain Management. 
(1)  As-built drawings. Plans which show the actual locations, elevations, and dimensions of the improvements as certified by a professional engineer or a licensed surveyor in the State of Georgia. 
(2)  Base flood. The flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year - the 100-year flood. 
(3)  Base flood elevation (B.F.E.). The highest water surface elevation anticipated at any given point during the base flood. 
(4)  Development. Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, such as mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations. 
(5)  Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). The Federal Agency which administers the National Flood Insurance Program. This agency prepares, revises and distributes the maps and studies adopted under Chapter 2, Article B Flood Management. 
(6)  Flood or flooding. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland waters or the unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any source. 
(7)  Flood elevation study. An examination, evaluation, and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations. 
(8)  Flood boundary and floodway map. An official map of East Point on which FEMA has delineated the various flood boundaries, the floodway fringe, and the floodways. 
(9)  Flood fringe. That area contained by the flood boundaries exclusive of the regulatory floodway. 
(10)  Flood insurance rate map (FIRM). The official map of East Point on which FEMA has delineated the risk premium zones. 
(11)  Flood insurance study (FIS). A compilation of flood related data obtained from the flood studies for East Point, Georgia, prepared by FEMA. 
(12)  Flood plain. Lands subject to flooding, which have a one percent probability of flooding occurrence in any calendar year; the 100-year flood plain is shown on the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map. Also referred to as Area of Moderate Flood Hazard. 
(13)  Flood prone area. Areas shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map as "Zone B" (zone where the contributing drainage area is less than one square mile) and which are determined by the Department of Public Works to be a hazard to adjacent properties or development in the event of the base flood. 
(14)  Flood proofing. Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
(15)  Floodway. See Regulatory Floodway. 
(16)  Freeboard. A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of flood plain management. 
(17)  Functionally dependent use. A use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. 
(18)  I.R.F. elevation. See "Base Flood Elevation". 
(19)  Lowest floor. The lowest minimum floor including basement and attached garage. 
(20)  Map. The Flood Boundary and Floodway Map or the Flood Insurance Rate Map. 
(21)  Mean sea level. For purposes of Flood Plain Management, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929. 
(22)  Mobile home. See Mobile Home under "M" headings in main text of Definitions. 
(23)  Mobile home park/mobile home subdivision. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more mobile home lots for rent or sale for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lot on which the mobile home is to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads and construction of streets) was completed on or after April 5, 1972. 
(24)  NGVD. National Geodetic Vertical Datum. 
(25)  New structure. Any proposed structure which does (did) not have a valid building permit prior to the effective date of this (amendment) resolution. Note: This resolution was adopted on March 11, 1955. Records suggest that flood plain management provisions were first adopted on April 5, 1972. 
(26)  Regulatory floodway. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
(27)  Riverine. Relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, or brook. 
(28)  Special flood hazard area. Those lands subject to periodic flooding and shown on the "Flood Insurance Rate Map" as a numbered or unnumbered "A" zone. 
(29)  Start of construction. The first placement of permanent construction of a structure, excluding a mobile home, on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footing or any work beyond excavation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways. Excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations, and the erection of temporary forms are not permanent forms of construction. The installation of accessory buildings, such as garages and sheds, apart from the main structure also fail to qualify as permanent construction. For any structure, except mobile home, which has no basement or poured footings, the "start of construction" includes the first permanent framing or assembly of the structure or any part thereof on its park or mobile home subdivision. For a mobile home, "start" means the date on which the mobile home is to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the construction of streets, either final site grading or the pouring of pads, and installation of utilities) is completed. 
(30)  State coordinating agency. The Flood Plain Management Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
(31)  Structure. All walled and roofed buildings, storage tanks and other structural improvements located principally above ground. 
(32)  Water surface elevation. The relationship between the projected heights and the NGVD reached by floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the flood plains. 
Floor area, heated. The sum of all heated area of a dwelling or dwelling unit, as appropriate, measured to the inside surfaces of exterior walls, excluding porches, balconies, attics, basements (unfinished), garages, patios and decks. 
Food store. A retail establishment wherein any of the following are offered for sale, or sold by retail: fresh fruits; fresh vegetables; bakery, meat, poultry, or fish products; frozen foods; along with processed, prepackaged and perishable food, but also may sell other convenience and household goods, and which occupies a minimum of 7,500 square feet but not more than 74,999 square feet of gross floor area. 
Foot-candle. A unit of measure for illuminance on a surface that is everywhere one foot from a point source of light of one candle, and equal to one lumen per square foot of area. 
Footprint. The outline of the total area on the ground of a site or lot that is encompassed within the exterior walls of a building or portion of a building, exclusive of courtyards. In the absence of surrounding exterior walls, the building footprint shall be the area under the horizontal projection of the roof. The footprint includes conditioned and unconditioned area but not parking lots, landscapes and, nonbuilding facilities. 
Fuel oil. A liquid petroleum product that is burned in a furnace for the generation of heat or used in an engine for the generation of power. The oil may be a distilled fraction of petroleum, a residuum from refinery operations, a crude petroleum, or a blend of two or more of these. 
Full cut-off. A luminaire light distribution where zero candela intensity occurs at or above an angle of 90 degrees above nadir. Additionally, the candela per 1,000 lamp lumens does not numerically exceed 100 (10 percent) at or above a vertical angle of 80 degrees above nadir. This applies to all lateral angles around the luminaire. 
G 
Gas station minimart. A facility associated with the sale of gasoline products that also offers for sale prepackaged food items and tangible consumer goods, primarily for self-service by the consumer. Hot beverages, fountain-type beverages, and pastries may be included in the food items offered for sale, but food items that are prepared or individually apportioned on the premises shall be prohibited. 
Garden center. A business whose primary operation is the sale of seeds and organic and inorganic materials, which include but are not limited to trees, shrubs, flowers, and other plants for sale or transplanting, mulch, pine straw, and other organic products for landscaping purposes, and other limited retail accessory products for gardening and/or landscaping with an approved Use Permit for Landscaping Business, Plant Nursery, or Garden Center with Indoor Retail Component. 
Glare. The sensation produced within the visual field by luminance that is sufficiently greater than the luminance to which the eyes are adapted, causing annoyance, discomfort, or loss in visual performance and visibility. 
Golf course. A use of land for playing the game of golf. The term shall not include miniature golf, but may include a Country Club and a driving range as an accessory use. 
Governmental facility. A building or institution provided by the government to care for a specified need, such as a courthouse or county jail. 
Grade. The average elevation of the finished surface of the ground adjacent to all sides of any structure. 
Green space. Green space means permanently protected land and water, including agricultural and forestry land that is in its undeveloped, natural state or that has been developed only to the extent consistent with, or is restored to be consistent with, one or more of the following goals: 
(1)  Water quality protection for rivers, streams, and lakes; 
(2)  Flood protection; 
(3)  Wetlands protection; 
(4)  Reduction of erosion through protection of steep slopes, areas with erodible soils, and stream banks; 
(5)  Protection of riparian buffers and other areas that serve as natural habitat and corridors for native plant and animal species; 
(6)  Scenic protection; 
(7)  Protection of archaeological and historic resources; 
(8)  Provision of recreation in the form of boating, hiking, camping, fishing, hunting, running, jogging, biking, walking, and similar outdoor activities; and 
(9)  Connection of existing or planned areas contributing to the goals set out in this paragraph. 
Group day care home. Operated by a person, society, agency, corporation, institution or group that receives pay for group care. It provides child care for children less than 18 years of age for less than 24 hours per day. Group day care homes are licensed by the State Department of Early Care and Learning pursuant to State of Georgia Rules and Regulations 290-2-1.03 for seven—18 children. 
H 
Hardship. The existence of extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the size, shape, or topography of a particular property, because of which the property cannot be developed in strict conformity with the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance. 
Hazardous waste. Any solid waste which has been defined as hazardous waste in regulations promulgated by the Board of Natural Resources, Chapter 391-3-11. 
Height. The vertical distance measured from the finished grade along all walls of a structure to the highest point of the coping or parapet of a flat roof or to the average height between eaves and ridge for gable, hip and gambrel roofs. 
Height, sign. The height of a sign shall be computed as the distance from the base of the sign structure at normal grade to the top of the highest attached component of the sign. 
Historic period lighting. Commercial lighting with an architectural design from the late 19th and early 20th centuries. 
Home occupation. An accessory use of a dwelling unit for business, operated by members of the resident family only. 
Hospice. A public agency or private organization or unit or either that provides care to persons terminally ill and to their families, regardless of ability to pay, a centrally administered and autonomous continuum of palliative and supportive care, directed and coordinated by the hospice care team primarily in the patient's home but also on an outpatient and short-term inpatient basis and which is classified as a hospice by the Georgia Department of Community Health. In addition, such public agency or private organization or unit or either may also provide palliative care to persons with advanced and progressive diseases and to their families, directed and coordinated by the hospice care team. 
Hospital. The provision of in-patient health care for people, including general medical and surgical services, psychiatric care and specialty medical facilities. Out-patient facilities are normally included. 
Hotel/motel. A building in which lodging and/or boarding is provided for fewer than 30 days. The term may include a restaurant in conjunction therewith and may also mean an inn. 
Hotel, apartment. A use which provides individual units which include cooking facilities, and which are used for temporary lodging to persons not related to the owner for fewer than 30 days. 
I 
Identification monument. See Chapter 7, Signs. 
IESNA. The Illuminating Engineering Society of North America, a non-profit professional organization of lighting specialists that has established recommended design standards for various lighting applications. 
Illuminance. The quantity of light arriving at a surface divided by the area of the illuminated surface, measured in foot-candles. Horizontal illuminance applies to a horizontal surface, vertical illuminance applies to a vertical surface. Average illuminance is the level of illuminance over an entire illuminated target area. Maximum illuminance is the highest level of illuminance on any point within the entire area; minimum illuminance is the lowest level of illuminance on any point within the entire area. 
Illuminance levels. Illuminance levels and foot candles noted in this ordinance mean the maintained illuminance levels; the illuminance levels occurring just prior to lamp replacement and luminaire cleaning. The average illuminance level applies to an entire illuminated target area. Minimum and maximum illuminance levels apply to small areas within the entire illuminated target area. Unless otherwise noted, illuminance levels refer to horizontal illuminance levels. 
Illumination. Direct illumination is illumination which is projected from within a sign, building, etc. Indirect illumination is illumination which is projected onto a sign, building, etc. 
Improvement setback. An area adjacent to a zoning buffer in which no improvements and/or structures shall be constructed. No development activity such as tree removal, stump removal or grinding, land disturbance or grading is permitted without the approval of the Director of the Planning and Community Development. 
Inert waste landfill. A disposal facility accepting only wastes that will not or are not likely to cause production of leachate of environmental concern. Such wastes are limited to earth and earth-like products, concrete, cured asphalt, rock, bricks, yard trimmings, stumps, limbs, and leaves. 
Institutional use. Includes schools, colleges, vocational schools, hospitals, places of worship, asylums, museums, and other similar uses or facilities. 
J 
Junk facility. See Salvage/Storage/Junk Facility. 
K 
Kennel. A use for the shelter of domestic animals where the shelter of these animals involves an exchange of revenue in which a business license is required. If the kennel is a non-business operation, its use shall be certified by the Fulton County Animal Control Office. 
L 
Lamp. The component of an outdoor luminaire that produces light. 
Land disturbance permit. A permit issued by the Department of Public Works that authorizes the commencement of alteration or development of a given tract of land or the commencement of any land disturbing activity. 
Land disturbing activity. Any alteration of land which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediment into water or onto lands, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling. 
Landfill, inert waste disposal. Any facility or location where the final disposition of solid waste occurs and includes, but is not limited to, facilities disposing of inert, construction and demolition, and municipal solid waste as defined and regulated by the Georgia Solid Waste Management rules and regulations, Chapter 391-3-4. 
Landfill, solid waste disposal. A disposal facility accepting solid waste excluding hazardous waste disposed of by placing an earth cover thereon. Solid waste includes waste from domestic, agricultural, commercial and industrial sources. (Refer to the rules concerning Solid Waste Management of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, Environmental Protection Division, as amended, for further definition). 
Landscape strip. An area required by this resolution or by conditions of zoning which is reserved for the installation and/or maintenance of plant materials. 
Landscaping business. A business whose primary operation is the sale and/or storage of organic and inorganic materials, plants, mulch, pine straw, and other limited related accessory products for the landscape industry and the storage and use of associated landscape vehicles with an approved Use Permit for Landscaping Business, Plant Nursery, or Garden Center with Indoor Retail Component. 
Large scale retail/service commercial structure. An individual retail/service commercial structure that is 75,000 square feet or greater. This size threshold refers to an individual establishment and its associated outdoor areas used for display and storage. 
Large scale retail/service commercial development. A retail/service commercial development with at least one large scale retail structure but no more than four such structures whether freestanding or combined. 
Lawful use. Any use of lots or structure which is not in violation of any existing federal, state or local law, statute, regulation or ordinance. 
Library. A place set apart to contain books and other literary material for reading, study, or reference, for use by members of a society or the general public. 
Licensee. Means a licensed cashier of checks, drafts, or money orders. 
Light, direct. Light emitted directly from the lamp, off of the reflector or reflector diffuser, or through the refractor or diffuser lens, of luminaire. 
Light, indirect. Direct light that has been reflected or has scattered off of other surfaces. 
Loading space. An area within the main building or on the same lot, which provides for the loading, or unloading of goods and equipment from delivery vehicles. 
Lodge and/or retreat/campground. A facility allowed with a Use Permit which provides space, food and/or lodging facilities for social, educational or recreational purposes. 
Lot. The basic lawful unit of land, identifiable by a single deed. A group of two or more contiguous lots owned by the same entity and used for a single use shall be considered a single lot. Lot, tract and parcel are synonymous. 
Lot, corner. A Multiple Frontage Lot adjoining two streets at their intersection. 
Lot frontage. The shortest property line adjoining a street or, for lots requiring no street frontage, oriented toward a street. A property line adjoining a stub street shall not be considered as frontage unless it is proposed for access or is the only street frontage. Front yard requirements shall be measured from this property line. In situations where a multiple frontage lot has equal distance on street frontages, the Director of Public Works shall determine the legal lot frontage. 
Lot line, front. A lot line which extends the entire length of an abutting street from intersecting property line to intersecting property line. The front lot line of a corner lot abuts the street which adjoins the lot for the shortest distance. 
Lot line, rear. Generally, the rear lot line is the lot line opposite and most distant from the front lot line. For a pointed or irregular lot, the rear lot line shall be an imaginary line, parallel to and the most distant from the front lot line, not less than 20 feet long, and wholly within the lot. True triangular lots do not have rear lot lines. Lots with more than one front lot line do not have rear lot lines. The Director of the Department of Planning and Community Development or his/her designee shall make the final determination of rear lot lines when in dispute or undefined by this definition. 
Lot line, side. A lot line which is not a rear or front lot line. 
Lot line/property line. A line established through recordation of an approved plat, or a deed in the absence of a platting requirement, which separates a lot from other lots, or a lot from rights-of-way. 
Lot, multiple frontage. Lots adjoining more than one street. 
Lot, nonconforming. See "Nonconforming Lot, Use or Structure". 
Lot-of-record. A lot, whether lawful or unlawful, which appears on a deed and/or plat recorded in the official records of the Clerk of Superior Court. 
Lot, unlawful. Any lot-of-record which, at the time of recordation in the official records of the Clerk of Superior Court, was not in compliance with zoning and subdivision laws in effect at that time. 
Lot width, minimum. The least dimension required along the building line specified for each district, parallel to the lot frontage and measured between side lot lines. 
Luminaire. This is a complete lighting system and includes a lamp or lamps and a fixture. 
M 
Maintenance, normal. The upkeep of a sign for the purpose of maintaining safety and appearance which may include painting, bulb replacement, panel replacement, letter replacement, repair of electrical components, and structural reinforcements to its original condition. 
Marquee. Any permanent roof-like structure projecting beyond a building or extending along and projecting beyond the wall of the building used for advertising or identification. 
Massing. Varying the massing of a building may be achieved by varying the surface planes of the building with porches, balconies, bay windows, and/or overhangs, and/or stepping-back the buildings from the second floor and above, and/or breaking up the roofline with different elements to create smaller compositions. 
Medical related lodging. A use which provides temporary lodging for family members of a hospitalized patient. 
Mineral extraction. Severance and/or removal of sand, stone, gravel, top soil, and other mineral resources whenever such severance and/or removal is not conducted in conjunction with a permitted development activity. Mineral extraction is prohibited City wide. 
Mini-warehouse. A structure or group of structures containing separate spaces/stalls which are leased or rented on an individual basis for the storage of goods. 
Minor variance. An application requesting deviation from the minimum yard requirements, not to exceed ten percent of the dimensional requirements. 
Mobile home. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. For flood plain management purposes, mobile home includes travel trailers and similar vehicles placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or more. For all other purposes including insurance purposes under FEMA sponsored programs, mobile home does not include travel trailers and similar vehicles. A mobile home is not a modular home. 
Mobile home park. Use of property for two or more mobile homes for living purposes, and spaces or lots set aside and offered for use for mobile homes. Does not include mobile home sales lot. 
Model home. A dwelling unit used for conducting business related to the sale of a development. 
Modification. An application requesting change to an approved condition of zoning or use permit, except for conditions that pertain to a change in use, increase in density, and/or increase in height. 
Modular home. A factory-fabricated, single family dwelling built in one or more sections, designed for placement on a permanent foundation and not having a permanent chassis. A modular home is not a mobile home. 
Motel. See Hotel/Motel. 
Multi-tenant. Two or more businesses that provide goods and/or services within separate structures located on the same site or within the same structure that provides wall separation and private access for each business. 
Municipal solid waste. Any solid waste derived from households, including garbage, trash, and sanitary waste in septic tanks and means solid waste from single family and multifamily residences, hotels and motels, bunkhouses, campgrounds, picnic grounds, and day use recreation areas. The term includes yard trimmings and commercial solid waste, but does not include solid waste from mining, agricultural, or silvicultural operations or industrial processes or operations. 
N 
Nadir. The point directly below the luminaire defined as 0 degrees vertical angle. 
Nightclub. An establishment having a capacity of at least 100 persons, with all booths and tables unobstructed and open to view, dispensing alcoholic beverages and in which music, dancing or entertainment is conducted. All such establishments shall be equipped with air conditioning. The principal business of a nightclub shall be entertainment, and the serving of alcoholic beverages shall be incidental thereto. 
Nonconforming (grandfathered) lot, use or structure. A use, lot or structure that was nonconforming at the time of the adoption of the East Point Zoning Ordinance on September 6, 1994 and does not now meet the minimum requirements of the district in which it is located. Also, a use, lot or structure which has been made nonconforming by some City or State action. Any change or addition to a use, lot or structure must comply with current provisions of the Zoning Ordinance. 
Nursing home. A facility, licensed by the Georgia Department of Community Health pursuant to State of Georgia Rules and Regulations 111-8-62, which admits patients on medical referral only and for whom arrangements have been made for continuous medical supervision; it maintains the services and facilities for skilled nursing care, rehabilitative nursing care, and has a satisfactory agreement with a physician and dentist who will be available for any medical and/or dental emergency and who will be responsible for the general medical and dental supervision of the home. 
O 
Off-premises. A location outside of the subject lot for a designated use. 
Off-site/premises. The location of a structure or use outside the lot-of-record of the subject development including the adjoining street or other right-of-way. 
On-premises. The individual lot-of-record on which the use is located. 
On-site/premises. The location of a structure or use within the confines of a property delineated by property lines or, if referenced in a zoning or use permit case, within the confines of the boundaries of the legal description filed with the petition. 
Office, business. An office for such activities as real estate agencies, insurance agencies, travel agencies and ticket sales, chambers of commerce, credit bureaus, abstract and title agencies or insurance companies, stockbrokers, and the like. 
Office, professional. Professional or government offices including: accounting, auditing and bookkeeping services; advertising agencies; architectural, engineering, planning, and surveying services; attorneys; counseling services; court reporting services; detective agencies and similar services; educational, scientific, and research organizations; employment, stenographic, secretarial, and word processing services; government offices including agency and administrative office facilities; management, public relations, and consulting services; photography and commercial art studios; writers and artists offices outside of the home. Includes offices for doctors, dentists, and similar uses. 
Office, temporary. A mobile, manufactured or other structure which is used as an office for real estate sales, on-site construction management and related functions. 
Open space. A portion of a site which is permanently set aside for public or private use and will not be developed. The space may be used for passive or active recreation or may be reserved to protect or buffer natural areas. Open space may include wooded areas other than required landscape strips and buffers, pathways/walkways, fields, and sensitive environmental areas such as wetlands, etc. Detention facilities and platted residential lots shall not be included in open space calculations. 
Outdoor event. An event or happening organized by any person or organization which will generate or invite considerable public participation and/or spectators for a particular and limited purpose of time, including, but not limited to, special sales and service promotions, car shows, arts and crafts shows, horse shows, carnivals, festivals, road races or similar sporting activities exhibitions, circuses, fairs, show houses and tours of homes for charity. Special events are not limited to those events conducted on the public streets but may occur entirely on private property. Special events may be for profit or nonprofit. Events which will occur in the public right-of-way, such as roadway foot races, fundraising walks, bike-a-thons, parades, etc. are subject to the approval of the East Point Police Department. A private party or event held at a location on residential property occupied by the host shall not be deemed a special event. 
Outdoor event, large. A special event as defined above wherein 2000 or more attendees are anticipated. Such events may be permitted only upon the approval of a Use Permit application by the East Point City Council as per the procedures and standards set forth in Article D of the City of East Point Zoning Ordinance, Sections 10-2081 et seq. 
Outdoor event, small. A special event as defined above wherein less than 2000 attendees are anticipated. Such events may be permitted only upon the approval of an Administrative Permit application by the Director of Planning and Community Development per the procedures and standards set forth in Article D of the City of East Point Zoning Ordinance, Sections 10-2081 et seq. 
Outparcel (spin-site). A portion of a larger parcel of land generally designed as a site for a separate structure and business from the larger tract. An outparcel may or may not be a subdivision of a larger parcel. To be recognized as an outparcel, the portion must be identified on a Site Plan approved for the larger parcel. 
P 
Parade. Any march, ceremony, show, exhibition, pageant or procession of any kind, or similar display in or upon any street, park or other public place in the city conducted by any person, any government or civic organization or other nonprofit organization. This definition specifically does not include funeral processions, students going to and from school or participating in educational activities under the direct supervision of school personnel. 
Parcel. See lot. 
Parking lot. An area which is used for the parking of vehicle. 
Parking space. An area designated for the parking of one vehicle on an all weather surface. No more than two carport or garage spaces may offset the minimum parking requirements in a single-family residential district. (specifications included in Article E) 
Path. A cleared way for pedestrians and/or bicycles that may or may not be paved or otherwise improved. 
Pawn shop/title pawn. A business that lends money at interest on personal property deposited with the lender until redeemed. 
Permit standards. Requirements established for each administrative and use permit such as setbacks, access, landscape and buffer areas, hours of operation etc. 
Personal care home, means any dwelling whether operated for profit or not, which undertakes through its ownership or management to provide or arrange for the provision of housing, food service, and one or more personal services for two or more adults who are not related to the owner or administrator by blood or marriage. Personal Care Homes are licensed by the Georgia Department of Community Health pursuant to Georgia Rules and Regulations 111-8-62. 
Plans review. The act of reviewing plans and specifications to insure that proposed undertakings comply with various governing laws, ordinances and resolutions. Compliance is subsequently utilized to determine that work and materials are in accordance with approved plans and specifications. 
Plant nursery. Any land used to raise trees, shrubs, flowers and other plants for sale or transplanting, but not including the retail sale of any related garden supplies such as chemical fertilizer, tools and other similar goods and/or equipment, or the retail sale of plants not grown on the property except with an approved Use Permit for Landscaping Business, Plant Nursery, or Garden Center with Indoor Retail Component. 
Plat, final. A finished drawing of a subdivision which provides a complete and accurate depiction of all legal and engineering information required by the Subdivision Regulations. Certification is necessary for recording. 
Plat, preliminary. A drawing which shows the proposed layout of a subdivision in sufficient detail to clearly indicate its feasibility, but is not in final form for recordation pursuant to the Subdivision Regulations. 
Pipeline. Any conduit through which natural gas, petroleum, oxygen, or other flammable or combustible products, or any of their derivative products, are conveyed or intended to be conveyed. 
Porch. A roofed open structure projecting from the exterior wall of a building and having at least 70 percent of the total area of the vertical planes forming its perimeter unobstructed in any manner except by insect-screening between floor and ceiling. 
Primary variance. An application requesting relief from the standards of the Zoning Ordinance, except relief from use, minimum lot area, or minimum lot frontage. 
Prison/correctional facility. A public or state-licensed privately owned building(s), and all accessory uses and structures, used for long-term confinement housing and supervision of persons who are serving terms of imprisonment for violation of criminal laws. A prison is distinguished from a jail, in that a prison is considered to be larger and for longer terms, and is normally operated under the authority or jurisdiction of the State or Federal government. (See Article D, Private Correctional Facility) 
Property. When used in conjunction with an application for rezoning, an area of land composed of less than one lot, or of accumulations of one or more lots, or parts thereof. 
Protected zone. All lands that fall outside the buildable area of a parcel, all areas of a parcel required to remain in open space, all areas required as landscape strips and/or buffers (including zoning buffers, state water buffers and tributary buffers) and all tree save areas according to the provisions of the East Point Zoning Ordinance, conditions of zoning, Use Permit or variance approval, and/or the Tree Preservation and Landscape Ordinance. 
Q 
R 
Recreational court, private. An improved area designed and intended for the playing of a game or event such as basketball or tennis, and which serves a single family dwelling(s), duplex dwellings and/or multi-family dwellings, or combinations of dwelling types, including such improved areas which are owned and/or controlled by a neighborhood or similar organization. A basketball goal adjoining a driveway of typical residential driveway dimensions shall not constitute a recreational court. 
Recreational court, public. An improved area designed and intended for the playing of a game or event such as basketball or tennis, and is operated as a business or as a club unless such club is a neighborhood club or similar organization identified under Recreational Court, Private. 
Recreational facilities. Includes parks, recreation areas, golf courses, playgrounds, recreation counters (indoor & outdoor), playing fields, and other similar uses or facilities. 
Recreation fields. An outside area designed and equipped for the conduct of sports and leisure-time activities including but not limited to softball, soccer, football, and field hockey. 
Recreational vehicle. A vehicle used for leisure time activities and as a dwelling unit while traveling. Examples include a camper, a motor home and a travel trailer. As distinguished from a mobile home, dimensions shall not exceed a width of eight and one-half (8.5) feet and a length of 45 feet. 
Recycling: Any process by which materials which would otherwise become solid waste are collected, separated, or processed and reused or returned to use in the form of raw materials or products. 
Recycling center, collecting. Any facility utilized for the purpose of collecting materials to be recycled including, but not limited to, plastics, glass, paper and aluminum materials. 
Recycling center, processing. Any facility utilized for the purpose of collecting, sorting and processing materials to be recycled including, but not limited to, plastics, glass, paper, and aluminum materials whenever such use is permitted by Use Permit only in I-2 Zoning Districts. A recycling processing center is not to be considered a collection center. 
Rehabilitation center. Shall include rehabilitation centers for persons with alcohol, drug abuse or other dependency problems or mentally or physically handicapped persons. 
Relocated residential structure. A dwelling which has been removed from one location for relocation to another lot. 
Repair garage, automobile. A use which may provide a full-range of automotive repairs and services including major overhauls. May include paint and body shops. 
Repair garage, truck and heavy equipment. A use which may provide a full-range of repairs and services including major overhauls on trucks and heavy equipment. Includes paint and body shops. 
Residential use dwelling. Any building or portion thereof where one actually lives or has his home; a place of human habitation. 
Restaurant. A food service use which involves the preparation and serving of food to seated patrons. A cafeteria shall also be considered to be a restaurant. The restaurant seating area must be at least 40 percent of the gross square footage of the restaurant facility. Seating space located outside of the main structure (i.e. patios, decks, etc.) shall not be included in calculating the seating space. 
Restaurant, casual dining. A food service establishment that serves moderately-priced food in a casual atmosphere that typically provides table service. Casual dining restaurants usually have a full bar with separate bar staff, a larger beer menu and a limited wine menu. 
Restaurant, fast casual. A food service establishment that does not offer table service, but may offer non-disposable plates and cutlery. The quality of food and prices tend to be higher than those of a conventional fast food restaurant but may be lower than casual dining. 
Restaurant, fast food. A food service establishment which sells food from a counter or window for consumption on-premises or off-premises. Tables may be provided, and food may be served at a table, but may not be ordered from a table. 
Restaurant, fine dining. A food service establishment that is full service with specific dedicated meal courses. 
Retail sales establishment, bulk merchandise. A retail establishment engaged in selling goods or merchandise to the general public as well as to other retailers, contractors, or businesses, and rendering services incidental to the sale of such goods. Bulk retail involves a high volume of sales of related and/or unrelated products in a warehouse setting and may include membership warehouse clubs. 
Retail sales establishment, general merchandise. Establishments that are retail operations that carry an assortment of merchandise from all other categories. Such stores may include but are not limited to department store, discount store, and similar establishments. 
Retail sales establishment, household. Establishments that sell goods for furnishing or improving housing units. These establishments may include but are not limited to furniture store, home improvement center, electronic store, appliance store, and similar establishments. 
Retail sales, specialty. Retail operations that specialize in one type or line of merchandise. Such stores may include but are not limited to apparel stores, jewelry stores, bookstores, shoe stores, stationary stores, antique stores, and similar establishments. 
Retail use. A business whose primary purpose is the sale of merchandise to consumers. 
Retreat. See Lodge. 
Right-of-way. A portion of land over which a local or state government has designated a right of use. 
Roadside produce stand. A use offering either farm-grown, prepared food products such as fruits, vegetables, canned foods, or prepared packaged meats for sale from a vehicle or a temporary structure. The consumption of food on-site is prohibited. 
Roadside vending. The sale of merchandise such as clothing, crafts, household item, firewood, etc., from a temporary table or cart. 
Rooming house. A residential use other than a hotel or motel in which lodging may be provided to non-household members for periods of 30 days or longer, and which does not include the provision of meals. 
S 
Salvage/storage/junk facility. Any use involving the storage or disassembly of wrecked or junked automobiles, trucks or other vehicles; vehicular impound lots; storage, bailing or otherwise dealing in scrap irons or other metals, used paper, used cloth, plumbing fixtures, appliances, brick, wood or other building materials; and the storage or accumulation outside of a storage building of used vehicle tires or tire carcasses which cannot be reclaimed for their original use. Such uses are storage and/or salvage facilities whether or not all or part of such operations are conducted inside or outside a building or as principal or accessory uses. State approval is required for all sites utilized for reclamation and/or disposal of toxic and/or hazardous waste. 
Scale. Scale refers to the relationship of the size of a building to neighboring buildings and of a building to a site. In general, the scale of new construction should relate to the majority of surrounding buildings. 
Schools, colleges and universities. Any educational facility established under the laws of the state (and usually regulated in matters of detail by local authorities), in the various districts, counties, or towns, maintained at the public expense by taxation, and open, usually without charge, to all residents of the city, town or other district; private schools which have students regularly attending classes and which teach subjects commonly taught in these schools of this state; any educational facility operated by a private organization or local county, or state that provides training or education beyond and in addition to that training received in grades kindergarten to twelfth, including but not limited to, trade, business and vocational schools; any institution of higher learning, consisting of an assemblage of colleges united under one corporate organization or government, affording instruction in the arts and sciences and the learned professions, and conferring degrees. 
School, private. An educational use having a curriculum at least equal to a public school, but not operated by the Fulton County Board of Education. 
School, special. An educational use devoted to special education including the training of gifted, learning disabled, mentally and/or physically handicapped persons, but not operated by the Fulton County Board of Education. 
Screen. A fence, wall, hedge, landscaping, earthen berm, buffer area or any combination of these that is designed to provide a visual and/or physical barrier. 
Seasonal business use. A primary use involving the sale of items related to calendar holidays, such as Christmas trees, Halloween pumpkins, etc., which may be conducted outside. 
Secondary variance. An appeal of a decision and/or action of the Director of Planning and Community Development authorized to hear a variance request or interpretation of the Zoning Ordinance. 
Self-storage/mini. A single-level structure or group of structures containing separate spaces/stalls and which are leased or rented to individuals for the storage of goods. 
Self-storage/multi. A multi-level structure containing separate storage rooms/stalls under a single roof that are leased or rented. 
Senior housing. A single family or multi-family development intended for, operated for and designed to accommodate residents 55 years of age and older. Senior housing communities are designed for seniors to live on their own, but with the security and conveniences of community living. Some provide communal dining rooms and planned recreational activities (congregate living or retirement communities), while others provide housing with only minimal amenities or services. 
Service commercial use. A business whose primary purpose is to provide a service. 
Service line. A distribution line that transports natural gas from a common source of supply to: (1) a customer meter or the connection to a customer's piping, whichever is farther downstream, or (2) the connection to a customer's piping if there is no customer meter. The customer meter is the meter that measures the transfer of gas from one operator to a customer. 
Service station. A use which provides for the sale of motor vehicle fuels and automotive accessories, and which may provide minor repair and maintenance services. A service station shall be limited to four or fewer bays excluding no more than one attached or detached bay for washing cars. 
Setback. A space between a property line and a building or specified structure. 
Setback, minimum. The minimum yards as specified in the various use districts. A minimum required space between a property line and a structure. An area identified by a building line. 
Sidewalk. A paved area designated for pedestrians which is constructed in accordance with East Point standards as outlined in the City of East Point Subdivision Regulations. 
Sign. Any name, identification, description, display, illustration, writing, emblem, pictorial representation or device which is affixed to or represented directly or indirectly upon a building, structure or land in view of the general public, and which directs attention to a product, place, activity, person, institution or business. 
Sign, abandoned. Any sign that contains or exhibits broken panels, visible rust, visible rot, damaged support structures, or missing letters or which is otherwise dilapidated, unsightly, or unkempt, and for which no person accepts maintenance responsibility. 
Sign animated. Any sign, or part of a sign, that uses movement or change of lighting or color to depict action or create a special effect or scene. 
Sign area. The area within a continuous perimeter enclosing the limits of writing, representation, emblem, or any figure similar character, together with any frame or other material or color forming an integral part of the display or used to differentiate such sign from the background against which such sign is placed. 
Sign, canopy. Any sign that is a part of or attached to an awning, canopy, or other fabric, plastic, or structural protective cover over a door, entrance, window, or outdoor service area. A marquee is not a canopy. 
Sign, changeable copy (electronic). Any sign that uses changing lights to form a sign message or messages wherein the sequence of messages and the rate of change is electronically programmed and can be modified by electronic processes. 
Sign, changeable copy (manual). Any sign that has a reader board format serving as background for letters/messages that are manually changeable. 
Sign, directional. Real estate signs for the purpose of marketing and providing directions to residential developments. 
Sign, freestanding. Any sign supported by structures or supports that are placed on, or anchored in, the ground and that are independent from any building or other structure, but not including monument type signs. 
Sign height. See Height, Chapter 7 Signs. 
Sign, identification monument. A sign not erected on one or more poles or similar supports but erected to rest on the ground or to rest on a monument base designed as an architectural unit with the sign. A ground sign that is mounted generally flush with the surrounding grade. It may not be attached to a pole or pylon, nor raised by mounting on a man-made berm, wall, or similar structure. 
Sign, illumination of. See Illumination. 
Sign, kiosk. A sign consisting of a list of names of businesses located on a property or in a building. 
Sign, portable. Any sign not permanently affixed to the ground or to a structure, including but not limited to signs on trailers or signs mounted or painted on vehicles which are parked in such a manner as to serve the purpose of a sign. 
Sign, projecting. Any sign which is suspended or projected from the wall, eave, or soffit of the building. 
Sign, roof. Any sign erected and constructed wholly on and over the roof of a building, supported by the roof structure, and extending vertically above the highest portion of the roof. 
Sign, temporary. Any sign that is used only temporarily and is not permanently mounted. 
Sign, temporary event. A sign that is erected on private property informing citizens of upcoming events sponsored by local governments, religious organizations, civic and community organizations. 
Sign, vehicle. A vehicle with sign(s) permanently painted, attached or magnetically designed to be affixed to a vehicle for the purpose of providing advertisements of products, services or events or directing people to a business or activity. Trailers or non-motorized vehicles are not to be classified as vehicles with signs. 
Sign, wall. Any sign attached parallel to, painted on the wall surface, or erected and confined within the limits of an outside wall of any building or structure, which is supported by such wall or building and which displays only one sign surface. 
Sign, wall (entry). Any single faced sign attached to or erected and confined within the limits of an exterior wall generally located along the perimeter of a development. 
Sign, window. Any temporarily affixed sign of pictures, symbol, or combination thereof, designed to communicate information about an activity, business, commodity, event, sale, or service, that is displayed within one foot of a window, attached inside a window or placed upon a window (including windows on doors) and is visible from the exterior of the window. 
Site plan. A detailed plan, drawn to scale, based on a certified boundary survey, and reflecting conditions of zoning approval, various requirements of State law, and City Ordinances. 
Site plan, preliminary. A detailed plan, normally associated with rezoning and Use Permit requests, which is drawn to scale and reflects the various requirements of State law and of City Ordinances. A Preliminary Site Plan must be drawn to scale and shall contain information listed for such a plan in the Development Review Guide. 
Skywalk. An elevated, grade separated pedestrian walkway or bridge located over a public right-of-way. 
Solid Waste. Any garbage or refuse; sludge from a wastewater treatment plant, water supply treatment plant, or air pollution control facility; and other discarded material including solid, liquid, semisolid, or contained gaseous material resulting from industrial, commercial, mining, and agricultural operations and from community activities, but does not include recovered materials; solid or dissolved materials in domestic sewage; solid or dissolved materials in irrigation return flows or industrial discharges that are point sources subject to permit under 33 U.S.C. Section 1342; or source, special nuclear, or by-product material as defined by the federal Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended (68 Stat. 923). 
Specified anatomical areas. Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic regions, buttocks, or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Specified sexual activities. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy; fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic regions, buttocks or female breasts. 
Spill light. The light that illuminates surfaces beyond the intended area of illumination caused by the uncontrolled direct light component from the luminaires. 
Stadium. A large open or enclosed structure used for sports and other major events and partly or completely surrounded by tiers of seats for spectators. 
Story. A portion of a building between the surface of any floor and the floor or space above it, excluding basements and attics. 
Street. A roadway/right-of-way located and intended for vehicular traffic. Streets may be public or they may be private if specifically approved by the Department of Planning and Community Development as part of a subdivision plat. 
Public streets are rights-of-way used for access owned and maintained by the federal, state, or local government. 
Private streets are roadways constructed to East Point Standards but owned and maintained by a private entity. Necessary easements for ingress and egress for police, fire, emergency vehicles and all operating utilities shall be provided. Should East Point ever be petitioned to assume ownership and maintenance of the private streets prior to dedication of the streets, they must be brought to acceptable East Point standards subject to the approval of the Director of Public Works. 
Stub streets are rights-of-way that dead ends into an interior property line. 
Freeway - Any multi-lane roadway having full access control and separation of directional traffic. A freeway accommodates large volumes of high speed traffic and provides efficient movement of vehicular traffic for interstate and major through travel. 
Principal arterial - Any roadway that has partial or no access control and is primarily used for fast or heavy traffic. Emphasis is placed on mobility rather than access to adjacent land. 
Minor arterial - Any roadway that has partial or no access control and is primarily used for interconnectivity of major arterials and places more emphasis on access to adjacent land over mobility than principal arterials. 
Collector road - Any roadway that has partial or no access control and has more emphasis on access to adjacent land over mobility than arterials. The primary purpose is to distribute trips to and from the arterial system to their destination points and allow access to the local roads. 
Local road - Any roadway that has no access control and places strong emphasis on access to adjacent land over mobility while service to through traffic is discouraged. 
Full access control - Preference is given to through traffic by providing access connections only with selected public roads and by prohibiting crossing at grade and direct private connections. 
Partial access control - Preference is given to through traffic to a degree that in addition to connection with selected public roads, there may be some crossing at grade and some private connections. 
No access control - Preference is generally given to access to adjacent land rather than mobility. 
Structure. Anything built or constructed which occupies a location on, or is attached, to the ground. Driveways, surface parking lots, patios, and similar paved surfaces are not considered structures. 
Structure, accessory. A subordinate structure, customarily incidental to a principal structure or use and located on the same lot. Examples of accessory structures in single-family dwelling districts include outbuildings, such as, tool sheds, woodsheds, workshops, outdoor kitchens, pool houses, gazebos, guest houses, storage sheds, detached garages and detached carports, etc. Fences and retaining walls are not considered accessory structures. Driveways, surface parking lots, patios, and similar paved surfaces are not considered accessory structures. 
Structure, principal. A structure in which the principal use or purpose on a property occurs, and to which all other structures on the property are subordinate. Principal shall be synonymous with main and primary. 
Subdivision. The division of land into two or more lots. A development consisting of subdivided lots. 
Surface, all-weather. Any surface treatment, including gravel, which is applied to and maintained so as to prevent erosion, and to prevent vehicle wheels from making direct contact with soil, sod or mud; and which effectively prevents the depositing of soil, sod or mud onto streets from areas required to be so treated. 
Swimming pool, private. A recreation facility designed and intended for water contact activities which serves a single family dwelling(s), duplex dwellings and/or multi-family dwellings, or combinations of dwelling types, including pools which are owned and/or controlled by a neighborhood club or similar organization. 
Swimming pool, public. A recreation facility designed and intended water contact activities which is operated as a business or as a club unless such club is associated with a neighborhood club or similar organization. 
T 
Tasting room. An outlet operated for the distribution and sale of wine by providing samples of such wine to the public and for the sale of such wine at retail for consumption on the premises and for sale in closed packages for consumption off premises with the required state and local licenses for same. Samples of wine can be given free of charge or for a fee. 
Tenant panels. An on-premise sign panel(s) that list the name of tenants within a shopping center or development which the primary sign identifies. 
Theatrical community center. A building or portion thereof that has as its purpose the promotion, instruction, study, and production of the theater (including dance) as an art form This definition does not include any "adult entertainment facility" or "adult nightclub" as defined in Chapter 6, Part 11 of the City of East Point Code of Ordinances 
Thoroughfare, major. Any street which is classified in the Transportation Element of the Comprehensive Plan as either a freeway, an arterial or a major collector. 
Thoroughfare, minor. Any street which is classified in the Transportation Element of the Comprehensive Plan as a minor collector or local street. 
Tower. Any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas, including self-supporting lattice towers, guyed towers and monopoles but not Alternative Antenna Support Structures. The term includes radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common carrier towers, cellular telephone towers and the like excluding amateur radio antenna. 
Transfer station. A facility used to transfer solid waste from one transportation vehicle to another for transportation to a disposal facility or processing operation. 
Transmission line. A pipeline other than a gathering line that (1) transports fuel oil/liquid petroleum product from a gathering line or storage facility (tank farm) to a distribution center or storage facility (tank farm) and/or (2) transports fuel oil/liquid petroleum product within a storage field. 
Trespass light. The offsite spill light that illuminates beyond the property boundaries in which the light fixture is installed, where it is neither wanted nor needed. 
Truck terminal. A primary use of property where trucks/trailers are either temporarily stored, maintained or based. Trucks/trailers shall have current registration and license plates with decal. (Permitted I-2 Heavy Industrial District). 
U 
Use. The purpose or function arranged or intended for a structure or property. 
Use, accessory. A subordinate use which is customarily incidental to the principal use of a lot, and which is located on the same lot as a principal use. 
Use, principal. The primary or main purpose or function of a lot or structure. Synonymous with Main and Primary. 
Use Permit. A permit approved by the City Council, pursuant to a public hearing, which authorizes a use which must meet certain standards which exceed the requirements of the district as a whole. 
V 
Variance, primary. An application requesting relief from the standards of the Zoning Ordinance, except relief from use, minimum lot area, or minimum lot frontage. 
Variance, secondary. An appeal of a decision and/or action of a director or assistant director authorized to hear a variance request or interpretation of the Zoning Ordinance. 
Vegetative screen. An evergreen planting which, within three years of planting, provides a 100 percent visual barrier between a lot and adjacent lots and uses with a minimum height of six feet. A vegetative screen is composed of plant materials. 
Vehicle, junk or salvage. Any automobile, truck or other vehicle which is missing one of the following: 1) current registration, 2) license plate with current decal, 3) proof of liability insurance, 4) drive train component for more than 30 days. 
Veterinary clinic/hospital. A place where animals are given medical care and the boarding of animals is limited to short-term care incidental to the hospital use. 
W 
Waste. Materials that are discarded, disposed of or no longer usable. 
Waste disposal boundary. The limit of all waste disposal areas, appurtenances, and ancillary activities (including but not limited to internal access roads and drainage control devices). 
Waste, hazardous. See Georgia Department of Natural Resources definition. Waste, Solid. See Georgia Department of Natural Resources definition. 
X 
Y 
Yard. A land area extending between a structure and a lot line. 
Yard, front. A yard abutting any street except the side street on a corner lot. Front yards extend the entire length of an abutting street from intersecting lot line to intersecting lot line. The front yard of corner lots shall be applied to the street which abuts the lot for the shortest distance. 
Yard, minimum. The minimum distance between a building or specified structure and a lot line as specified in the district regulations. 
Yard, rear. The rear yard is the minimum required distance between the rear lot line and a structure. True triangular lots do not have rear yards. Lots with more than one front lot line do not have rear yards. The Director of the Department of Planning and Community Development or his/her designee shall make the final determination of rear yards when in dispute or undefined by this definition. 
Yard, side. A yard which is not a front or rear yard. 
Z 
Zoning conditions. Requirements placed on property by the City Council at the time of approval of a rezoning and/or use permit. 
Zoning modification. An application to change approved zoning conditions on rezoning and Use Permits where it has been determined by the Director of the Planning and Community Development Department that the requested change involves a matter of significant public interest. 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 1(Exh. A), 9-19-16 ) 
ARTICLE B. - GENERAL PROVISIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 061-016, § 2, Exh. B, adopted Sept. 19, 2016, amended and restated former Art. B, §§ 10-2004—10-2053, in its entirety. Former Art. B pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 003-09, 3-2-09; Ord. No. 018-10, § 1, 11-15-10; Ord. No. 023-11, § 1, 9-19-11; Ord. No. 024-11, §§ 2, 3, 9-19-11; Ord. No. 036-15, § 1, 9-8-15; Ord. No. 046-15, §§ 1, 2, 11-16-15; Ord. No. 047-15, § 1, 11-16-15. 

Sec. 10-2004. - Scope and intent. 
This article includes a variety of regulations that apply to uses and structures allowed in one or more zoning districts or to uses and structures allowed in all zoning districts except when specifically excluded by provisions contained elsewhere in this Ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 2(Exh. B), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2005. - Other laws apply. 
Compliance with this Ordinance shall not substitute for compliance with federal and state laws nor for other East Point Ordinances. 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 2(Exh. B), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2006. - Administrative approval. 
Action on a request brought under a provision of the zoning ordinance which requires approval by at least one City of East Point official, shall be accompanied or followed by an interoffice memorandum which shall be addressed to, and included in, the appropriate zoning file or alternate file if there is no zoning file. A courtesy copy of the authorization memo shall be sent to the Directors of the Departments of Public Works and Planning and Community Development and the Chief Building Official. 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 2(Exh. B), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2007. - Lot, structure and use regulations. 
Sec. 10-2007.1. - Use, permitted use, change of use. 
Properties shall be used and structures or parts thereof shall be erected, constructed, reconstructed, modified, moved, enlarged, or altered in conformity with the regulations contained in this ordinance and any conditions of zoning. 
Determination of use categories and subcategories. 
(a)  The Planning and Community Development Director is authorized to classify uses on the basis of the use category and subcategory descriptions of this section. 
(b)  When a use cannot be readily classified into a use category/subcategory or appears to fit into multiple categories/subcategories, the Planning and Community Development Director is authorized to determine the most similar, and thus most appropriate, use category/subcategory based on the actual or projected characteristics of the principal use or activity in relationship to the use category and subcategory descriptions provided in this section. Any decision made by the Planning and Community Development Director to authorize a use in a zoning district where it is not specifically authorized shall be published, and notice sent to adjacent property owners. In making such determinations, the Planning and Community Development Director is authorized to consider all of the following: 
(1)  The types of activities that will occur in conjunction with the use; 
(2)  The types of equipment and processes to be used; 
(3)  The existence, number and frequency of residents, customers or employees; 
(4)  Parking demands associated with the use; and 
(5)  Other factors deemed relevant to a use determination. 
(c)  If a use can reasonably be classified in multiple categories, subcategories or specific use types, the Planning and Community Development Director must categorize the use in the category, subcategory or specific use type that provides the most exact, narrowest and appropriate match. 
(d)  If the Planning and Community Development Director is unable to determine the appropriate use category for a proposed use, the Planning and Community Development Director is authorized to deny the permit request. 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 2(Exh. B), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2008. - Lots. 
Except as provided in Section 10-4004, structures shall be erected and uses shall be established only upon a single lot which meets or exceeds the requirements of this Ordinance or conditions of zoning, whichever is more restrictive. Regardless of the minimum requirements of individual zoning districts, a plat shall not be approved until the buildable area [including the buildable area(s) within the 50 percent of a minimum lot size which must be outside a flood plain] of every lot is determined to be sufficient to accommodate the minimum building area required by the zoning district. 
Lots created within a development project to accommodate detention and retention facilities which are incidental, related, appropriate, and clearly subordinate to the main use in the project are exempt from the minimum lot size requirements in all zoning districts. No other construction/building shall be permitted on such lots. 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 2(Exh. B), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2009. - Reduction of lot area. 
When a lot or property is reduced in size, all resulting divisions and all structures shall meet the minimum requirements of the applicable provisions of this Ordinance; except that if a lot or property is reduced in area to less than the district minimum lot size as a result of government action, the lot shall be deemed a legal nonconforming lot. 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 2(Exh. B), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2010. - Division of conditionally-zoned parcels 
All lots of a proposed subdivision must be in keeping with unit and density allocations, and other conditions of zoning as well as the City of East Point Subdivision Regulations and this Ordinance. If each proposed parcel does not conform to the foregoing requirements, the proposed division shall require a rezoning. 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 2(Exh. B), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2011. - Maintenance of vegetation. 
Pervious surfaces, including yards, shall be permanently maintained and shall be landscaped with grass, trees, shrubs, hedges and/or other landscaping materials in accordance with the Tree Protection and Landscaping Ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 2(Exh. B), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2012. - Multiple zoning. 
Whenever a lot is zoned for more than one single family dwelling district or zoned a single family district(s) and AG-1, the district which comprises the largest area shall control the development standards for that lot. 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 2(Exh. B), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2013. - Building separations. 
All building separations shall be as specified by the International Code Council. 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 2(Exh. B), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2014. - Exceptions for governmental property. 
This Ordinance shall apply to every lot, parcel, property, use and structure in East Point except as excluded in this section. Furthermore, the provisions herein shall not apply to properties and structures owned, operated and/or leased for use by East Point for public purposes. The use of said property for a nonconforming use does not establish a precedent for other non-public (governmental) uses. Should the public use cease to exist, the provisions herein shall apply. 
(Ord. of 11-21-2016, § II) 
Sec. 10-2015. - Nonconforming lots, uses and structures. 
Within the zoning districts established by this Ordinance there may exist lots, structures, and uses of both land and structures which were lawful before this Ordinance was adopted or subsequently amended, but which would be prohibited, regulated, or restricted under the terms of this Ordinance as adopted or subsequently amended. Nonconforming lots, uses and structures may continue in their nonconforming status with the following limitations and/or requirements. 
(a)  Nonconforming lot. A single, lawful lot-of-record which does not meet the requirements of this Ordinance for area or dimensions, or both, may be used for the buildings and accessory buildings necessary to carry out permitted uses subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  Parking space requirements as provided for in Article E are met; and 
(2)  Such lot does not adjoin another vacant lot(s) or portion of a lot in the same ownership. 
(3)  If two (2) or more adjoining undeveloped lots in single ownership do not meet the requirements established for lot width, frontage or area, the property involved shall be treated as one lot, and no portion of said lot shall be used or sold in a manner which diminishes compliance with this Ordinance. This paragraph shall not apply to non-conforming lots when 50 percent or more of adjoining lots on the same street are the same size or smaller. 
(b)  Nonconforming uses of land. When a use of land is nonconforming pursuant to the provisions of this Ordinance, such use may continue as long as it remains otherwise lawful and complies with the following provisions: 
(1)  No nonconforming use shall be enlarged, increased or extended to occupy a greater area of land than that which was occupied at the time use became nonconforming; 
(2)  No nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any other portion of the lot not occupied by such use at the time the use became nonconforming; and 
(3)  If any nonconforming use of land ceases for a period of more than one year, regardless of any reservation of an intent not to abandon by the property owner, any subsequent use of such land shall comply with this Ordinance. 
(c)  Nonconforming use of structures. If a lawful use of structure, or of a structure and lot in combination, exists at the effective date of adoption of this ordinance or its subsequent amendment that would not be allowed under provisions of this Ordinance as adopted or amended, the use may be continued so long as it complies with other regulations, subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  To avoid undue hardship, the lawful but nonconforming use of any structure or land at the time of the enactment of this Ordinance or any subsequent amendment may be continued even though the use does not conform to the provisions of this Ordinance, except that the nonconforming use: 
a.  Shall not be changed to another nonconforming use. 
b.  Shall not be reestablished after its removal from the property or its discontinuance for one year or more, or unless the premises are under a continuing lease but are unoccupied by the nonconforming use, regardless of the intent of the owner or occupier to resume the nonconforming use. 
c.  Shall not be extended to occupy a greater area of land. 
d.  Shall not be extended to occupy a greater area of a building or structure unless such additional area of the building or structure existed at the time of the passage or amendment of this Ordinance and was clearly designed to house the same use as the nonconforming use occupying the other portion of the building or structure. 
(2)  If an existing use was lawfully established in a zoning district that is subsequently amended to require Special Use approval for such use, the existing use shall not be subject to the provisions of this subsection. 
(3)  Any intended but not yet existing nonconforming use for which a vested right was acquired prior to the adoption of this Ordinance or the adoption of an amendment to it shall be prohibited unless such intended nonconforming use for which a vested right was acquired is actually commenced within one year of the adoption of this Ordinance or the adoption of an amendment to it regardless of the intent or expectation to commence or abandon such nonconforming use. 
(d)  Nonconforming Structures. When a structure exists on the effective date of adoption of this Ordinance or its amendments that could not be built under the terms of this Ordinance because of restrictions on building area, lot coverage, height, yards, or other characteristics of the structure or its location on the lot, such structure may remain as long as it complies with all other zoning regulations, subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  No structure may be enlarged or altered in a way which increases its nonconformity. 
(2)  Any structure which is moved, for any reason and for any distance whatever, shall conform to the regulations for the district in which it is located. 
(3)  Destruction by any means of more than sixty percent of the gross square footage of a structure shall require that the structure be reconstructed in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance. 
(4)  Telecommunications facilities. 
a.  All telecommunication facilities existing on the effective date of this Ordinance shall be allowed to continue to be used as they presently exist. 
b.  Routine maintenance (including modifications to accommodate the co-location of an additional user or users) shall be permitted on existing telecommunication facilities. 
c.  Replacement of antennas on a structure with different antennas shall be considered routine maintenance so long as the replacement antenna(s) does not increase the height of any existing structure. 
(e)  Rezoning which results in nonconforming structures. When a property containing lawful structures is rezoned, the following shall apply: 
(1)  The approval of the rezoning by the City Council shall automatically adjust minimum/maximum yards to the extent necessary for existing structures to comply. 
(2)  All new construction, expansions or additions shall comply with the minimum yard requirements of the new district. 
(3)  Buffers and landscape areas shall be established by conditions of zoning which shall have precedence over the district standards contained in Chapter 6. 
(4)  Destruction or removal of buildings which preexisted rezoning shall reinstate the development standards of the then applicable district provisions of this zoning ordinance. 
(f)  Exemptions due to State or City action. Whenever a lot becomes nonconforming as a result of land acquisition by the city or state, building permits shall be granted for new construction provided the proposed structure complies with all but lot area requirements, and setback requirements shall be reduced without requirement for a variance to the extent of the width of the acquired property. 
Whenever a structure becomes nonconforming as a result of city or state action other than an amendment to this ordinance, the use of the structure may continue and the structure may be replaced as though no nonconformity exists if, subsequent to such action, the structure is destroyed. 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 2(Exh. B), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2016. - Model homes. 
Dwelling units may be utilized for sales offices and/or model homes as long as two or more lots and/or dwelling units in the development have not undergone an initial sale or lease by the builder. 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 2(Exh. B), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2017. - Height limits. 
The zoning districts' maximum height limitations for structures shall not apply to the following: 
(a)  Church spires and belfries. 
(b)  Water storage tanks. 
(c)  Cooling towers. 
(d)  Chimneys. 
(e)  Mechanical penthouses located on roofs. 
(f)  Smokestacks. 
(g)  Flag poles. 
(h)  Silos and grain elevators. 
(i)  Fire towers. 
Public and semi-public buildings (except as exempt in Section 10-2014), hospitals and schools may be erected to 60 feet in height, and churches and temples may be erected to 75 feet in height. For each foot that said buildings exceed the height regulations of the district in which located, an additional foot of side and rear yard setbacks shall be required. 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 2(Exh. B), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2018. - Minimum building lines. 
The minimum yards (setbacks) in each district shall establish minimum building lines for all structures except those named in Section 10-2027.8 entitled outside storage and accessory displays. 
(a)  Corner lots. Principal structures on corner lots shall be required to identify a main entrance. Said entrance shall be setback as specified in the front yard setback regulations for the applicable zoning district. The setback for the other street-adjoining side shall be as specified in the district regulations. 
(b)  Permitted encroachments into yards. The following encroachments shall be allowed to the extent specified below. 
(1)  Non-residential. Canopies shall be allowed over walkways or driveways to within 12 feet of the street right-of-way or the right-of-way based on the street's functional classification, whichever is farther from the street's centerline. Fuel pumps and pump islands, when permitted, shall be set back as stated in this paragraph for canopies. 
(2)  Single-family residential and townhouses used for single family on individual lots of record. Porches, decks or patios attached to the main dwelling may extend no more than ten feet into a minimum front or rear yard. Outdoor fireplaces and outdoor uncovered kitchens, whether stand alone or constructed as a part of a patio, retaining wall or other structure, may only be located in the rear yard and may extend no more than 10 feet into the minimum rear yard. In no case shall an outdoor fireplace be located closer than ten feet to a property line. Awnings may project to within five feet of a side lot line. 
(3)  All zoning districts. Architectural features such as cornices, eaves, steps, gutters, fire chases, chimneys which are a part of an exterior wall of the primary structure, and fire escapes may not encroach or project over more than 36 inches (3 feet) into any minimum yard. 
(4)  Adjoining railroads. There shall be no minimum rear yard requirement adjoining the siding for those uses which utilize a rail siding for loading and unloading. 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 2(Exh. B), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2019. - Encroachment on public rights-of-way. 
No privately owned structures other than driveways, access walkways, and mail boxes shall be permitted within a public right-of-way. Landscaping shall be allowed with permission of the Georgia Department of Transportation and the City of East Point or as specified in the Tree Protection and Landscaping Ordinance, as applicable. Signs and other structures belonging to the State of Georgia, East Point, MARTA, a railroad or utility are exempt from this provision. 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 2(Exh. B), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2020. - Large scale retail/service commercial structures and developments 75,000 square feet or greater {10-2020.1 through 10-2020.3} 
Sec. 10-2020.1 - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of establishing requirements for large-scale retail establishments is to apply design standards and additional conditions to large developments proposed in East Point in order to ensure the development of appropriate, functional, well-planned, aesthetically pleasing retail/service commercial developments that stimulate economic and social growth, are integrated with surrounding areas, positively contribute to the changing community character, with facilities that have functional reuse potential in the future. 
As such, these regulations intend to promote high quality materials and design, promote pedestrian-friendly environments, encourage infrastructure concurrency, encourage responsible storm-water management practices, and promote environmental planning policies. 
The regulations are to be used in conjunction with the development criteria of the East Point Zoning Ordinance and all other adopted development standards and criteria, including overlay district standards. 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 2(Exh. B), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2020.2. - Number, size and location criteria. 
Large scale retail establishments or developments cannot be accessed solely via collector or local roads, as defined by East Point guidelines and depicted on the Georgia Department of Transportation Road Functional Classification maps. They are solely permitted on sites with at least one frontage on an arterial road. However, the Director may waive the road classification criteria if the developer can demonstrate that the proposed road improvements, with identified funding sources, will accommodate projected traffic volume to be generated by the proposed development to the degree that the current level of service (LOS) or better is maintained for the affected road segment. 
No more than four large scale retail establishments, as defined in this Ordinance, are allowed in a single development. Developments may include additional smaller retail structures as part of the overall development; however, the number of retail establishments that are 75,000 square feet or larger is limited to four, and such developments are subject to the regulations outlined in this Ordinance. 
Developments are encouraged to create a cluster effect in order to achieve a village and/or town center effect. This Ordinance promotes an appropriate mix of large and small scale retail with smaller retail buildings located closer to streets in order to reduce the visual scale of the development, encourage pedestrian traffic, and promote the use of architectural details. 
This Ordinance also recognizes the varied types of developments in East Point and promotes the use of screening and buffers. 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 2(Exh. B), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2020.3. - Site design guidelines and requirements 
(a)  General site guidelines. 
(1)  To the extent feasible, on site creeks should be integrated into the site as amenities. 
(2)  New construction shall conform to the existing topography as much as possible subject to approval by the Director of Planning and Community Development. 
(3)  Buildings shall be discouraged on sites with existing slopes greater than 33 percent. This condition may be amended as approved by the Director of Planning and Community Development. 
(4)  Where retaining walls are required, they must be faced with stone, brick or decorative concrete modular block. Use of landscape timber as exterior treatment in retaining walls is prohibited. Retaining walls taller than 5 feet from base of the wall to top of wall shall have evergreen plantings in front or as approved by the Director of Planning and Community Development. 
(5)  Detention facilities are encouraged to be designed pursuant to the Alternative Design Standards described in the East Point Subdivision Regulations. 
(6)  To the greatest extent practicable, design of a traditional detention facility shall follow the natural landforms around the perimeter of the basin. 
(b)  Open space. 
(1)  A minimum of ten percent of the site shall be landscaped open space. 
(2)  Each retail development shall contribute to the establishment or enhancement of the community and public spaces by providing at least two community amenities such as patio/seating area, water feature, clock tower, and pedestrian plazas or benches. Such features shall be constructed of materials that are the same or similar to those used for the principal buildings and landscape. 
(3)  Square footage of community areas can be counted towards the minimum open space requirement. 
(c)  Screening and fencing. 
(1)  Landscaping and fencing materials should be used to minimize visual and noise impact of parking, loading areas and accessory site features. 
(2)  All loading areas shall be located to the rear or side of the building. Location should be restricted, however, to whichever location does not abut a residentially zoned property, if applicable. Loading areas shall be screened from view of any public street by a five-foot berm, a continuous row of evergreen hedges five feet in height at the time of planting, or architectural treatment. 
(3)  Refuse areas and receptacles shall be placed in the least visible location from public streets and shall be enclosed on three sides with opaque walls. The fourth side shall be a self-closing gate with an architectural finish. Opaque walls shall be a minimum of 12 inches higher than the receptacle. Wall materials shall be noncombustible brick, stone, or split-faced concrete masonry. 
(4)  Accessory site features, as defined in this Zoning Ordinance, shall be placed in the least visible location from public streets, and shall be screened from view of any right-of-way and/or any property zoned, used, or developed for residential uses, including the AG-1 zoning district, by one of the following means: (1) placement behind the building, (2) 100 percent opaque fencing which must be constructed of the same type of exterior material used for the building, or (3) by a berm or vegetative screening. The screening shall consist of evergreen shrubs, be 3½ to four feet at time of planting, and reach a height of six feet within two years of planting. 
(5)  Fencing materials along public streets and side yards are restricted to brick, stone, iron, decorative wrought iron, and treated wood, and or combinations of the above not resulting in an opaque fence. 
(6)  Fences adjacent to a public street shall not exceed four feet from finished grade. 
(7)  Chain link fencing, except as required along detention/retention ponds, is prohibited from public view. All chain link fencing shall be black vinyl clad. 
(8)  Suburban developments: All parking areas shall be screened from view of any public street by: (1) a 25-foot-wide landscape strip planted to buffer standards or (2) a berm planted with a continuous hedge or evergreen shrubs. Plants shall be a minimum height of 3½ to four feet at time of planting, and such plants (or in the case of option 2 above, the berm and the planting combined) shall be capable of reaching a height of six feet within two years of planting. 
(d)  Outdoor storage and display. 
(1)  Display or sale of goods outside the permanent portions of a building is prohibited. Garden centers; and other similar areas, with permanent walls/fencing on the outside are considered permanent structures. Exceptions: Seasonal holiday trees, pumpkins, and open air fairs, provided an administrative permit is obtained, pursuant to Article D of the Zoning Ordinance. 
(2)  Vending machines, paper stands and other similar devices must be located interior to the building structure. 
(e)  Buffer standards. 
(1)  All developments shall provide a minimum 25-foot wide landscape strip along all public streets, if buildings within the development do not front the street. 
(2)  A minimum ten-foot wide natural, undisturbed buffer with a ten-foot improvement setback shall be provided along any interior property line adjacent to a residential zoning and/or use. This buffer shall be augmented with plantings if it does not achieve the intended visual screening. 
(3)  To ensure that a visual buffer is achieved (for developments adjacent to a residential zoning and/or use), the city may require the installation of a four-foot high earthen berm with plantings per the city Buffer Standards. The Planning and Community Developmenet Director will make the determination of a berm requirement based upon a review of the Landscape Plan and existing topography and vegetation. 
(4)  A minimum 15-foot wide landscape strip shall be provided along any interior property line adjacent to a nonresidential zoning and/or use. 
(f)  Infill/urban developments. 
(1)  Developments are encouraged to place small retail storefronts on the public street. 
(2)  If buildings do not front a public street, all properties shall provide a minimum 15-foot-wide landscape strip along all public streets. The 15-foot-wide strip shall be planted with minimum three-inch caliper hardwood over-story trees every 30 feet. 
(3)  A minimum ten-foot wide landscape strip shall be provided along any interior property line adjacent to a nonresidential zoning and/or use. This provision does not apply to individual lots within an overall development. 
(4)  A minimum five-foot wide natural, undisturbed buffer shall be provided along any interior property line adjacent to a residential zoning and/or use. This buffer shall be augmented with plantings if it does not achieve the intended visual screening. 
(g)  Landscaping. 
(1)  Specimen trees should be preserved to the extent possible. 
(2)  Large overstory street trees in the landscape strips shall be planted in asymmetrical groupings at a minimum density of one tree per 30 feet of street frontage. 
(3)  Street trees shall be a minimum of three-inch caliper. 
(4)  Street trees shall be selected from the list provided in Chapter 6 of the East Point Tree Protection and Landscaping Ordinance or as may be approved by the Director of Planning and Community Development. 
(5)  Street trees may be counted towards the required tree density for a site as approved by the Director of Planning and Community Development. 
(h)  Parking lot landscaping islands. 
(1)  Parking lot landscaping shall follow the standards within the East Point Tree Protection and Landscaping Ordinance Section 10-6009. 
(i)  Landscape installation and maintenance. 
(1)  Landscaping must be installed, or a landscape installation guaranty must be provided prior to the release of Certificate of Occupancy (CO), unless appropriate provisions are made to guarantee the installation of landscaping after such certificate is issued, such as approval by the Department of a bond for landscaping. The guaranty shall be stamped and signed by a registered landscape architect certifying that landscaping meets the standards of the East Point Tree Protection and Landscaping Ordinance. Landscape plantings must be replaced if damaged or dead. 
(j)  Sidewalks and pedestrian circulation. 
(1)  Sidewalks or pedestrian paths are required along all public and private road frontages and may meander around existing trees subject to the approval of the Director of Planning and Community Development. 
(2)  Pedestrian paths may be installed instead of sidewalks as approved by the Director of Planning and Community Development. 
(3)  Sidewalks shall be a minimum width of five feet. 
(4)  Pedestrian paths shall be a minimum of five feet wide. They shall be made out of a hard surface material such as concrete, brick or pavers. Paths may be gravel or gravel dust as approved by the Director of Planning and Community Development. 
(5)  Sidewalks for all new projects should connect with existing walks, where applicable. 
(6)  Pedestrian access should be provided to all entrances including access from rear parking areas. 
(7)  Inter-parcel connectivity shall be required for multiuse, pedestrian paths and sidewalks. 
(8)  All internal pedestrian walkways shall be distinguished from driving surfaces through the use of color and durable, low maintenance surface materials such as pavers, bricks, or scored concrete to enhance pedestrian safety and comfort, as well as the attractiveness of the walkways. 
(k)  Parking. 
(1)  Parking lots should be distributed around large buildings along not less than two facades (front, rear or sides) in order to shorten the distance to other buildings and public sidewalks. 
(2)  A minimum of 50 percent of the required surface parking for out-parcels shall be located at the rear of the out-parcel building, interior to the overall development or facing the large retail parking lot. 
(3)  No parking or loading area shall be used for the sale, repair, dismantling or servicing or storing of any vehicle, equipment, materials or supplies. 
(4)  All developments must provide space for parking bicycles. This area may be within the parking lot or courtyard. A bike rack must be permanently attached to the ground accommodating a bicycle lock or chain. 
(5)  Where feasible, no more than 50 percent of the off-street parking area for the lot, tract or area of land devoted to the large retail establishment should be located along the property fronting a public road and between the front facade and the road. 
(6)  Downtown developments: On-street parking is allowed subject to the approval of the Director of Public Works. 
(l)  Architectural standards. 
(1)  The design and layout of a development should build upon and complement the design of the surrounding community. The size, orientation, setback and scale of buildings are integral elements of communities. A building's orientation and placement should complement and relate to adjacent buildings, structures and properties. 
(2)  The location of a building should take into consideration its surrounding and take advantage of opportunities to maintain open views and spaces. Buildings should be in proportion, in scale and characteristic to their natural setting. The building design and material should contribute to the style and surrounding areas. Building design that is based on a standardized formula associated with a business or franchise shall be modified to meet the provisions of this section. 
(3)  Buildings shall include architecture elements such as columns, arcades, covered entry-walkways, arches, facade offsets, windows, balconies, recesses/projections, clock towers, cupolas and/or courtyards. 
(m)  Orientation. 
(1)  All buildings shall be oriented to a public street. An entrance to a building should be located on the side of the building facing a public street. 
(2)  Small retail stores as part of an overall development should be oriented to a public street; with the larger retail buildings in the rear. 
(3)  Principal buildings should have articulated building entryways with greater architectural details, to include a minimum of two of the following elements: 
a.  Decorative columns or posts. 
b.  Pediments. 
c.  Arches. 
d.  Brackets. 
e.  Transoms over doorways. 
f.  Sidelights. 
g.  Porticos. 
(n)  Height. 
(1)  There shall be a maximum height of 40 feet from average-finished grade to the bottom of the roof eave. 
(2)  Downtown development: No specific height restriction for the C-R district. 
(o)  Scale. 
(1)  For every 100 feet of building length on a single face, visible from the public street, there shall be variation in the exterior. This exterior variation shall be accomplished through the following means: 
a.  For each 100 feet of building exterior wall, the building exterior and roof shall be offset. 
b.  For each 100 feet of building exterior wall, there shall be a change in details, or patterns or materials. 
(p)  Building material. 
(1)  The exterior wall materials of all buildings shall consist of a minimum of 60 percent (per vertical wall plane) of the following: brick, stone, stucco, solid plank, cementitious plank, or horizontal clapboard siding. 
(2)  Accent wall materials on buildings shall consist of glass, architecturally treated concrete masonry, stone, or stucco and shall not exceed 40 percent per vertical wall plane. 
(3)  Prohibited exterior building facade materials are: metal panel systems, precast, smooth concrete masonry or plain, reinforced concrete slabs, EIFS, aluminum or vinyl siding, plywood, mirrored glass, press-wood or corrugated steel (exceptions: mechanical penthouses and roof screens). 
(4)  To the extent any rear or side of any building is adjacent to a public street or single family residence, architectural treatment shall continue through the rear or side. 
(q)  Colors. 
(1)  If large scale retail establishment or development is not located in an overlay district, all aspects of a development should use colors common in the area and in nature. Earth-toned, subtle and muted colors provide for a development that incorporates sensitivity to its natural surrounding. High intensity fluorescent colors shall be prohibited. 
(r)  Roof. 
(1)  Permissible roof types are flat, gable, pyramidal, and hip. Shed roofs are permitted over porches, additions, and accessory structures. 
(2)  Roof pitches shall be in the range of four over 12 to 12 over 12. 
(3)  Roof pitch material shall be made out of the following materials: asphalt shingle, wood shingle, wood shake, standing seam metal, or materials designed to give the appearance of the above mentioned materials. 
(4)  A decorative parapet or cornice shall be constructed along all roof lines with a lower pitch than specified in above. 
(5)  Flat roofs and roof-mounted equipment shall be screened from the view of public and private streets by a parapet. No parapet shall be required to be greater than four feet above roof. 
(s)  Additional requirements. 
(1)  Burglar bars, steel gates, metal awnings and steel-roll down curtains are prohibited on the exterior and interior of the structure except at the structure's rear. Steel roll down curtains may be located in other areas if not visible from the front of a building or from a public street. 
(2)  Neon lights outlining and/or detailing building features are prohibited. 
(3)  Where additional stores will be located in a large retail establishment, each such store that is 5,000 square feet and greater shall have at least one exterior customer entrance, which shall conform to the above requirements. 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 2(Exh. B), 9-19-16 ) 
Secs. 10-2021—10-2024. - Reserved. 
Sec. 10-2025. - Adaptive reuse of properties and store closure. 
If an establishment remains empty for a period of 12 consecutive months the owner and/or lessee must work with Department of Economic Development to create a plan for the removal or adaptive re-use of the principal structure. 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 2(Exh. B), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2026. - Vacancy maintenance requirements. 
(a)  Owner shall provide security patrols on the site to deter vandalism or other illegal activities on the property. 
(b)  Retail establishments that have been closed should be maintained at the standard of the occupied store, prior to store closure, this includes all parking lot surfaces and landscaping. 
(c)  Building fenestration, including doors and windows cannot be boarded up. 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 2(Exh. B), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2027. - Accessory uses and structures. 
Accessory structures shall be constructed concurrently with or subsequent to a principal structure and in accordance with the following regulations applicable to selected accessory uses and structures: 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 2(Exh. B), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2027.1. - Temporary storage units and portable on-demand storage (PODS) 
Temporary storage units and portable on-demand storage structures may be utilized as a temporary structure within the City when in compliance with standards of this subsection. Any use of such structures within the City not in compliance with this subsection shall be unlawful. 
(a)  Before placing a temporary storage unit or a portable on-demand storage (PODS) structures on a property, an application and a fee must be submitted to the Department of Planning and Community Development. 
(b)  In residential areas, there is a limit of three permits per calendar year, per lot. Each permit is limited to 30 days, including the days of delivery and removal. 
(c)  In non-residential areas, there is a limit of one permit per calendar year, per lot. The permit is limited to 180 days, including the days of delivery and removal. A valid building permit must be on file. 
(d)  Temporary storage units and portable on-demand storage (PODS) structures existing prior to the effective date must obtain a permit. 
(e)  To the extent possible, temporary storage units and portable on-demand storage (PODS) should be located on an impervious surface. 
(f)  Temporary storage units and portable on-demand storage (PODS) may not be located in any part of a fire lane, required parking space or public right-of-way. Units are prohibited from being placed in streets or the front yard of a property unless a variance from this provision is granted by the Director of Planning and Community Development set forth below. 
(g)  In the event an applicant for permit has property which does not have a driveway, has challenging topography or does not have adequate access to the rear yard, the Planning and Community Development Director may grant a variance from the requirements of subsections E and/or F above to allow the temporary storage unit/portable on-demand structure to be placed in an alternate location, provided that the location is in keeping with the intent of the ordinance. Pursuant to Section 10-2188 Secondary Variance/Interpretation, if the applicant does not concur with the decision of the Planning Director, the applicant may appeal the decision as a secondary variance/interpretation. 
(h)  Property must have a principal structure to which the storage unit is an accessory. 
(i)  Only one temporary storage unit or portable on-demand storage (PODS) unit may be placed at any property at one time. 
(j)  No temporary storage and portable on-demand (PODS) unit shall be used to store solid waste, construction debris, demolition debris, recyclable materials, business inventory, commercial goods, illegal or hazardous material or goods for property other than at the property where unit is located. 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 2(Exh. B), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2027.2. - Greenhouses. 
A greenhouse accessory to a residential use shall be limited in size to one-third of the floor area of the principal dwelling. 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 2(Exh. B), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2027.3 - Antennas. 
This provision shall apply to all antennas and towers except those that exceed the maximum height of the district in which they are located (Article D). Antennas and towers are accessory structures when erected on a residential lot in association with a residential use and must meet all accessory structure requirements for the district in which the antenna is located except that principal structure height requirements shall control. Antennas which are located on roofs shall be located only on that portion of the roof most closely associated with yard(s) for which accessory structures are allowed. In addition, an antenna shall be designed such that the entire structure will remain on the property or within a fall easement if it should fall. 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 2(Exh. B), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2027.4. - Refuse areas. 
Refuse areas shall be identified on site plans for lots improved with structures other than single- family dwellings, and such areas shall be screened to one-hundred percent opacity with fences or walls, or a vegetative screen which complies with the screening requirements of the Tree Protection and Landscaping Ordinance. The refuse containers located therein shall not be visible from streets or adjoining properties. Vegetative screens must comply with the provisions of Chapter 6. Refuse areas shall not be located in required landscape areas, required buffers, required parking areas, or required loading areas. 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 2(Exh. B), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2027.5. - Animals. 
Refer to Part 7. Health and Sanitation Chapter 3 for regulations that apply to animals other than animals associated with farming as a principal or accessory use. 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 2(Exh. B), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2027.7. - Non-habitable accessory structure. 
Non-habitable accessory structures may not be rented to another party. The structure must be aesthetically compatible with the principal structure and include one additional on-site parking space. The use remains single-family and the lot may not be subdivided nor may the unit be sold separately. A building permit is required if accessory structure is greater than 200 square feet. 
Criteria: 
(1)  The accessory structure cannot be built or moved onto any lot before construction of the principal structure unless a building permit has been issued for the construction of the principal structure. 
(2)  The height must not exceed the height of the principal structure or 35 feet, whichever is less. 
(3)  It cannot exceed the floor area of the principal structure constructed on the same lot. 
(4)  The ground floor total area cannot cover more than 50 percent of the rear yard; unless otherwise specified in the zoning district in which property is located. 
(5)  If located in the rear yards, excluding patio covers, it must be located at least five feet from the side and rear property lines and have a separation distance of at least six feet from the principal structure. 
a.  On comer lots, the roof of an accessory structure may be attached to the principal structure, if there is a minimum 6 feet separation between the walls of the accessory structure and the principal structure and at least two sides of the breezeway are open. 
b.  A gate or fence with at least 50 percent open construction may be attached to one end of the breezeway. 
c.  If located in the rear yard of comer lots, it cannot be located closer to the side property line than that required for the principal structure. 
(6)  If located in the side yard area, excluding patio covers, it must be located a minimum distance of five feet from the side property line and must have a minimum of six feet separation from the principal structure. 
(7)  If the property is adjacent to an alley, it can be located on the property line. 
(8)  The accessory structure may be attached or detached. 
(9)  The accessory structure may not contain a 220 volt power supply, ventilation hood or gas line. 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 2(Exh. B), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2027.8 - Outside storage and accessory displays. 
Outside storage and accessory displays are permitted as indicated below for the various use districts. 
(1)  Outside storage associated with residential uses or districts including AG-1 used for residential purposes only. Outside storage is permitted in side and rear yards only, if screened from adjoining residential uses and from streets with an opaque fence or a vegetative screen in accordance with Chapter 6 of the Tree Protection and Landscaping Ordinance. Any storage not normally associated with residential use shall be prohibited. 
(2)  Outside storage associated with industrial uses or districts. Outside storage is permitted in rear and side yards only in the I-1, I-2 and BP Districts. Outside storage shall be located at least 25 feet from any residential property line. Such storage must be screened, in accordance with the Tree Protection and Landscaping Ordinance, from neighboring residential uses in all industrial districts and from streets in the I-1, I-2, B-P, E-I, M-I and O-I-T Districts. 
(3)  Outside storage associated with institutional, office and/or commercial uses or districts. Outside storage is permitted only within rear yards, and shall be located at least 25 feet from any residential property line. Such storage must be screened from neighboring residential uses and streets with an opaque fence or a vegetative screen in accordance with the Tree Protection and Landscaping Ordinance. 
(4)  Outside accessory display associated with commercial and/or industrial uses or BP districts. Accessory displays for merchandise which is being offered for sale on premises shall be permitted in the commercial and industrial districts only. Such displays may be located in any yard as long as it is not located in a minimum yard. Vehicle and similar displays may be located in minimum front yards, but may not encroach upon minimum landscape areas. 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 2(Exh. B), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2027.9. - Fences and walls. 
Fences and walls which conform to the provisions stated herein shall be permitted by the Planning and Zoning Department. Fences erected for agricultural purposes in the AG-1 District shall be exempt from permit requirements. 
(a)  Visibility triangle. Fences, walls and vegetative materials used in association therewith must not obstruct the minimum sight distance requirements which are specified in East Point Subdivision Regulations administered by the Director of the Public Works. 
(b)  Gates. No part of a gate shall be located within 20 feet of a public right-of-way, nor shall any gate or vehicle in any way obstruct a public right-of-way or the minimum sight distance specified in the East Point Subdivision Regulations regardless of whether open, closed or in an intermediate position. 
(c)  Fence and wall materials. Where the Zoning Ordinance or zoning conditions require fences and walls to be solid/opaque, the visual density of the fence shall be such that it cannot be seen through. The following standards shall apply to fences and walls. 
(1)  Adjoining right-of-way. In zoning districts AG-1, I-1, I-2, and B-P, wire and plastic fencing materials, including vinyl clad chain-link fencing with plastic or wooden inserts are required where adjoining a street right-of-way. 
Fences of decorative wrought iron, aluminum or green vinyl clad chain-link with a planted landscape strip around the fencing shall be used as a security fence around storm water facilities. 
The architectural treatment of poured concrete, common aggregate block or concrete walls shall be approved by the Director of Planning and Community Development. 
Wire fencing materials, including vinyl-clad chain-link fencing with plastic or wooden inserts are prohibited where adjoining a street right-of-way in all residential zoning districts and zoning districts that include a residential component. This prohibition extends to any front, side or rear yard fencing where the yard adjoins or abuts a street right of way. 
(2)  Fences along all property lines. Walls and fences constructed along all property lines shall be constructed with a finished side toward the neighboring property. 
(3)  Barbed wire. Barbed wire may be used in the AG-1 District as long as its use is associated with a legitimate agricultural pursuit. Barbed wire shall not be approved for any single-family dwelling lots including such lots which are located in the AG-1 District. Barbed wire may be used for security strands in rear and side yards only in I-1, I-2 and only at a height of at least eight feet above grade. Barbed wire may not be used in conjunction with electrified fences. 
(4)  Minimum landscape requirements. A minimum three-foot landscape strip shall be provided between a fence or wall and a public right-of-way. 
(5)  Material. Fences of ornamental iron, pre-treated wood, wrought iron, or vinyl in all residential and commercial districts are subject to height regulations. 
(6)  Repair. Fences and walls requiring a repair of 25 percent or less of the total linear feet of the fence do not require a permit. 
(d)  Height. Fences and walls shall not exceed a height of four feet in front yard and six feet for side and rear yards measured from finished grade in residential districts. Additionally, column and ornament heights are permitted to exceed the maximum fence/wall height up to three feet. 
(1)  Fences and walls shall not exceed six feet in all yards areas in C-1, C-2, C-L, CUP and MIX. 
(2)  Fences and walls shall not exceed eight feet in all yards areas in E-1, M-1, I-1, I-2 and B-P. 
(3)  Fences and walls shall not exceed four feet in all yard areas in CR. 
(e)  Setback. Fences and walls shall be set back a minimum of three feet from a public right-of-way. 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 2(Exh. B), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2027.10. - Home occupation. 
A home occupation is permitted as an accessory use of a dwelling unit in any zoning district and its operation is limited to members of the resident family only. The following are limitations on home occupations: 
(a)  The smaller of 25 percent or 750 square feet of the gross floor area of a dwelling unit may be used for activities devoted to the home occupation. 
(b)  Accessory buildings and structures may be used for the home occupation. 
(c)  There shall be no signs identifying the home occupation, nor shall there be any storage, display or activity associated with the home occupation visible outside the structure. 
(d)  The following uses are excluded from permissible home occupations: auto repair or similar operations, restaurants, keeping of animals, funeral homes, retail or wholesale shops, motel type establishments, taxi services, or any other occupation found incompatible with the intent of this Ordinance. 
(e)  Resident participants in a home occupation must have the appropriate occupational licensing, including business licenses. 
(f)  No home occupation shall generate traffic, sound, smell, vibration, light, or dust that is offensive. 
(g)  No more than two clients or patrons are allowed on the premises at the same time in conjunction with the home occupation (except for persons in care at a family daycare home, where no more than six children are allowed). 
(h)  Vehicles kept on site in association with the home occupation shall be used by residents only. 
(i)  Incoming vehicles related to the home occupation shall be parked off-street within the confines of the residential driveway or other on-site permitted parking. 
(j)  The use of instruments, machinery or equipment that emit sounds (i.e. musical instruments, sewing machines, saws, drills) that are detectable beyond the unit are prohibited. 
(k)  Family daycare homes shall be located at least 1,000 feet in all directions from any other such use operated as a home occupation. 
(l)  Family daycare homes hours of operation shall be limited to Monday through Saturday from six a.m. to seven p.m. 
(m)  Family daycare home operators shall have a current, certified copy of the operator's State of Georgia Family Day Care Home registration which shall be filed with the business license application and renewals. 
(n)  An on-site outdoor play area equal to 100 square feet of area for each child at play must be provided, and shall be limited to side or rear yards outside the minimum yard area, and shall not occupy any yard adjoining a street. 
(o)  The perimeter of outdoor play areas shall be enclosed by a minimum 6 foot decorative wrought iron or aluminum fence interior to any required landscape strips and/or buffers. Evergreen screen buffers may be required when deemed necessary by the Planning and Community Development Director to maintain compatibility with surrounding properties. Criteria to be considered include the nature and type of adjacent uses, lot size of the subject property and adjacent properties, and the distance to adjacent properties. 
(p)  Every family daycare home shall meet all applicable fire, safety, and parking requirements. 
(q)  No home occupation shall be operated so as to create or cause a nuisance. 
Secs. 10-2028—10-2035. - Reserved. 
Sec. 10-2036. - Outdoor lighting {10-2036 through 10-2042}. 
Sec. 10-2036.1. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose and intent of this Ordinance is to provide a regulatory strategy for outdoor lighting that will permit reasonable uses of outdoor lighting for nighttime safety, utility, security, productivity, enjoyment and commerce; curtail and reverse the degradation of the nighttime visual environment and the night sky; preserve the dark night sky for astronomy; minimize glare, obtrusive light and artificial sky glow by limiting outdoor lighting that is misdirected, excessive or unnecessary; conserve energy and resources to the greatest extent possible; and help to protect the natural environment from the damaging effects of night lighting from man-made sources. 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 2(Exh. B), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2037. - Conformance with applicable codes. 
All outdoor illuminating devices shall be installed in conformance with the provisions of this ordinance, the International Code Council and the National Electrical Code as applicable with the appropriate permits and inspections. Where there is conflict between the provisions of this Ordinance and other regulations, the most restrictive provision shall prevail. 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 2(Exh. B), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2038. - Applicability. 
For all land uses, developments and buildings that require a permit, all outdoor lighting fixtures shall meet the requirements of this ordinance. All building additions or modifications of 25 percent or more in terms of additional dwelling units, gross floor area, or parking spaces, either with a single addition or with cumulative additions subsequent to the effective date of this provision, shall invoke the requirements of this ordinance for the entire property, including previously installed and any new outdoor lighting. Cumulative modification or replacement of outdoor lighting constituting sixty (60) percent or more of the permitted lumens for the parcel, no matter the actual amount of lighting already on a non-conforming site, shall constitute a major addition for purposes of this section. 
(a)  Minor additions. Additions or modifications of less than 25 percent to existing uses, as defined above, that require a permit shall require the submission of a complete inventory and site plan detailing all existing and any proposed new outdoor lighting. Any new lighting on the site shall meet the requirements of this ordinance with regard to shielding and lamp type. 
(b)  Exempt lighting. The following luminaries and lighting systems are exempt from these requirements: 
(1)  Lighting for pools used at night. 
(2)  Underwater lighting used for the illumination of swimming pools and fountains; 
(3)  Temporary holiday lighting; 
(4)  Lighting required and regulated by the Federal Aviation Administration, or other federal, state or local agency; 
(5)  Emergency lighting used by police, fire, or medical personnel, or at their direction; 
(6)  All outdoor light fixtures producing light directly from the combustion of fossil fuels, such as kerosene and gasoline; 
(7)  Security lighting controlled and activated by a motion sensor device for a duration of ten minutes or less. 
(c)  Prohibited lighting. The following lighting systems are prohibited: 
(1)  Aerial lasers; 
(2)  Searchlight style lights; 
(3)  Other very intense lighting, defined as having a light source exceeding 200,000 lumens or intensity in any direction of 2 million candelas or more; 
(4)  Mercury vapor lamps; 
(5)  Neon lighting. 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 2(Exh. B), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2039. - Outdoor lighting standards. 
All nonexempt outdoor lighting fixtures shall meet the following criteria: 
(a)  Shall be full cut-off placed so as to allow no light above the horizontal as measured at the luminaire, except as herein noted in this Ordinance (as in the case of period fixtures, cut-off fixtures may be used). 
(b)  Shall be located, aimed or shielded so as to minimize glare and stray light trespassing across property boundaries and into the public right-of-way in accordance with the following standards: 

 

 
  
(c)  Flood or spot lamps must be positioned no higher than 45 degrees above straight down (half-way between the vertical and the horizontal) when the source is visible from any off-site residential property or public roadway. 
(d)  All light fixtures that are required to be shielded shall be installed and maintained in such a manner that the shielding is effective as described herein for fully shielded fixtures. 
(e)  Multi-use development lighting must conform to the standards of its respective use. 
(f)  Illumination levels are measured from any height and orientation of the measuring device at any location along the property line, except the lighting of parking lots shall be measured at grade with the meter sensor held horizontally on the surface. 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 2(Exh. B), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2040. - Special uses. 
All lighting not directly associated with the special use areas designated below shall conform to the lighting standards described in this ordinance. 
(a)  Outdoor sports, recreation fields, or performance areas. Lighting of outdoor recreational facilities (public or private), such as, but not limited to, outdoor athletic fields, courts, tracks, special event or show areas shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Facilities designed for recreational, or professional leagues and training fields for recreational, professional, or social levels of play shall utilize luminaries with minimal uplight consistent with the illumination constraints of the design. Where fully shielded fixtures are not utilized, acceptable luminaries shall include those which: 
a.  Are provided with internal and/or external glare control louvers or lenses, and are installed so as to minimize uptight and offsite light trespass and glare; and 
b.  Are installed and maintained so as to avoid aiming no more than 2.5 times the mounting height. 
(2)  Illuminance. All lighting installations shall be designed to achieve the illuminance levels for the activity as recommended by the Illuminating Engineering Society of North America (IESNA RP-6). 
(3)  Off site spill. The installation shall also limit off-site spill (off the parcel containing the sports facility) to the maximum extent possible consistent with the illumination constraints of the design. For all levels of play and training fields, as well as, performance areas, illumination levels shall not exceed 1.5 foot-candles at any location along any non-residential property line, and 0.5 foot-candles at any location along any residential property line. 
(4)  Curfew. All events shall be scheduled so as to complete all activity no later than 10:30 p.m. Illumination of the playing field, court or track shall be permitted after the curfew only to conclude a scheduled event that was unable to conclude before the curfew due to unusual circumstances. Field lighting for these facilities shall be turned off within 30 minutes after the last event of the night. 
(5)  Setback. All light poles shall be set back the greater of fifty feet or one foot for every foot in height from any residential property line or right-of-way. 
(b)  Service station canopies and parking structures. 
(1)  All luminaries mounted on or recessed into the lower surface of service station canopies and parking structures shall be fully shielded and utilize flat lenses. 
(2)  The total light output of luminaries mounted on the lower surface, or recessed into the lower surface of the canopy, and any lighting within signage or illuminated panels over the pumps, shall not exceed 50 foot-candles. 
(3)  The total light output of illuminated areas of a service station other than as detailed in 2. above shall not exceed 15 foot-candles. 
(4)  Illuminance levels for the interior of parking structures, where interior lighting is visible from outside the structure, shall conform to the IESNA recommendation (RP-20). 
(5)  Lights shall not be mounted on the top or sides of a canopy and the sides of a canopy shall not be illuminated. 
(c)  Security lighting. 
(1)  Security lighting shall be directed toward the targeted area. 
(2)  Sensor activated lighting must be located in such a manner as to prevent direct glare and lighting into properties of others or into a public right-of-way, and the light shall not be triggered by activity off the property. 
(d)  Pedestrian path lighting.. 
(1)  Lighting post shall not exceed 16 feet from the finished grade. 
(e)  Architectural accent lighting. 
(1)  Fixtures used to accent architectural features, materials, colors, style of buildings, landscaping, or art shall be located, aimed and shielded so that light is directed only on those features. Such fixtures shall be aimed or shielded to minimize light spill into the dark night sky in conformance with the luminaire standards. 
(2)  Lighting fixtures shall not generate glare, or direct light beyond the facade onto a neighboring property, streets or into the night sky. 
(f)  Temporary lighting permits. 
(1)  Permits for temporary lighting will be granted by the Department if the total output from the luminaries does not exceed 50 foot-candles and the following conditions apply: 
a.  The purpose for which the lighting is proposed can be completed within 30 days, except that the permit for a major construction project may extend to completion. 
b.  The proposed lighting is designed in such a manner as to minimize light trespass and glare. 
c.  Permits issued for temporary recreational lighting shall be extinguished by 10:30p.m. 
(2)  The application for the temporary lighting permit shall include, but not be limited to, the following information: 
a.  Name and address of applicant and property owner; 
b.  Location of proposed luminaire(s); 
c.  Date and times for the lighting; 
d.  Type, wattage and lumen output of lamp(s); 
e.  Type and shielding of proposed luminairies; 
f.  Intended use of the lighting; 
g.  Duration of time for requested exemption; 
h.  The nature of the exemption; and 
i.  The means to minimize light trespass and glare. 
(g)  Commercial parking areas. 
(1)  All lighting fixtures servicing parking lots, except floodlights, shall be cut-off fixtures, directed downward and not toward buildings or other areas. 
(2)  The minimum illumination level for a parking lot shall be 0.4 foot-candles at grade level and the ratio of the average illumination to the minimum illumination shall not exceed 4:1. 
(3)  Floodlights should be aimed or shielded to minimize uplight. 
(4)  Light poles used in parking lots shall not exceed 35 feet in height. 
(h)  Street lights. 
(1)  All new, repaired (outside of normal maintenance) or replaced street light fixtures shall be the cut-off type. 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 2(Exh. B), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2041. - Variances. 
(a)  Any person may submit an application to the Planning and Zoning Commission for a variance from the provisions of this Ordinance. The application should include, but not be limited to, evidence about the following: 
(1)  How the proposed design and appearance of the luminaire are superior; 
(2)  How light trespass and glare will be limited; 
(3)  How the proposed solution will provide a benefit without negative impact on the health, safety, and welfare of the community. 
(b)  The application may include the recommended practices of the Illuminating Engineering Society of North America, a professional engineer, or other authority on outdoor lighting. 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 2(Exh. B), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2042. - Submission of plans and evidence of compliance. 
The applicant for any permit required by any provision of the laws of East Point, in connection with proposed work involving outdoor lighting fixtures, shall submit, as part of the application for permit, evidence that the proposed work will comply with this Ordinance. Even should no other such permit be required, the installation or modification, except for routine servicing and same-type lamp replacement of any exterior lighting, shall require submission of the information described below. The submission shall contain but shall not necessarily be limited to the following, all or part of which may be part or in addition to the information required elsewhere in the laws of East Point upon application for the required permit: 
(a)  Plans indicating the location on the premises of each illuminating device, both proposed and any already existing on the site. 
(b)  Description of all illuminating devices, fixtures, lamps, supports, reflectors, both proposed and existing. The description may include, but is not limited to catalog cuts and illustrations by manufacturers. 
(c)  Photometric data, such as that furnished by manufacturers or similar, showing the angle of cut off of light emissions. 
Additional submission. The above required plans, descriptions and data shall be sufficiently complete to enable the Department to readily determine whether compliance with the requirements of this Ordinance will be secured. If such plans, descriptions and data cannot enable this ready determination, the applicant shall additionally submit, as evidence of compliance to enable such determination, such certified reports of tests as will do so provided that these tests shall have been performed and certified by a recognized testing laboratory. 
Subdivision plats. All new subdivided properties shall submit information as described herein for installed street lights and other common or public area outdoor lighting. 
Certification. For all projects, certification that the lighting as installed, conforms to the approved plans shall be provided by an illumination engineer/professional before the Certificate of Occupancy is issued. Until this certification is submitted, approval for use by the issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy shall not be issued. 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 2(Exh. B), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2043. - Architectural treatment of common aggregate block. 
Whenever visible from a public street in all except the AG-1 and industrial districts, and whenever adjoining a residential zoning district in all districts, the exterior of all common aggregate blocks shall be provided with an architectural treatment such as stucco, stone, brick, wood or an alternate treatment approved by the Director of Planning and Community Development. Split rib and marble aggregate block shall not be deemed to be common aggregate block. 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 2(Exh. B), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2046. - Outparcel development. 
Outparcel development permitted as a condition of zoning approval and identified on a Site Plan shall comply with the following standards. 
(a)  The total floor area for outparcels shall be included in the total floor area allowed for the larger parcel. 
(b)  Access for outparcels shall be from internal drives with no direct access to public roads. 
(c)  No minimum width is required for outparcels provided that all applicable Code requirements can be met on the outparcel. 
(d)  Internal entrance drives shall be located at least 100 feet from any publicly dedicated right-of-way. 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 2(Exh. B), 9-19-16 ; Ord. No. 073-017, § 1, 3-20-17 ) 
Sec. 10-2047. - Noise. 
The East Point Site Acceptability Noise Standards shall apply to all new proposed residential and special uses described herein. 

 
  
(1)  New residential development proposed within 5 miles of the Hartsfield Jackson International Airport boundary shall be in compliance with the East Point Site Acceptability Noise Standards. 
(2)  No residential dwelling shall be occupied if the interior day-night average sound level is 50 dBA or higher. 
(3)  Any existing legal residential lot of record that does not change use or zoning classification is exempt from the requirements of this section. 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 2(Exh. B), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2048. - Landfills, transfer stations, quarries and/or surface mining sites. 
(1)  No portion of a new proposed residentially zoned or used property shall be located within a one-mile radius of the property lines of an existing active landfill. 
(2)  No portion of a new proposed residentially zoned or used property shall be located within a one-mile radius of the property lines of an existing active transfer station. 
(3)  No portion of a new proposed residentially zoned or used property shall be located within a 1.5-mile radius of the property lines of an existing active quarry. 
(4)  Any owner of property located within a one-mile radius of the property lines of an existing active landfill or existing active transfer station or within a 1.5-mile radius of the property line of an existing active quarry, shall, prior to the sale or transfer of said property, notify and disclose in writing the existence of the landfill, transfer station, or quarry to the potential owner or transferee. 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 2(Exh. B), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2052. - Severability. 
The East Point City Council hereby declares that every section, paragraph, clause and phrase of this Ordinance is severable. If, for any reason, any provision of the ordinance is held to be invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the validity of the remaining provisions. 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 2(Exh. B), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2053. - Appeals. 
Any person or persons severally or jointly aggrieved by any decision of the Planning and Zoning Commission may present an appeal to the Superior Court of Fulton County. Such an appeal to the Superior Court shall be by writ of certiorari and filed within 30 days from the date of the decision of the Planning and Zoning Commission. Upon failure to file the appeal within 30 days, the decision of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be final. 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 2(Exh. B), 9-19-16 ) 
ARTICLE C. - ZONING TEXT, DISTRICT CLASSIFICATIONS AND BOUNDARIES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 061-016, § 2(Exh. C), adopted Sept. 19, 2016, amended former Art. C, §§ 10-2054—10-2080, in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. C pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 003-009, 3-2-09; Ord. No. 008-11, § 1, 6-6-11; Ord. No. 014-11, § 1, 7-5-11; Ord. No. 021-11, § 1, 9-19-11; Ord. No. 030-13, § 1, 12-16-13; Ord. No. 003-014, 2-17-14; Ord. No. 057-016, § 1, 6-20-16. 

Sec. 10-2054. - Zoning text, district classifications and boundaries. 
In order to regulate the location of structures, the height and bulk of structures, the use and intensity of use of lots and structures, and to regulate open spaces and aesthetics, East Point is divided into zoning districts which are individually described in this Ordinance. Those districts are set forth below. Within the listing are individual zoning districts which are no longer active but which continue to apply to properties zoned in those classifications. 

 
  
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 2(Exh. B), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2055. - Boundaries. 
The boundaries of the several zoning districts are shown on the East Point zoning maps. Street rights-of-way shall serve as district boundaries adjoining property lines, and all such right-of-ways shall not be zoned. Inconsistencies between legal boundary descriptions submitted at the time of rezoning and lot lines identified from more recent surveys shall be interpreted to attach the zoning to the legal lot. 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 2(Exh. B), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2056. - Zoning text. 
The official text of the East Point Zoning Ordinance shall be kept on file by the Clerk to the City Council. The Planning and Community Development Department shall provide all City departments with copies of amendments within 15 days of approval by the City Council, and shall provide a subscription and update service for the public. 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 2(Exh. B), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2057. - Zoning maps. 
The East Point zoning maps and all information contained thereon are part of this Ordinance and have the same force and effect as if fully set forth and/or described herein. The zoning maps are on file with the Planning and Community Development Department. 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 2(Exh. B), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2058. - Territory added. 
All unincorporated territory which may be annexed to East Point or which may be incorporated from a municipality within the county shall be classified in the R-1, Single Family District until, as applicable, the territory may be more appropriately zoned by the City Council based upon a Staff recommendation with consideration given to the suggestion of the Comprehensive Plan Land Use Map and/or zonings of adjacent properties in East Point. 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 2(Exh. B), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2059. - Abandonment. 
Whenever any street, alley, or other public way is abandoned by East Point or by the State of Georgia, the zoning district adjoining such street, alley or public way shall be extended to the center of such public way. 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 2(Exh. B), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2060. - AG-1 Agricultural District. 
AG-1 District scope and intent. Regulations set forth in this article are the AG-1 District regulations. Article D should be consulted to determine uses and minimum standards for uses allowed by Administrative or Use Permit. The AG-1 District is intended to encompass lands devoted to a wide range of uses including individual parcels devoted to low density residential use, single family subdivisions, agricultural and closely related uses. 
Use regulations. Within the AG-1 District, land and structures shall be used in accordance with standards herein. Any use not specifically designated as a permitted use in this section or as a use allowed by administrative permit or Use Permit shall be prohibited. 
(a)  Permitted uses. A building or property may be used for only the following purposes: 
(1)  Single family dwelling. 
(2)  Agriculture, general and specialized farming, including: horticulture, plant nursery, greenhouse, dairy farming, livestock raising and poultry raising provided, however, that buildings used for housing animals must be at least 100 feet from all property lines. 
(3)  Community garden, landscaping business, plant nursery, or garden center with indoor retail component. See Section 10-2093 for applicable standards. 
(4)  Roadside stand for the sale of agricultural products produced on the property. 
(5)  Riding Stable other than accessory, provided buildings housing animals are at least 100 feet from all property lines and the lot is not less than ten ten acres. Standards for keeping horses other than for a non-accessory Public Riding Stable are the same as the standards contained in Section 10-2027.5 pertaining to the keeping of horses in a single family dwelling district. 
(6)  Kennel, Veterinary Hospital or Veterinary Clinic, provided buildings housing animals are fully enclosed and at least 100 feet from all property lines; and pens, runs, etc. which are not located in a fully enclosed building are at least 200 feet from all property lines. 
(b)  Accessory uses. 
(1)  Accessory uses and structures: 
a.  Accessory uses and structures incidental to any permitted use are allowed as defined by 10-2027 Accessory Uses and Structures. 
b.  Revival tents are allowed via an administrative permit accessory to an existing church, temple, or place of worship. 
c.  For sale, for rent, or for lease signs are allowed in accordance with sign regulations in Chapter 7, Signs. 
(c)  Uses permitted through administrative permit. The following uses may be permitted per the procedures and standards set forth in Article D, Section 10-2081 et. seq. in the AG-1 District: 
(1)  10-2089. Alternative antenna support structure. 
(2)  10-2090. Amateur radio antenna. 
(3)  10-2091. Antenna tower, and associated structures (radio. T.V., microwave broadcasting, etc.). 
(4)  10-2093. Community garden, landscaping business, plant nursery, or garden center with indoor retail component. 
(5)  10.2094. Driving Range (not associated with a golf course). 
(6)  10-2096. Film Production. 
(7)  10-2098. Golf course. 
(8)  10-2099. Outdoor event, small in conjunction with certain institutional uses or for the benefit of charity. 
(9)  10-2101. Recreational Court, private. 
(10)  10-2103. Relocated residential structure. 
(11)  10-2107. Seasonal business use. 
(12)  10-2109. Swimming pool, private. 
(13)  10-2112. Temporary structures. 
(14)  10-2113. Utility substations. 
(15)  10-2123. Bed and Breakfast. 
(d)  Uses permitted through use permit. The following uses may be permitted per the procedures and standards set forth in Article D, Section 10-2115 et. seq. in the AG-1 District: 
(1)  10-2119. Amateur radio antenna to exceed the administrative permit height. 
(2)  10-2120. Amphitheaters. 
(3)  10-2121. Antenna tower and associated structure (radio, T.V., microwave broadcasting, etc.). 
(4)  10-2124. Cemetery and/or mausoleum (human or pet). 
(5)  10-2125. Church, temple or place of worship. 
(6)  10-2132. Lodge, retreat, campground. 
(7)  10-2134. Outdoor event, large. 
(8)  10-2136. Recreational fields. 
(9)  10-2140. School, private or special. 
(10)  10-2143. Skywalks. 
(11)  10-2144. Stadium (offsite) associated with a private school. 
Other regulations. The headings below contain provisions applicable to uses allowed in the AG-1 District: 
Chapter 2 Zoning Regulations 
Chapter 3 Building Code Regulations 
Chapter 4 Subdivision Regulations 
Chapter 5 Flood Damage Prevention 
Chapter 6 Tree Protection and Landscape Ordinance 
Chapter 7 Signs 
Chapter 8 Uniform Roadway Addressing System 
Chapter 9 Condition and Use of Commercial and Industrial Buildings 
Chapter 10 Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control 
Chapter 11 Stormwater Management 
Chapter 12 Stream Buffer Protection 
Chapter 13 Enterprise Zones 
Chapter 14 Overlay Districts 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 3(Exh. C), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2061. - R-1 Single Family Dwelling District. 
District scope and intent. Regulations set forth in this Section are the R-1 District regulations. Article D should be consulted to determine uses and minimum standards for uses allowed by Administrative Permit or Use Permit. The R-1 District encompasses lands devoted to low density residential areas and closely related uses or as a use allowed by Administrative Permit or Use Permit. 
Use regulations. Within the R-1 District, land and structures shall be used in accordance with standards herein. Any use not specifically designated as a permitted use in this section or as a use allowed by Administrative Permit or Use Permit shall be prohibited. 
(a)  Permitted uses. Structures and land may be used for only the following purposes: 
(1)  Single-family detached dwelling. 
(2)  Family daycare home. 
a.  Home occupation license required. 
(b)  Accessory Uses. 
(1)  Accessory uses and structures: 
a.  Accessory uses and structures incidental to any permitted use are allowed as defined by 10-2027 Accessory uses and structures. 
b.  Revival tents are allowed via an administrative permit accessory to an existing church, temple or place of worship. 
c.  For sale, for rent, or for lease signs are allowed in accordance with sign regulations found in Chapter 7, Signs. 
(c)  Uses permitted through administrative permit. The following uses may be permitted per the procedures and standards set forth in Article D. Section 10-2081 et. seq. in the R-1 District: 
(1)  10-2089. Alternative antenna support structure. 
(2)  10-2090. Amateur radio antenna. 
(3)  10-2093. Community garden, landscaping business, plant nursery, or garden center with indoor. 
(4)  10.2094. Driving Range (not associated with a golf course). 
(5)  10-2096. Film production. 
(6)  10-2098. Golf course. 
(7)  10-2099. Outdoor event, small in conjunction with certain institutional uses or for the benefit of charity. 
(8)  10-2101. Recreational Court, private. 
(9)  10-2103. Relocated residential structure. 
(10)  10-2109. Swimming pool, private. 
(11)  10-2112. Temporary structure. 
(12)  10-2113. Utility substations. 
(d)  Uses permitted through use permit. The following uses may be permitted per the procedures and standards set forth in Article D. Section 10-2115 et. seq. in the R-1 District: 
(1)  10-2119. Amateur radio antenna to exceed the administrative permit height. 
(2)  10-2121. Antenna tower and associated structure (radio, T.V., microwave broadcasting, etc.) 
(3)  10-2124. Cemetery and/or mausoleum (human and pet). 
(4)  10-2125. Church, temple or place of worship. 
(5)  10-2130. Habitable accessory structure. 
(6)  10-2136. Recreational fields. 
(7)  10-2140. School, private or special. 
(8)  10-2144. Stadium (offsite) associated with a private school. 
(e)  Development Standards. 
a.  Height regulations - No building shall exceed thirty (30) feet in height. 
b.  Minimum front yard setback - 45 feet 
c.  Minimum side yard setback 
- 8 feet adjacent to interior line 
- 8 feet adjacent to street 
d.  Minimum rear yard setback - 30 feet 
e.  Minimum lot area — 10,000 square feet 
f.  Minmum width of lot frontage or width at building line - 75 feet 
g.  Minimum heated floor area 
- 1,000 square feet on ground level for less than two story 
- 1,500 square feet for two story or more than two story with 900 square feet on ground floor 
h.  Minimum accessory structure requirements. Accessory structures may be located in the rear or side yards only but shall not be located within a setback. Habitable accessory structures must be constructed with materials similar as those of the principal structure. 
i.  Conservation subdivision. The development standards of a conservation subdivision shall be in accordance with Chapter 4 of the East Point Subdivision Regulations. 
Other regulations. The headings below contain provisions applicable to uses allowed in the R-1 District: 
Chapter 2 Zoning Regulations 
Chapter 3 Building Code Regulations 
Chapter 4 Subdivision Regulations 
Chapter 5 Flood Damage Prevention 
Chapter 6 Tree Protection and Landscape Ordinance 
Chapter 7 Signs 
Chapter 8 Uniform Roadway Addressing System 
Chapter 9 Condition and Use of Commercial and Industrial Buildings 
Chapter 10 Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control 
Chapter 11 Stormwater Management 
Chapter 12 Stream Buffer Protection 
Chapter 13 Enterprise Zones 
Chapter 14 Overlay Districts 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 3(Exh. C), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2062. - R-1A Urban Residential District. 
R-1A District scope and intent. Regulations set forth in this Section are for the R-1A District regulations. Article D should be consulted to determine uses and minimum standards for uses allowed by Administrative Permit or Use Permit. The R-1A District is intended to provide land areas devoted to medium density residential areas and closely related uses. The District also provides for closely related uses or as a use allowed by Administrative Permit or Use Permit. 
Use regulations. Within the R-1A District, land and structures shall be used in accordance with standards herein. Any use not specifically designated as a permitted use in this section or as a use allowed by Administrative Permit or Use Permit shall be prohibited. 
(a)  Permitted uses. Structures and land may be used for only the following purposes: 
(1)  Single-family detached dwelling. 
(2)  Family daycare home. 
a.  Home occupation license required. 
(b)  Accessory uses. 
(1)  Accessory uses and structures: 
a.  Accessory uses and structures incidental to any permitted use are allowed as defined by Section 10-2027 Accessory uses and structures. 
b.  Revival tents are allowed via an administrative permit accessory to an existing church, temple or place of worship. 
c.  For sale, for rent, or for lease signs are allowed in accordance with sign regulations found in Chapter 7, Signs. 
(c)  Uses permitted through administrative permit. The following uses may be permitted per the procedures and standards set forth in Article D, Section 10-2081 et. seq. in the R-1A District: 
(1)  10-2089. Alternative antenna support structure. 
(2)  10-2090. Amateur radio antenna. 
(3)  10-2093. Community garden, landscaping business, plant nursery, or garden center with indoor retail component. 
(4)  10-2094. Driving range (not associated with a golf course). 
(5)  10-2096. Film production. 
(6)  10-2098. Golf course. 
(7)  10-2099. Outdoor event, small in conjunction with certain institutional uses or for the benefit of charity. 
(8)  10-2101. Recreational Court, private. 
(9)  10-2109. Swimming pool, private. 
(10)  10-2112. Temporary structures. 
(11)  10-2113. Utility substations. 
(d)  Uses permitted through use permit. The following uses may be permitted per the procedures and standards set forth in Article D, Section 10-2115 et. seq. in the R-1A District: 
(1)  10-2119. Amateur radio antenna to exceed the administrative permit height. 
(2)  10-2121. Antenna tower, and associated structure (radio. T.V., microwave broadcasting, etc.). 
(3)  10-2125. Church, temple, or place of worship. 
(4)  10-2130. Habitable accessory structure. 
(5)  10-2136. Recreational fields. 
(6)  10-2140. School, private or special. 
(7)  10-2144. Stadium (offsite) associated with a private school. 
(e)  Development standards. 
a.  Height regulations - No building shall exceed 35 feet in height. 
b.  Minimum front yard setback - 30 feet 
c.  Minimum Side Yard Setback - 
- 8 feet adjacent to interior line 
- 8 feet adjacent to street 
d.  Minimum rear yard setback - 20 feet 
e.  Minimum lot area - 7,500 square feet 
f.  Minimum width of lot frontage or width at building line - 50 feet 
g.  Minimum heated floor area 
- 900 square feet on ground level for less than two-story 
- 1,300 square feet for two-story or more than two-story with 1,000 square feet on ground floor 
h.  Minimum accessory structure requirements. Accessory structures may be located in the rear or side yards only but shall not be located within a setback. Accessory structures must be constructed of materials similar as those of the principal structure. 
i.  Conservation subdivision. The development standards of a conservation subdivision shall be in accordance with Chapter 4 of the East Point Subdivision Regulations. 
Other regulations. The headings below contain provisions applicable to the R1-A District: 
Chapter 2 Zoning Regulations 
Chapter 3 Building Code Regulations 
Chapter 4 Subdivision Regulations 
Chapter 5 Flood Damage Prevention 
Chapter 6 Tree Protection and Landscape Ordinance 
Chapter 7 Signs 
Chapter 8 Uniform Roadway Addressing System 
Chapter 9 Condition and Use of Commercial and Industrial Buildings 
Chapter 10 Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control 
Chapter 11 Stormwater Management 
Chapter 12 Stream Buffer Protection 
Chapter 13 Enterprise Zones 
Chapter 14 Overlay Districts 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 3(Exh. C), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2063. - R-l Residential Limited Single Family Dwelling District. 
R-L District scope and intent. R-L Single Family District is established to provide locations for land areas devoted to low density residential uses and closely related uses. Article D should be consulted to determine uses and minimum standards for uses allowed by Administrative Permit or Use Permit. 
Use regulations. Within R-L District, land and structures shall be used in accordance with standards herein. Any use not specifically designated as a permitted use in this section or as a use allowed by Administrative Permit or Use Permit shall be prohibited. 
(a)  Permitted Uses. Structures and land may be used for only the following purposes: 
(1)  Single-family detached dwelling. 
(2)  Family daycare home. 
a.  Home occupation license required. 
(b)  Accessory uses. 
(1)  Accessory uses and structures: 
a.  Accessory uses and structures incidental to any permitted use are allowed as defined by 10-2027 Accessory uses and structures. 
b.  Revival tents are allowed via an administrative permit accessory to an existing church, temple or place of worship.. 
c.  For sale, for rent, or for lease signs are allowed in accordance with sign regulations found in Chapter 7, Signs. 
(c)  Uses permitted through administrative permit. The following uses may be permitted per the procedures and standards set forth in Article D, Section 10-2081 et. seq. in the R-L District: 
(1)  10-2089. Alternative antenna support structure. 
(2)  10-2090. Amateur radio antenna. 
(3)  10-2093. Community garden, landscaping business, plant nursery, or garden center with indoor retail component. 
(4)  10.2094. Driving range (not associated with a golf course). 
(5)  10-2096. Film production. 
(6)  10-2098. Golf course. 
(7)  10-2099. Outdoor event, small in conjunction with certain institutional uses or for the benefit of charity. 
(8)  10-2101. Recreational Court, private. 
(9)  10-2104. Revival tent when associated with existing place of worship. 
(10)  10-2109. Swimming pool, private. 
(11)  10-2112. Temporary structures. 
(12)  10-2113. Utility substations. 
(d)  Uses permitted through use permit. The following uses may be permitted per the procedures and standards set forth in the Article D, Section 10-2115 et. seq. in the R-L District: 
(1)  10-2119. Amateur radio antenna to exceed the administrative permit height. 
(2)  10-2121. Antenna tower, and associated structure (radio, T.V., microwave broadcasting, etc.). 
(3)  10-2125. Church, temple or place of worship. 
(4)  10-2130. Habitable accessory structure. 
(5)  10-2136. Recreational fields. 
(6)  10-2140. School, private or special. 
(7)  10-2144. Stadium (offsite) associated with a private school. 
(e)  Development STANDARDS. 
a.  Height regulations - No building shall exceed 30 feet height. 
b.  Minimum front yard setback - 45 feet 
c.  Minimum side yard setback - 15 feet 
d.  Minimum rear yard setback - 40 feet 
e.  Minimum lot area - 18,000 square feet 
f.  Minimum width of lot frontage or width at building line - 100 feet 
g.  Minimum Heated Floor Area 
- 1,600 square feet on ground level for less than two-story 
- 1,800 square feet for two-story or more than two-story with 1,050 square feet on ground floor 
h.  Minimum accessory structure requirements. Accessory structures may be located in the rear or side yards only but shall not be located within a setback. Accessory structures must be constructed of materials similar as those of the principal structure. 
i.  Conservation subdivision. The development standards of a conservation subdivision shall be in accordance with Chapter 4 of the East Point Subdivision Regulations. 
Other regulations. The headings below contain provisions applicable to the R-L District: 
Chapter 2 Zoning Regulations 
Chapter 3 Building Code Regulations 
Chapter 4 Subdivision Regulations 
Chapter 5 Flood Damage Prevention 
Chapter 6 Tree Protection and Landscape Ordinance 
Chapter 7 Signs 
Chapter 8 Uniform Roadway Addressing System 
Chapter 9 Condition and Use of Commercial and Industrial Buildings 
Chapter 10 Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control 
Chapter 11 Stormwater Management 
Chapter 12 Stream Buffer Protection 
Chapter 13 Enterprise Zones 
Chapter 14 Overlay Districts 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 3(Exh. C), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2064. - R-2 Two-Family Dwelling District. 
R-2 District Scope and Intent. Regulations set forth in this Section are the R-2 District regulations. Article D should be consulted to determine uses and minimum standards for uses allowed by Administrative Permit or Use Permit. The R-2 District is intended to provide land areas devoted to medium density residential uses. The District also provides for closely related uses. Land areas zoned R-2 are further intended to provide a transition between low and high density dwelling areas or between low density dwelling areas and non-residential areas. 
Use regulations. Within the R-2 District, land and structures shall be used in accordance with standards herein. Any use not specifically designated as a permitted use in this section or as a use allowed by Administrative Permit or Use Permit shall be prohibited. 
(a)  Permitted uses. Structures and land may be used for only the following purposes: 
(1)  Single-family detached dwelling. 
(2)  Two-family dwelling. 
(3)  Family daycare home. 
a.  Home occupation license required. 
(b)  Accessory uses. 
(1)  Accessory uses and structures: 
a.  Accessory uses and structures incidental to any permitted use are allowed as defined by Section 10-2027 Accessory uses and structures. 
b.  Revival tents are allowed via an administrative permit accessory to an existing church, temple or place of worship. 
c.  For sale, for rent, or for lease signs are allowed in accordance with sign regulations found in Chapter 7, Signs. 
(c)  Uses permitted through administrative permit. The following uses may be permitted per the procedures and standards set forth in Article D, Section 10-2081 et seq. in the R-2 District: 
(1)  10-2089. Alternative antenna support structure. 
(2)  10-2090. Amateur radio antenna. 
(3)  10-2093. Community garden, landscaping business, plant nursery, or garden center with indoor retail component. 
(4)  10.2094. Driving range (not associated with a golf course). 
(5)  10-2096. Film production. 
(6)  10-2098. Golf course. 
(7)  10-2099. Outdoor event, small in conjunction with certain institutional uses or for the benefit of charity. 
(8)  10-2101. Recreational court, private. 
(9)  10-2103. Relocated residential structure. 
(10)  10-2109. Swimming pool, private. 
(11)  10-2112. Temporary structures. 
12.  10-2113. Utility substations. 
(d)  Uses permitted through use permit only. The following uses may be permitted per the procedures and standards set forth in Article D, Section 10-2115 et seq. in the R-2 District: 
(1)  10-2119. Amateur radio antenna to exceed the administrative permit height. 
(2)  10-2121. Antenna tower and associated structure (radio, T.V., microwave broadcasting, etc.). 
(3)  10-2125. Church, temple or place of worship. 
(4)  10-2130. Habitable accessory structure. 
(5)  10-2136. Recreational fields. 
(6)  10-2140. School, private or special. 
(7)  10-2144. Stadium (offsite) associated with a private school. 
(e)  Development Standards. 
a.  Height regulations - No building shall exceed 35 feet in height. 
b.  Minimum front yard setback - 35 feet 
c.  Minimum side yard setback 
- 6 feet adjacent to interior line 
- 15 feet adjacent to street 
d.  Minimum rear yard setback - 25 feet 
e.  Minimum lot area. 
- Single family — 8,500 square feet 
- Two-family — 9,400 square feet 
f.  Minimum width of lot frontage or width at building line - 60 feet 
g.  Minimum heated floor area 
- Single family — 1,100 square feet on ground level for less than two story 1,300 square feet for two-story or more than two-story with 900 square feet on ground floor 
- Two family — 1,000 square feet on ground level per unit for less than two story 1,800 square feet for two-story or more than two-story with 1000 square feet on ground floor 
h.  Minimum accessory structure requirements. Accessory structures may be located in the rear or side yards only but shall not be located within a setback. Accessory structures must be constructed of materials similar as those of the principal structure. 
Other regulations. The headings below contain provisions applicable to the R-2 District: 
Chapter 2 Zoning Regulations 
Chapter 3 Building Code Regulations 
Chapter 4 Subdivision Regulations 
Chapter 5 Flood Damage Prevention 
Chapter 6 Tree Protection and Landscape Ordinance 
Chapter 7 Signs 
Chapter 8 Uniform Roadway Addressing System 
Chapter 9 Condition and Use of Commercial and Industrial Buildings 
Chapter 10 Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control 
Chapter 11 Stormwater Management 
Chapter 12 Stream Buffer Protection 
Chapter 13 Enterprise Zones 
Chapter 14 Overlay Districts 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 3(Exh. C), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2065. - R-3 Multifamily Development District. 
District scope and intent. Regulations set forth in this section are the R-3 District regulations. Article D should be consulted to determine uses and minimum standards for uses allowed by Administrative Permit or Use Permit. The R-3 District is intended to provide land areas devoted to medium to high density residential uses. The district also provides for closely related uses. 
Use regulations. Within the R-3 District, land and structures shall be used in accordance with standards herein. Any use not specifically designated as a permitted use in this section or as a use allowed by Administrative Permit or Use Permit shall be prohibited. 
(a)  Permitted uses. Structures and land may be used for only the following purposes: 
(1)  Single-family detached dwelling. 
(2)  Two-family dwelling. 
(3)  Multi-family dwelling. 
(4)  Family daycare home. 
a.  Home occupation license required. 
(b)  Accessory uses. 
(1)  Accessory uses and structures: 
a.  Accessory uses and structures incidental to any permitted use are allowed as defined by 10-2027 Accessory uses and structures. 
b.  Accessory uses and structures incidental to any permitted use are allowed including but not limited to pools, cabanas, clubhouses, recreational fields, carwashes, dog parks, and any other common areas. 
c.  Revival tents are allowed via an administrative permit accessory to an existing church, temple or place of worship. 
d.  For sale, for rent, or for lease signs are allowed in accordance with sign regulations found in Chapter 7, Signs. 
(c)  Uses permitted through administrative permit. The following uses may be permitted per the procedures and standards set forth in Article D, Section 10-2081 et seq. in the R-3 District: 
(1)  10-2089. Alternative antenna support structure. 
(2)  10-2090. Amateur radio antenna. 
(3)  10-2093. Community garden, landscaping business, plant nursery, or garden center with indoor retail component. 
(4)  10.2094. Driving Range (not associated with a golf course). 
(5)  10-2096. Film productions. 
(6)  10-2098. Golf course. 
(7)  10-2099. Outdoor event, small in conjunction with certain institutional uses or for the benefit of charity. 
(8)  10-2101. Recreational court, private. 
(9)  10-2103. Relocated residential structure. 
(10)  10-2108. Senior housing. 
(11)  10-2109. Swimming pool, private. 
(12)  10-2112. Temporary structures. 
(13)  10-2113. Utility substations. 
(d)  Uses permitted through use permit only. The following uses may be permitted per the procedures and standards set forth in Article D, Section 10-2115 et seq. in the R-3 District: 
(1)  10-2119. Amateur radio antenna to exceed the administrative permit height. 
(2)  10-2121. Antenna tower and associated structures (radio, T.V., microwave broadcasting, etc.). 
(3)  10-2125. Church, temple, or place of worship. 
(4)  10.2130. Habitable accessory structure. 
(5)  10-2140. School, private or special. 
(6)  10-2144. Stadium (offsite) associated with a private school. 
(e)  Development Standards. 
a.  Height regulations - 
•  Single family - No building shall exceed 35 feet in height 
•  Two-family - No building shall exceed 35 feet in height 
•  Multi-family - No building shall exceed 40 feet in height 
b.  Minimum front yard setback - 35 feet 
c.  Minimum side yard setback - 
•  6 feet adjacent to interior line 
•  6 feet adjacent to street 
d.  Minimum rear yard setback - 25 feet 
e.  Minimum lot area - 
•  Single Family — 8,500 sq. ft. 
•  Two-family — 9,400 sq. ft. 
•  Multi-family — 14,400 sq. ft. 
f.  Minimum width of lot frontage or width at building line 
•  Single family — 60 feet 
•  Two-family — 60 feet 
g.  Minimum heated floor area 
•  1,600 square feet on ground level for less than two-story 
•  1,800 square feet for two-story or more than two-story with 1,050 square feet on ground floor 
h.  Minimum accessory structure requirements. Accessory structures may be located in the rear or side yards only but shall not be located within a minimum yard. 
i.  Multifamily conservation. Multifamily, townhome, and condominium projects shall be required to place in a conservation easement which will be dedicated to the HOA and/or property maintenance firm, prior to the issuance of a land disturbance permit a minimum of 25 percent of the project area reserved as open and/or green space when developing undeveloped property. New projects on undeveloped property must include seven of the required amenities. The regulations set forth in this section supplement regulations for the R-3 Multifamily Residential District regulations set forth elsewhere in this chapter. 
1.  Amenity package requirements: 
a.  Multi-family, town home and condominium projects shall include an amenity package of two (2) or more amenities. Amenities shall be defined as "a feature that increases the attractiveness or value of a project." These amenities shall include but not be limited to: 
1.  Pool and cabana; 
2.  Majority (51%) masonry materials in combination including brick, stone or hard coat stucco; 
3.  Enhanced landscaping; 
4.  Clubhouse with meeting rooms and/or exercise facilities; 
5.  Significant recreational opportunities - swimming pool(s), water park, lighted tennis courts, basketball courts, playground, tot lots, baseball field, soccer/football field, walking track with exercise stations; 
6.  Benches, architectural lighting, bike racks, and gazebos; 
7.  Ponds/enhanced detention facilities; 
8.  Mixture of Uses within the development; and 
9.  Trails. 
b.  Projects are eligible for density bonuses based on the following: 

 
  
Other regulations. The headings below contain provisions applicable to the R-3 District: 
Chapter 2 Zoning Regulations 
Chapter 3 Building Code Regulations 
Chapter 4 Subdivision Regulations 
Chapter 5 Flood Damage Prevention 
Chapter 6 Tree Protection and Landscape Ordinance 
Chapter 7 Signs 
Chapter 8 Uniform Roadway Addressing System 
Chapter 9 Condition and Use of Commercial and Industrial Buildings 
Chapter 10 Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control 
Chapter 11 Stormwater Management 
Chapter 12 Stream Buffer Protection 
Chapter 13 Enterprise Zones 
Chapter 14 Overlay Districts 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 3(Exh. C), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2066. - R-4 Multifamily Development District. 
District scope and intent. Regulations set forth in this Section are the R-4 District regulations. Article D should be consulted to determine uses and minimum standards for uses allowed by Administrative Permit or Use Permit. The R-4 District is intended to provide land areas devoted to high density residential areas of single family, two-family and multifamily dwellings. The district also provides for closely related uses. 
Use regulations. Within the R-4 District, land and structures shall be used in accordance with standards herein. Any use not specifically designated as a permitted use in this section or as a use allowed by Administrative Permit or Use Permit shall be prohibited. 
(a)  Permitted uses. Structures and land may be used for only the following purposes: 
(1)  Single-family detached dwelling. 
(2)  Two-family dwellings. 
(3)  Multi-family dwellings. 
(4)  Family daycare home. 
a.  Home occupation license required. 
(b)  Accessory uses. 
(1)  Accessory uses and structures: 
a.  Accessory uses and structures incidental to any permitted use are allowed as defined by Section 10-2027, Accessory uses and structures. 
b.  Accessory uses and structures incidental to any permitted use is allowed including but not limited to pools, cabanas, clubhouses, recreational fields, carwashes, dog parks, and any other common areas 
c.  Revival tents are allowed via an administrative permit accessory to an existing church, temple or place of worship. 
d.  For sale, for rent, or for lease signs are allowed in accordance with sign regulations found in Chapter 7, Signs. 
(c)  Uses permitted through administrative permit. The following uses may be permitted per the procedures and standards set forth in Article D, Section 10-2081 et seq. in the R-4 District: 
(1)  10-2089. Alternative antenna support structure. 
(2)  10-2090. Amateur radio antenna. 
(3)  10-2093. Community garden, landscaping business, plant nursery, or garden center with indoor retail component. 
(4)  10.2094. Driving range (not associated with a golf course). 
(5)  10-2096. Film production. 
(6)  10-2098. Golf course. 
(7)  10-2099. Outdoor event, small in conjunction with certain institutional uses or for the benefit of charity. 
(8)  10-2100. Recreational court, private. 
(9)  10-2103. Relocated residential structure. 
(10)  10-2109. Swimming pool, private. 
(11)  10-2112. Temporary structures. 
(12)  10-2113. Utility substations. 
(13)  10-2108. Senior housing. 
(d)  Uses permitted through use permit only. The following uses may be permitted per the procedures and standards set forth in Article D, Section 10-2115 et seq. in the R-4 District: 
(1)  10-2119. Amateur radio antenna to exceed the administrative permit height. 
(2)  10-2121. Antenna tower and associated structures (radio, T.V., microwave broadcasting, etc.). 
(3)  10-2124. Cemetery and/or mausoleum (human or pet). 
(4)  10-2125. Church, temple, or place of worship. 
(5)  10.2130. Habitable accessory structure. 
(6)  10-2140. School, private or special. 
(7)  10-2144. Stadium (offsite) associated with a private school. 
(e)  Development Standards. 
a.  Height regulations - No building shall exceed 40 feet in height. 
b.  Minimum front yard setback - 35 feet 
c.  Minimum side yard setback 
•  Single family dwelling - 6 feet 
•  Two or more family dwelling - 6 feet (lots less than 17,000 sq. ft.) 
•  Two or more family dwelling - 6 feet (lots less than 20,000 sq. ft.) 
d.  Minimum rear yard setback - 15 feet 
e.  Minimum lot area 
•  Single family - 8,500 sq. ft. 
•  Two-family - 12,000 sq. ft. 
•  Multifamily — 20,000 sq. ft. 
f.  Minimum width of lot frontage or width at building line 
•  Single family — 50 feet 
•  Two-family — 50 feet 
g.  Minimum heated floor area 
•  1,000 square feet on ground level for less than two-story 
•  1,100 square feet for two-story or more than two-story with 800 square feet on ground floor 
h.  Minimum accessory structure requirements. Accessory structures may be located in the rear or side yards only but shall not be located within a minimum yard. 
i.  Multifamily conservation. Multifamily, townhome, and condominium projects shall be required to place in a conservation easement which will be dedicated to the HOA and/or property maintenance firm, prior to the issuance of a land disturbance permit a minimum of 25 percent of the project area reserved as open and/or green space when developing undeveloped property. New projects on undeveloped property must include seven of the required amenities. The regulations set forth in this section supplement regulations for the R-4 Multifamily Residential District regulations set forth elsewhere in this chapter. 
1.  Amenity package requirements: 
a.  Multi-family, town home and condominium projects shall include an amenity package of two or more amenities. Amenities shall be defined as "a feature that increases the attractiveness or value of a project." These amenities shall include but not be limited to: 
1.  Pool and cabana; 
2.  Majority (51%) masonry materials in combination to include brick, stone, or hard coat stucco; 
3.  Enhanced landscaping; 
4.  Clubhouse with meeting rooms and/or exercise facilities; 
5.  Significant recreational opportunities - swimming pool(s), water park, lighted tennis courts, basketball courts, playground, tot lots, baseball field, soccer/football field, walking track with exercise stations; 
6.  Benches, architectural lighting, bike racks, and gazebos; 
7.  Ponds/enhanced detention facilities; 
8.  Mixture of Uses within the development; and 
9.  Trails. 
b.  Projects are eligible for density bonuses based on the following: 

 
  
Other regulations. The headings below contain provisions applicable to the R-4 District: 
Chapter 2 Zoning Regulations 
Chapter 3 Building Code Regulations 
Chapter 4 Subdivision Regulations 
Chapter 5 Flood Damage Prevention 
Chapter 6 Tree Protection and Landscape Ordinance 
Chapter 7 Signs 
Chapter 8 Uniform Roadway Addressing System 
Chapter 9 Condition and Use of Commercial and Industrial Buildings 
Chapter 10 Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control 
Chapter 11 Stormwater Management 
Chapter 12 Stream Buffer Protection 
Chapter 13 Enterprise Zones 
Chapter 14 Overlay Districts 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 3(Exh. C), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2067. - Reserved. 
Sec. 10-2068. - CUP Community Unit Plan District. 
CUP District scope and intent. Regulations in this section are the CUP District regulations. Article D should be consulted to determine uses and minimum standards for uses allowed by Administrative Permit or Use Permit. The CUP District identifies land areas for a variety of housing types within a planned community setting. 
The CUP District is intended to: 
(a)  Encourage the development of large tracts of land as planned communities. 
(b)  Encourage flexible and creative concepts in site planning. 
(c)  Preserve the natural amenities of the land by encouraging scenic and functional open areas. 
(d)  Provide for an efficient use of land. 
(e)  Provide a stable residential environment compatible with surrounding residential areas. 
(f)  Protect neighboring properties by requiring larger peripheral lots adjacent to larger lot developments. 
Use regulations. Within the CUP District, land and structures shall be used in accordance with standards herein. Any use not specifically designated as a permitted use in this section or as a use allowed by Administrative Permit or Use Permit shall be prohibited. 
(a)  Permitted uses. Structures and land may be used for only the following purposes: 
(1)  Community facilities. 
(2)  Family daycare home, group daycare, and child care learning center located in a multi-family or community building, or church, temple or place of worship. 
a.  Family day requires a home occupation license. 
b.  Group daycare: 
•  Facility shall locate no closer than 500 feet to another group daycare. 
•  Provides care for seven to 18 children under the age of 18. 
•  Hours of operation shall be limited to Monday through Friday from 6:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. 
•  Copies of all applicable state and federal permits shall be provided to the Department of Planning and Community Development prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy and business license. 
•  Provide minimum landscape strips, buffers, and improvement setbacks as specified for MIX when adjacent to residential. 
•  Provide a minimum six-foot high decorative wrought or aluminum fence interior to required landscape strips and/or buffers around the periphery of the yard used for the play area. 
•  Play areas shall be located within the rear or side yards. 
•  No parking allowed in the front yard. 
•  Driveway design shall permit vehicles to exit the property in a forward direction. 
c.  Childcare learning center: 
•  Facility shall locate no closer than 1,000 feet to another childcare learning center. 
•  Provides care for 19 or more children under the age of 18. 
•  Hours of operation shall be limited to Monday through Friday from 6:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. 
•  Copies of all applicable state and federal permits shall be provided to the Department of Planning and Community Development prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy and business license. 
•  Provide minimum landscape strips, buffers, and improvement setbacks as specified for MIX when adjacent to residential. 
•  Provide a minimum six-foot high decorative wrought or aluminum fence interior to required landscape strips and/or buffers around the periphery of the yard used for the play area. 
•  Play areas shall be located within the rear or side yards. 
•  No parking allowed in the front yard. 
•  Driveway design shall permit vehicles to exit the property in a forward direction. 
(3)  Funeral home. 
(4)  Habitable accessory structure: 
a.  See Section 10-2130 for standards. 
(5)  Multi-family residential. 
(6)  Single-family detached dwelling. 
(7)  Single-family townhouse, attached in structures containing no more than ten dwelling units. 
(8)  Two-family dwelling. 
(b)  Accessory uses. A structure or land may be used for uses customarily incidental to any permitted use and a dwelling may be used for a home occupation. Retail and service uses, and clubs accessory to recreation facilities are allowed subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  Accessory retail and service uses shall be located wholly within a building with a majority of the floor area designed for recreation uses. No outdoor advertising is allowed. 
(2)  Retail and service uses shall be limited to convenience retail and service establishments such as pro shops and personal services. Restaurants accessory to a club are allowed. 
(3)  Temporary storage pods are intended for a limited period of time and not for permanent storage. 
(4)  Revival tents are allowed via an administrative permit accessory to an existing church, temple or place of worship. 
(5)  For sale, for rent, or for lease signs are allowed in accordance with sign regulations found in Chapter 7, Signs. 
(c)  Uses permitted through administrative permit. The following uses may be permitted per the procedures and standards set forth in Article D, Section 10-2081 et seq. in the CUP District: 
(1)  10-2089. Alternative antenna support structure. 
(2)  10-2090. Amateur radio antenna. 
(3)  10-2093. Community garden, landscaping business, plant nursery, or garden center with indoor retail component. 
(4)  10-2094. Driving Range (not associated with a golf course). 
(5)  10.2095. Film production. 
(6)  10-2098. Golf course. 
(7)  10-2099. Outdoor event, small in conjunction with certain institutional uses or for the benefit of charity. 
(8)  10-2101. Recreational court, private. 
(9)  10-2103. Relocated residential structure. 
(10)  10-2105. Roadside produce stands. 
(11)  10-2106. Roadside vending. 
(12)  10-2107. Seasonal business use. 
(13)  10-2109. Swimming pool, private. 
(14)  10-2112. Temporary structures. 
(15)  10-2113. Utility substations. 
(d)  Uses permitted through use permit only. The following uses may be permitted per the procedures and standards set forth in Article D, Section 10-2115 et seq. in the CUP District: 
(1)  10-2119. Amateur radio antenna to exceed the administrative permit height. 
(2)  10-2121. Antenna tower and associated structure (radio, T.V., microwave broadcasting, etc.). 
(3)  10-2124. Cemetery and/or mausoleum (human or pet). 
(4)  10-2125. Church, temple or place of worship. 
(5)  10-2140. School, private or special. 
(6)  10-2144. Stadium (offsite) associated with a private school. 
(e)  Development plan. The development plan shall be the zoning control document for features depicted graphically. The site plan requirement applicable to rezoning requests shall be adhered to for CUP rezoning requests. Administrative guidelines for preparing site plans are available from the Director of the Planning and Community Development Department. A site plan shall become the development plan if the request to rezone is approved without changes or additions. If the approval by the City Council differs, in any way, from what is depicted on the site plan submitted for the purpose of seeking rezoning, a revised plan must be certified by the Planning and Community Development Department before development related permits may be issued. A site plan or development plan shall not substitute for plans which are required as a prerequisite for applying for development related permits. The location of all use areas shall be shown on the development plan, and location on the ground shall be as shown on the development plan. 
(f)  Development standards. 
a.  Height regulations - No single family residential dwellings or accessory structures shall exceed 40 feet in height. The height of all other structures are as approved per the conditions of zoning. 
b.  Minimum lot area per unit — 6,000 sq. ft. 
c.  Minimum CUP size - 10 contiguous acres 
d.  Maximum density 
•  Multifamily - 9.0 units per gross acre 
•  Single family - 5.0 units per gross acre 
e.  Minimum width of lot frontage or width at building line - None, unless specified in conditions 
f.  Minimum CUP development frontage - 35 feet 
g.  Minimum lot frontage - 20 feet adjoining a street 
h.  Minimum heated floor area per unit - As specified in conditions 
i.  Minimum perimeter setback — Entire CUP Development — As specified in conditions 
j.  Minimum interior setbacks — Single family Lots 
1.  Minimum front yard - As specified in conditions 
2.  Minimum side yard - As specified in conditions 
3.  Minimum rear yard - As specified in conditions 
k.  Minimum accessory structure requirements 
Single Family and Two Family Uses - Accessory structures may be located within the side or rear yards subject to perimeter and minimum yard setbacks. 
Multi-family Uses - Accessory structures may be located in the rear yard only but shall not be located within a minimum yard. 
l.  Minimum building separation - More than one dwelling per lot 
All building separations shall be as specified by the International Code Council. 
m.  Conservation subdivision - The development standards of a conservation subdivision shall be in accordance with Chapter 4 of the East Point Subdivision Regulations. 
n.  Other minimum standards: 
1.  Setbacks and roof lines shall be varied by at least two feet so that no more than three adjoining dwelling units within a single building shall have the same front setback or roof line. 
2.  Common outdoor area consisting of not less than 550 square feet per unit shall be provided for recreation in all developments of 20 or more acres. 
3.  Land area proposed for open space or recreation shall be allocated among the use areas in proportion to the ratio of a neighborhood population to the total CUP population so that acreage devoted to open space is reasonably accessible to all residents. 
4.  Multi-family uses shall not be located along the perimeter except adjacent to or across a street from an existing multifamily or more intense use. 
5.  Agreements, covenants, declarations and other contracts which govern the use, maintenance, and protection of a CUP development among its owner's areas shall be part of the official zoning file, and changes thereto shall have no force and effect until a copy has been provided to the Director of the Planning and Community Development Department. 
6.  Multi-family units shall not exceed 25 percent of the total number of dwelling units in a CUP. 
p.  Multifamily conservation. Multifamily, townhome, and condominium projects shall be required to place in a conservation easement which will be dedicated to the HOA and/or property maintenance firm, prior to the issuance of a land disturbance permit a minimum of 25 percent of the project area reserved as open and/or green space when developing undeveloped property. New projects on undeveloped property must include seven of the required amenities. The regulations set forth in this section supplement regulations for the R-4 Multifamily Residential District regulations set forth elsewhere in this chapter. 
1.  Amenity package requirements: 
a.  Multi-family, town home and condominium projects shall include an amenity package of two or more amenities. Amenities shall be defined as "a feature that increases the attractiveness or value of a project." These amenities shall include but not be limited to: 
1.  Pool and cabana; 
2.  Majority (51%) masonry materials in combination to include brick, stone, or hard coat stucco; 
3.  Enhanced landscaping; 
4.  Clubhouse with meeting rooms and/or exercise facilities; 
5.  Significant recreational opportunities — golf course, swimming pool(s), water park, lighted tennis courts, basketball courts, playground, tot lots, baseball field, soccer/football field, walking track with exercise stations; 
6.  Benches, architectural lighting, bike racks, and gazebos; 
7.  Ponds/enhanced detention facilities; 
8.  Mixture of Uses within the development; and 
9.  Trails 
b.  Projects are eligible for density bonuses based on the following: 

 
  
Other regulations. The headings below contain some additional, but not all, provisions applicable to the CUP District: 
Chapter 2 Zoning Regulations 
Chapter 3 Building Code Regulations 
Chapter 4 Subdivision Regulations 
Chapter 5 Flood Damage Prevention 
Chapter 6 Tree Protection and Landscape Ordinance 
Chapter 7 Signs 
Chapter 8 Uniform Roadway Addressing System 
Chapter 9 Condition and Use of Commercial and Industrial Buildings 
Chapter 10 Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control 
Chapter 11 Stormwater Management 
Chapter 12 Stream Buffer Protection 
Chapter 13 Enterprise Zones 
Chapter 14 Overlay Districts 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 3(Exh. C), 9-19-16 ; Ord. No. 088-018 , § 2, 4-16-18) 
Sec. 10-2069. - R-T Residential Townhouse District. 
R-T District scope and intent. Regulations set forth in this section are the R-T District regulations. Article D should be consulted to determine uses and minimum standards for uses allowed by Administrative Permit or Use Permit. The R-T District is intended to provide for medium to high density residential uses with residential conveniences. 
Use regulations. Within the R-T District, land and structures shall be used in accordance with standards herein. Any use not specifically designated as a permitted use in this section or as a use allowed by Administrative Permit or Use Permit shall be prohibited. 
(a)  Permitted uses. Structures and land may be used for only the following purposes: 
(1)  Single-familytownhouse dwellings; attached in structures containing no more than ten (10) dwelling units. 
(2)  Family daycare home. 
a.  Home occupation license required 
(b)  Accessory uses. 
(1)  Accessory uses and structures: 
a.  Accessory uses and structures incidental to any permitted use are allowed as defined by Section 10-2027 Accessory uses and structures. 
b.  Accessory uses and structures incidental to any permitted use is allowed including but not limited to pools, cabanas, clubhouses, recreational fields, carwashes, dog parks, and any other common areas. 
c.  Revival tents are allowed via an administrative permit accessory to an existing church, temple or place of worship. 
d.  Temporary storage pods are intended for a limited period of time and not for permanent storage. 
e.  For sale, for rent, or for lease signs are allowed in accordance with sign regulations found in Chapter 7, Signs. 
(c)  Uses permitted through administrative permit. The following uses may be permitted per the procedures and standards set forth in Article D, Section 10-2081 et seq. in the R-T District: 
(1)  10-2089. Alternative antenna support structure. 
(2)  10-2090. Amateur radio antenna. 
(3)  10-2093. Community gardens, landscaping business, plant nursery, or garden center with indoor retail component.. 
(4)  10.2094. Driving Range (not associated with a golf course). 
(5)  10-2096. Film production. 
(6)  10-2098. Golf course. 
(7)  10-2099. Outdoor event, small in conjunction with certain institutional uses or for the benefit of charity. 
(8)  10-2101. Recreational court, private. 
(9)  10-2109. Swimming pool, private. 
(10)  10-2112. Temporary structures. 
(11)  10-2113. Utility substation. 
(d)  Uses permitted through use permit only. The following uses may be permitted per the procedures and standards set forth in Article D, Section 10-2115 et seq. in the R-T District: 
(1)  10-2119. Amateur radio antenna to exceed the administrative permit height. 
(2)  10-2121. Antenna tower and associated structure (radio, T.V., microwave broadcasting, etc.). 
(e)  Development standards. 
a.  Height regulations - No building shall exceed 35 feet in height. 
b.  Minimum front yard - 10 feet 
c.  Minimum side yard — 
(A)  10 feet adjacent to interior lot lines 
(B)  10 feet adjacent to street 
d.  Minimum rear yard - 10 feet 
e.  Minimum lot area - 3,000 square feet 
f.  Minimum width of lot frontage or width at building line - 30 feet 
g.  Minimum heated floor area per unit - 500 square feet 
h.  Minimum accessory structure requirements. Accessory structures may be located in the rear or side yards only but shall not be located within a minimum yard. 
i.  Multifamily conservation. The regulations set forth in this section supplement regulations for the R-T Residential-townhouse District regulations set forth elsewhere in this chapter. 
1.  Amenity package requirements: 
a.  Multi-family, town home and condominium projects shall include an amenity package of two or more amenities. Amenities shall be defined as "a feature that increases the attractiveness or value of a project." These amenities shall include but not be limited to: 
1.  Pool and cabana; 
2.  Majority (51%) masonry materials in combination to include brick, stone, or hard coat stucco; 
3.  Enhanced landscaping; 
4.  Clubhouse with meeting rooms and/or exercise facilities; 
5.  Significant recreational opportunities - swimming pool(s), water park, lighted tennis courts, basketball courts, playground, tot lots, baseball field, soccer/football field, walking track with exercise stations; 
6.  Benches, architectural lighting, bike racks, and gazebos; 
7.  Ponds/enhanced detention facilities; 
8.  Mixture of Uses within the development; and 
9.  Trails 
b.  Projects are eligible for density bonuses based on the following: 

 
  
Development on undeveloped land: Multi-family, town home, and condominium projects shall be required to place in a conservation easement which will be dedicated to the HOA and/or property maintenance firm, prior to the issuance of a land disturbance permit a minimum of 25 percent of the project area reserved as open and/or green space when developing on undeveloped property. New projects on undeveloped property must include seven of the required amenities. 
Other regulations. The headings below contain provisions applicable to the R-T District. 
Chapter 2 Zoning Regulations 
Chapter 3 Building Code Regulations 
Chapter 4 Subdivision Regulations 
Chapter 5 Flood Damage Prevention 
Chapter 6 Tree Protection and Landscape Ordinance 
Chapter 7 Signs 
Chapter 8 Uniform Roadway Addressing System 
Chapter 9 Condition and Use of Commercial and Industrial Buildings 
Chapter 10 Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control 
Chapter 11 Stormwater Management 
Chapter 12 Stream Buffer Protection 
Chapter 13 Enterprise Zones 
Chapter 14 Overlay Districts 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 3(Exh. C), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2070. - E-I Educational Institutional District. 
E-I District scope and intent. Regulations set forth in this Section are the E-I District regulations. Article D should be consulted to determine uses and minimum standards for uses allowed by Administrative Permit or Use Permit. The E-I District is intended to provide an area for the establishment and maintenance of educational and related institutional functions and activities which would be compatible with the existing educational facilities within the area. 
Use regulations. Within the E-I District, land and structures shall be used in accordance with standards herein. Any use not specifically designated as a permitted use in this section or as a use allowed by Administrative Permit or Use Permit shall be prohibited. 
(a)  Permitted uses. Structures and land may be used for only the following purpose: 
(1)  Childcare learning center. 
a.  Facility shall locate no closer than 1,000 feet to another childcare learning center. 
b.  Provides care for 19 or more children under the age of 18. 
c.  Hours of operation shall be limited to Monday through Friday from six a.m. to seven p.m. 
d.  Copies of all applicable state and federal permits shall be provided to the Department of Planning and Community Development prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy and business license. 
e.  Provide minimum landscape strips, buffers, and improvement setbacks as specified for MIX when adjacent to residential. 
f.  Provide a minimum six-foot high decorative wrought iron or aluminum fence interior to any required landscape strips and/or buffers around the periphery of the yard used for the play area. 
g.  Play areas shall be located within the rear or side yards. 
h.  No parking allowed in the front yard. 
i.  Driveway design shall permit vehicles to exit the property in a forward direction. 
(2)  Dwellings. 
a.  Single family townhouse dwellings attached in structures containing no more than ten dwelling units. 
(3)  Education. 
a.  College and university. 
b.  K-12 private or special. 
c.  Technical school. 
d.  Vocational schools. 
(4)  Family daycare home. 
a.  Home occupation license required. 
(5)  Group daycare. 
a.  Facility shall locate no closer than 500 feet to another group daycare. 
b.  Provides care for seven to 18 children under the age of 18 
c.  Hours of operation shall be limited to Monday through Friday from six a.m. to seven p.m. 
d.  Copies of all applicable state and federal permits shall be provided to the Department of Planning and Community Development prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy and business license. 
e.  Provide minimum landscape strips, buffers, and improvement setbacks as specified for MIX when adjacent to residential. 
f.  Provide a minimum 6-foot high wrought iron or aluminum interior to any required landscape strips and/or buffers around the periphery of the yard used for the play area. 
g.  Play areas shall be located within the rear or side yards. 
h.  No parking allowed in the front yard. 
i.  Driveway design shall permit vehicles to exit the property in a forward direction. 
(6)  Laundromats and dry cleaning collection stations limited to no more than 2,500 square feet. 
(7)  Office, business. 
a.  Automobile/truck rental, lease, and equipment sales office is prohibited. 
(8)  Office, professional. 
(9)  Restaurants, bars, grills, taverns, cafes, drive-ins, fast-food, facilities and similar eating and drinking establishments. 
a.  Drive-thru restaurants shall not locate closer than 1,520 feet from another drive-thru restaurant or similar eating or drinking establishment. 
b.  Drive-thru restaurant lanes shall be designed in such a way as to be screened from the public right of way through elevation differences, landscaping, arbors, trellises, canopies, walls and other architectural features used to reduce the visual presence of drive-thru operations. 
c.  Drive-thru windows are prohibited on the front of the building directly facing a street frontage. 
(b)  Accessory uses. 
(1)  Accessory uses and structures: 
a.  Accessory uses and structures incidental to any permitted use are allowed as defined by Section 10-2027 Accessory uses and structures. 
b.  Accessory uses and structures incidental to any permitted use is allowed including but not limited to performing arts buildings, gymnasiums, student housing associated with school, recreational fields, dining halls, swimming pools, recreational fields and courts, and student center. 
c.  For sale, for rent, or for lease signs are allowed in accordance with sign regulations found in Chapter 7, Signs. 
(c)  Uses permitted through administrative permit. The following uses may be permitted per the procedures and standards set forth in Article D, Section 10-2081 et seq. in the E-I District: 
(1)  10-2089. Alternative antenna support structure. 
(2)  10-2090. Amateur radio antenna. 
(3)  10.2094. Driving range (not associated with a golf course). 
(4)  10-2096. Film production. 
(5)  10-2098. Golf course. 
(6)  10.2099. Outdoor Event, small. 
(7)  10-2101. Recreational court, private. 
(8)  10-2105. Roadside produce stand. 
(9)  10-2106. Roadside vending. 
(10)  10-2108. Senior housing. 
(11)  10-2109. Swimming pool, private. 
(12)  10-2112. Temporary structures. 
(13)  10-2113. Utility substations. 
(d)  Uses permitted through use permit only. The following uses may be permitted per the procedures and standards set forth in Article D, Section 10-2115 et seq. in the E-I District: 
(1)  10-2117. Adult day center. 
(2)  10-2119. Amateur radio antenna to exceed the administrative permit height. 
(3)  10-2122. Assisted living facility. 
(4)  10-2124. Cemetery and/or mausoleum (human or pet). 
(5)  10-2125. Church, temple, or place of worship. 
(6)  10-2127. Community living arrangement. 
(7)  10-2133. Medical related lodging. 
(8)  10-2134. Outdoor event, large. 
(9)  10-2135. Personal care home. 
(10)  10-2138. Rehabilitation center. 
(11)  10-2144. Stadium (offsite) associated with a private school. 
(e)  Development standards. 
a.  Height regulations - 40 feet 
b.  Minimum lot area - 10,000 square feet 
c.  Minimum width of lot frontage or width at building line — 75 feet 
d.  Minimum heated floor area per unit - Single family - 1,000 square feet 
e.  Minimum front yard - 45 feet 
f.  Minimum side yard - 8 feet 
g.  Minimum rear yard - 30 feet 
h.  Minimum accessory structure requirements. Accessory structures may be located in rear or side yards but shall not be located within a minimum rear yard except that detached garages may locate along a rear lot line between zero and seven feet with an encroachment and maintenance easement allowing a minimum of seven feet of access to the garage. 
i.  Multifamily conservation. The regulations set forth in this section supplement regulations for the R-T Residential Townhouse District regulations set forth elsewhere in this chapter. 
1.  Amenity package requirements: 
a.  Multi-family, town home and condominium projects shall include an amenity package of two or more amenities. Amenities shall be defined as "a feature that increases the attractiveness or value of a project." These amenities shall include but not be limited to: 
1.  Pool and cabana; 
2.  Majority (51%) masonry materials in combination to include brick, stone, or hard coat stucco; 
3.  Enhanced landscaping; 
4.  Clubhouse with meeting rooms and/or exercise facilities; 
5.  Significant recreational opportunities - swimming pool(s), water park, lighted tennis courts, basketball courts, playground, tot lots, baseball field, soccer/football field, walking track with exercise stations; 
6.  Benches, architectural lighting, bike racks, and gazebos; 
7.  Ponds/enhanced detention facilities; 
8.  Mixture of Uses within the development; and 
9.  Trails. 
b.  Projects are eligible for density bonuses based on the following: 

 
  
Development on undeveloped land: Multi-family, town home, and condominium projects shall be required to place in a conservation easement which will be dedicated to the HOA and/or property maintenance firm, prior to the issuance of a land disturbance permit a minimum of 2) percent of the project area reserved as open and/or green space when developing on undeveloped property. New projects on undeveloped property must include seven of the required amenities. 
Other regulations. The headings below contain some additional, but not necessarily all, provisions applicable to the E-I District: 
Chapter 2 Zoning Regulations 
Chapter 3 Building Code Regulations 
Chapter 4 Subdivision Regulations 
Chapter 5 Flood Damage Prevention 
Chapter 6 Tree Protection and Landscape Ordinance 
Chapter 7 Signs 
Chapter 8 Uniform Roadway Addressing System 
Chapter 9 Condition and Use of Commercial and Industrial Buildings 
Chapter 10 Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control 
Chapter 11 Stormwater Management 
Chapter 12 Stream Buffer Protection 
Chapter 13 Enterprise Zones 
Chapter 14 Overlay Districts 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 3(Exh. C), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2071. - M-I Medical Institutional District. 
M-I District scope and intent. Regulations set forth in this Section are the M-I District regulations. Article D should be consulted to determine uses and minimum standards for uses allowed by Administrative Permit or Use Permit. The M-I District is intended to provide for the establishment and maintenance of high quality medical and institutional uses, structures, facilities and accessory uses. 
Use regulations. Within the M-I District, land and structures shall be used in accordance with standards herein. Any use not specifically designated as a permitted use in this section or as a use allowed by Administrative Permit or Use Permit shall be prohibited. 
(a)  Permitted uses. Structures and land may be used for only the following purpose: 
(1)  Adult day center. 
a.  In accordance with standards, Section 10-2117. 
(2)  Childcare learning center. 
a.  Facility shall locate no closer than 1,000 feet to another childcare learning center. 
b.  Provides care for 19 or more children under the age of 18. 
c.  Hours of operation shall be limited to Monday through Friday from 6:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. 
d.  Copies of all applicable state and federal permits shall be provided to the Department of Planning and Community Development prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy and business license. 
e.  Provide minimum landscape strips, buffers, and improvement setbacks as specified for MIX when adjacent to residential. 
f.  Provide a minimum six-foot high decorative wrought iron or aluminum fence interior to any required landscape strips and/or buffers around the periphery of the yard used for the play area. 
g.  Play areas shall be located within the rear or side yards. 
h.  No parking allowed in the front yard. 
i.  Driveway design shall permit vehicles to exit the property in a forward direction. 
(3)  Dwellings. 
a.  Single-family detached dwellings. 
b.  Single-family townhouse dwellings; attached in structures containing no more than ten dwelling units. 
c.  Multi-family dwellings. 
d.  Two-family dwellings. 
(4)  Family daycare home. 
a.  Home occupation license required. 
(5)  Funeral home. 
(6)  Group daycare. 
a.  Facility shall locate no closer than 500 feet to another childcare learning center. 
b.  Provides care for seven to 18 children less than 18 years of age. 
c.  Hours of operation shall be limited to Monday through Friday from 6:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. 
d.  Copies of all applicable state and federal permits shall be provided to the Department of Planning and Community Development prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy and business license. 
e.  Provide minimum landscape strips, buffers, and improvement setbacks as specified for MIX when adjacent to residential. 
f.  Provide a minimum six-foot high decorative wrought iron or aluminum fence interior to any required landscape strips and/or buffers around the periphery of the yard used for the play area. 
g.  Play areas shall be located within the rear or side yards. 
h.  No parking allowed in the front yard. 
i.  Driveway design shall permit vehicles to exit the property in a forward direction. 
(7)  Hospitals and clinics, chiropractic, dental, medical, optical dental, osteopathic and similar facilities for humans. 
(8)  Laundromats and dry cleaning collection stations limited to no more than 2,500 square feet. 
(9)  Office, professional. 
(10)  Office, business. 
a.  Automobile/truck rental, lease, and equipment sales office is prohibited. 
(11)  Pharmacies. 
(12)  Private ambulance service. 
(13)  Restaurants, bars, grills, taverns, cafes, drive-ins, fast-food facilities and similar eating and drinking establishments. 
a.  Drive-thru restaurants shall not locate closer than 1,520 feet from another drive-thru restaurant or similar eating or drinking establishment. 
b.  Drive-thru restaurant lanes shall be designed in such a way as to be screened from the public right-of-way through elevation differences, landscaping, arbors, trellises, canopies, walls and other architectural features used to reduce the visual presence of drive-thru operations. 
c.  Drive-thru windows are prohibited on the front of the building directly facing a street frontage. 
(14)  School, private or special. 
a.  Minimum lot area shall be one acre. 
b.  If located adjacent to a single family detached dwelling district and/or AG-1 district used for single family, the minimum landscape strips, buffers, and improvement setbacks required for the MIX district when adjacent to residential shall be required. 
c.  Buildings and refuse areas shall not be located within 100 feet of an adjoining residential district and/or AG-1 district used for single family. 
d.  Active outdoor recreation areas shall not be located within 100 feet of an adjoining residential district or use. Recreational fields, such as playing fields, that accessory to the school do not require a separate use permit. 
e.  Parking areas shall not be located with 50 feet of any residential district and/or AG-1 district used for single family. 
f.  Student drop-off and vehicular turn-around facilities shall be provided on the site so that vehicles may re-enter the public street in a forward manner. 
g.  Permitted curb cut access shall not be from a local street. 
h.  In accordance with Article J, submit a noise study report as required in Section 10-2224.6. 
(15)  Senior housing. 
a.  In accordance with standard, Section 10-2108. 
(16)  Veterinary clinic/hospital or kennel. 
(b)  Accessory Uses. 
(1)  Accessory uses and structures: 
a.  Accessory uses and structures incidental to any permitted use are allowed as defined by Section 10-2027 Accessory uses and structures, for single-family detached uses. 
b.  Revival tents are allowed via an administrative permit accessory to an existing church, temple or place of worship. 
c.  Temporary storage pods are intended for a limited period of time and not for permanent storage. 
d.  For sale, for rent, or for lease signs are allowed in accordance with sign regulations found in Chapter 7, Signs. 
(c)  Uses permitted through administrative permit. The following uses may be permitted per the procedures and standards set forth in Article D, Section 10-2081 et seq. in the M-I District: 
(1)  10-2089. Alternative antenna support structure. 
(2)  10-2090. Amateur radio antenna. 
(3)  10-2094. Driving Range (not associated with a golf course). 
(4)  10-2096. Film production. 
(5)  10-2098. Golf course. 
(6)  10-2099. Outdoor event, small. 
(7)  10-2101. Recreational court, private. 
(8)  10-2105. Roadside produce. 
(9)  10-2106. Roadside vending. 
(10)  10-2107. Seasonal business use. 
(11)  10-2109. Swimming pool, private. 
(12)  10-2111. Temporary classroom. 
(13)  10-2112. Temporary structures 
(d)  Uses permitted through use permit only. The following uses may be permitted per the procedures and standards set forth in Article D, Section 10-2115 et seq. in the M-I District: 
(1)  10-2119. Amateur radio antenna to exceed the administrative permit height. 
(2)  10-2121. Antenna tower and associated structure (radio, T.V., microwave broadcasting, etc.). 
(3)  10-2122. Assisted living. 
(4)  10-2124. Cemetery and/or mausoleum (human or pet). 
(5)  10-2125. Church, temple or place of worship. 
(6)  10-2127. Community living arrangement. 
(7)  10-2133. Medical related lodging. 
(8)  10-2134. Outdoor event, large. 
(9)  10-2135. Personal care home. 
(10)  10-2136. Recreational fields. 
(11)  10-2138. Rehabilitation center. 
(12)  10-2143. Skywalks. 
(13)  10-2144. Stadium (offsite) associated with a private school. 
(e)  Development standards. 
a.  Height regulations 
•  Single-family - 35 feet 
•  Two-family - 40 feet 
•  Other permitted uses - 40 feet 
b.  Minimum lot area/i> 
•  Single-family - 8,500 square. feet. 
•  Two-family - 9,400 square feet 
•  Multifamily - 14,400 
•  Other permitted uses - 8,500 sq. ft. 
c.  Minimum width of lot frontage or width at building line 
•  Single-family - 60 feet 
•  Two-family - 60 feet 
•  Other Permitted Uses - 60 feet 
d.  Minimum heated floor area per unit 
•  Single-family - 1,000 square. feet 
•  Two-family - 700 square feet 
•  Multifamily - 1,800 square feet. two story or more w/1,050 square feet on ground floor 
•  Other permitted uses - 800 sq. ft. 
e.  Minimum front yard - 35 feet 
f.  Minimum side yard 
•  Single-family - 8 feet 
•  Two-family - 8 feet 
•  Other permitted uses - 8 feet 
g.  Minimum rear yard - 30 feet 
h.  Minimum accessory structure requirements 
a.  Accessory structures may be located in rear or side yards but shall not be located within a minimum rear yard except that detached garages may locate along a rear lot line between zero and seven feet with an encroachment and maintenance easement allowing a minimum of seven feet of access to the garage. 
i.  Multifamily conservation. The regulations set forth in this section supplement regulations for the R-T Residential-townhouse District regulations set forth elsewhere in this chapter. 
1.  Amenity Package Requirements: 
a.  Multi-family, town home and condominium projects shall include an amenity package of two (2) or more amenities. Amenities shall be defined as "a feature that increases the attractiveness or value of a project." These amenities shall include but not be limited to: 
1.  Pool and cabana; 
2.  Majority (51%) masonry materials in combination to include brick, stone, or stucco; 
3.  Enhanced landscaping; 
4.  Clubhouse with meeting rooms and/or exercise facilities; 
5.  Significant recreational opportunities - swimming pool(s), water park, lighted tennis courts, basketball courts, playground, tot lots, baseball field, soccer/football field, walking track with exercise stations; 
6.  Benches, architectural lighting, bike racks, and gazebos; 
7.  Ponds/enhanced detention facilities; 
8.  Mixture of Uses within the development; and 
9.  Trails. 
b.  Projects are eligible for density bonuses based on the following: 

 
Development on undeveloped land: Multi-family, townhome, and condominium projects shall be required to place in a conservation easement which will be dedicated to the HOA and/or property maintenance firm, prior to the issuance of a land disturbance permit a minimum of 25 percent of the project area reserved as open and/or green space when developing on undeveloped property. New projects on undeveloped property must include seven of the required amenities. 
Other regulations. The headings below contain some additional, but not necessarily all, provisions applicable to the M-I District: 
Chapter 2 Zoning Regulations 
Chapter 3 Building Code Regulations 
Chapter 4 Subdivision Regulations 
Chapter 5 Flood Damage Prevention 
Chapter 6 Tree Protection and Landscape Ordinance 
Chapter 7 Signs 
Chapter 8 Uniform Roadway Addressing System 
Chapter 9 Condition and Use of Commercial and Industrial Buildings 
Chapter 10 Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control 
Chapter 11 Stormwater Management 
Chapter 12 Stream Buffer Protection 
Chapter 13 Enterprise Zones 
Chapter 14 Overlay Districts 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 3(Exh. C), 9-19-16 ; Ord. No. 088-018 , § 3, 4-16-18) 
Sec. 10-2072. - C-1 Neighborhood Commercial District. 
C-1 District scope and intent. Regulations set forth in this section are the C-1 District regulations. Article D should be consulted to determine uses and minimum standards for uses allowed by Administrative Permit or Use Permit. The C-1 District is intended to provide those convenient shopping goods and services required by the neighboring residences. Land areas zoned C-1 are further intended to provide a transition between medium and moderate density dwelling areas and higher density residential areas or nonresidential areas. 
Use regulations. Within the C-1 District, land and structures shall be used in accordance with standards herein. Any use not specifically designated as a permitted use in this section or as a use allowed by Administrative Permit or Use Permit shall be prohibited. 
(a)  Permitted uses. Structures and land may be used for only the following purposes: 
(1)  Art galleries. 
(2)  Barber shops and beauty shops. 
(3)  Brewpubs (in accordance with Chapter 1, Alcoholic Beverages, Section 11-1000). 
(4)  Banks and other financial institutions, including loan and finance companies. 
(5)  Car wash, including hand car wash. 
a.  Establishment shall provide an oil water separator and a sand trap. 
b.  Establishment shall have no more than two washing bays. 
(6)  Childcare learning center. 
a.  Facility shall locate no closer than 1,000 feet to another childcare learning center. 
b.  Provides care for 19 or more children under the age of 18. 
c.  Hours of operation shall be limited to Monday through Friday from 6:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. 
d.  Copies of all applicable state and federal permits shall be provided to the Department of Planning and Community Development prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy and business license. 
e.  Provide minimum landscape strips, buffers, and improvement setbacks as specified for MIX when adjacent to residential. 
f.  Provide a minimum six-foot high decorative wrought iron or aluminum fence interior to required landscape strips and/or buffers around the periphery of the yard used for the play area. 
g.  Play areas shall be located within the rear or side yards. 
h.  No parking allowed in the front yard. 
i.  Driveway design shall permit vehicles to exit the property in a forward direction. 
(7)  Church, temple, or place of worship. 
a.  Where existing; no new church, temple or places of worship allowed. 
(8)  Convenience stores. 
(9)  Funeral home. 
(10)  Gas station minimart. 
a.  Vehicle repair is prohibited. 
b.  May not locate closer than 2,640 feet or one-half mile to the nearest location providing gas. 
(11)  Group daycare home. 
a.  Facility shall locate no closer than 500 feet to another group daycare. 
b.  Provides care for seven to 18 children under the age of 18. 
c.  Hours of operation shall be limited to Monday through Friday from 6:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. 
d.  Copies of all applicable state and federal permits shall be provided to the Department of Planning and Community Development prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy and business license. 
e.  Provide minimum landscape strips, buffers, and improvement setbacks as specified for MIX when adjacent to residential. 
f.  Provide a minimum six-foot high decorative wrought iron aluminum fence interior to any required landscape strips and/or buffers around the periphery of the yard used for the play area. 
g.  Play areas shall be located within the rear or side yards. 
h.  No parking allowed in the front yard. 
i.  Driveway design shall permit vehicles to exit the property in a forward direction. 
(12)  Food stores. 
(13)  Laundry and dry cleaning collection stations limited to no more than 2,500 square feet. 
(14)  Libraries. 
(15)  Office, business. 
a.  Automobile/truck rental, lease, and equipment sales office is prohibited. 
(16)  Office, professional. 
(17)  Pawn shop/title pawn and same or similar uses. 
a.  Prohibited. 
(18)  Restaurants, bars, grills, taverns, cafes, drive-ins, fast-food facilities and similar eating and drinking establishments. 
a.  Drive-thru restaurants shall not locate closer than 1,520 feet from another drive-thru restaurant or similar eating or drinking establishment. 
b.  Drive-thru restaurant lanes shall be designed in such a way as to be screened from the public right-of-way through elevation differences, landscaping, arbors, trellises, canopies, walls and other architectural features used to reduce the visual presence of drive-thru operations. 
c.  Drive-thru windows are prohibited on the front of the building directly facing a street frontage. 
(19)  Retail establishments, including catering establishments, delicatessens and bakeries. 
(20)  Retail sales, general merchandise. 
(21)  Retail sales, household. 
(22)  Retail sales, specialty. 
(23)  Studios, art, dance, photographer. 
(24)  Theatrical community center. 
(b)  Accessory uses. 
(1)  Accessory uses and structures: 
a.  Temporary storage pods are intended for a limited period of time and not for permanent storage. 
b.  For sale, for rent, or for lease signs are allowed in accordance with Chapter 7, Signs. 
e.  Revival tents are allowed via an Administrative Permit accessory to an existing church, temple or place of worship. 
(c)  Uses permitted through administrative permit. The following uses may be permitted per the procedures and standards set forth in Article D, Section 10-2081 et seq. in the C-1 District: 
(1)  10-2089. Alternative antenna support structure. 
(2)  10-2090. Amateur radio antenna. 
(3)  10-2092. Club. 
(4)  10-2093. Community garden, landscaping business, plant nursery, or garden center with indoor retail component. 
(5)  10-2094. Driving range (not associated with a golf course). 
(6)  10-2096. Film production. 
(7)  10-2097. Food trucks. 
(8)  10-2094. Golf course. 
(9)  10-2099. Outdoor event, small. 
(10)  10-2102. Recreational courts, public. 
(11)  10-2104. Revival tent. 
(12)  10-2105. Roadside produce stands. 
(13)  10-2106. Roadside vending. 
(14)  10-2107. Seasonal business use. 
(15)  10-2110. Swimming pool, public. 
(16)  10-2112. Temporary structures. 
(17)  10-2113. Utility substations (telephone, electric, or gas, etc.). 
(d)  Uses permitted through use permit only. The following uses may be permitted per the procedures and standards set forth in Article D, Section 10-2115 et seq. in the C-1 District: 
(1)  10-2119. Amateur radio antenna to exceed the administrative permit height. 
(2)  10-2120. Amphitheaters. 
(3)  10-2121. Antenna tower and associated structure (radio, T.V., microwave, broadcasting, etc.). 
(4)  10-2126. Commercial amusement, outdoor. 
(5)  10-2134. Outdoor event, large. 
(6)  10-2136. Recreational fields. 
(7)  10-2142. Self-storage/multi. 
(8)  10-2143. Skywalks. 
(e)  Development standards. 
a.  Height regulations - No building shall exceed 40 feet in height. 
b.  Minimum front yard - 20 feet 
c.  Minimum side yard 
•  5 feet adjacent to interior lot lines 
•  15 feet adjacent to street 
d.  Minimum rear yard - 20 feet 
e.  Minimum lot area - 7,500 square feet 
f.  Minimum width of lot frontage or width at building line - 30 feet 
g.  Minimum heated floor area per unit - 650 square feet 
h.  Minimum accessory structure requirements. Accessory structures may be located in the rear or side yards only but shall not be located within a minimum yard. 
Other regulations. The headings below contain provisions applicable to the C-1 District. 
Chapter 2 Zoning Regulations 
Chapter 3 Building Code Regulations 
Chapter 4 Subdivision Regulations 
Chapter 5 Flood Damage Prevention 
Chapter 6 Tree Protection and Landscape Ordinance 
Chapter 7 Signs 
Chapter 8 Uniform Roadway Addressing System 
Chapter 9 Condition and Use of Commercial and Industrial Buildings 
Chapter 10 Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control 
Chapter 11 Stormwater Management 
Chapter 12 Stream Buffer Protection 
Chapter 13 Enterprise Zones 
Chapter 14 Overlay Districts 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 3(Exh. C), 9-19-16 ; Ord. No. 088-018 , § 4, 4-16-18) 
Sec. 10-2073. - C-2 Central Business Commercial District. 
C-2 District scope and intent. Regulations set forth in this Section are the C-2 District regulations. Article D should be consulted to determine uses and minimum standards for uses allowed by Administrative Permit or Use Permit. The C-2 District is intended to provide those commercial goods and services which serve the entire community. 
Use regulations. Within the C-2 District, land and structures shall be used in accordance with standards herein. Any use not specifically designated as a permitted use in this section or as a use allowed by Administrative Permit or Use Permit shall be prohibited. 
(a)  Permitted uses. Structures and land may be used for only the following purposes: 
(1)  All uses allowed in C-1. 
(2)  Amusement, indoor commercial. 
(3)  Amusement, outdoor commercial 
(4)  Arcade, amusement. 
(5)  Artisan's workshop. 
(6)  Automobile/truck rental, lease and sales offices. 
a.  No vehicle/equipment storage in the minimum front yard.a 
(7)  Car wash, automatic, hand car wash, and self-service. 
a.  Establishment shall provide an oil water separator and a sand trap. 
b.  Establishment shall have no more than four washing bays. 
(8)  Automobile dealership, including repair and maintenance. 
a.  All repair and maintenance activities shall be carried on entirely within an enclosed building. 
(9)  Boat and trailers, sales and clinics and services. 
(10)  Commercial parking lots and parking garages. 
(11)  Country inn. 
a.  Lot area shall be a minimum of 5 acres. 
b.  A minimum of 6 guest rooms and a maximum of 30 rooms are permitted. 
c.  The Country Inn shall be owner occupied. 
d.  Permitted curb cut access shall be from a local road or higher road classification. 
e.  The establishment may provide meal services to guests. 
f.  Parking shall not be permitted within the minimum front yard setback. 
g.  The minimum landscape strip and buffer requirements for the MIX District as specified in Chapter 6 shall be required. 
h.  Parking requirements shall be the same as hotel/motel as specified in Article E. 
(12)  Dog day care facility. 
(13)  Hotel/motel. 
(14)  Movie theater. 
(15)  Museums. 
(16)  Nightclub. 
(17)  Office, business. 
(18)  Office, professional. 
(19)  Pawn Shop/Title Pawn and same or similar uses. 
a.  Prohibited. 
(20)  Pet shops and pet supply stores. 
(21)  Private ambulance and emergency medical services. 
(22)  Radio and television broadcasting stations, and telephone exchanges. 
(23)  Restaurants, bars, grills, taverns, cafes, drive-ins, fast-food facilities and similar eating and drinking establishments. 
a.  Drive-thru restaurants shall not locate closer than 1,520 feet from another drive-thru restaurant or similar eating or drinking establishment. 
b.  Drive-thru restaurant lanes shall be designed in such a way as to be screened from the public right of way through elevation differences, landscaping, arbors, trellises, canopies, walls and other architectural features used to reduce the visual presence of drive-thru operations. 
c.  Drive-thru windows are prohibited on the front of the building directly facing a street frontage. 
(24)  Retail sales of spirituous liquors. 
(25)  Retail sales, bulk merchandise. 
(26)  Retail establishments, including catering establishments, delicatessens and bakeries. 
(27)  Sporting goods stores and bicycle sales. 
(28)  Tasting room. 
(b)  Accessory uses. 
(1)  Accessory uses and structures: 
a.  Temporary storage pods are intended for a limited period of time and not for permanent storage. 
b.  For sale, for rent, or for lease signs are allowed in accordance with Chapter 7, Signs. 
c.  Revival tents are allowed via an Administrative Permit accessory to an existing church, temple or place of worship. 
(c)  Uses permitted through administrative permit. The following uses may be permitted per the procedures and standards set forth in Article D, Section 10-2081 et seq. in the C-2 District: 
(1)  10-2089. Alternative antenna support structure. 
(2)  10-2090. Amateur radio antenna. 
(3)  10-2092. Club. 
(4)  10-2093. Community garden, landscaping business, plant nursery, or garden center with indoor retail component. 
(5)  10-2094. Driving Range (not associated with a golf course). 
(6)  10-2096. Film production. 
(7)  10-2097. Food trucks. 
(8)  10-2098. Golf course. 
(9)  10-2099. Outdoor event, small. 
(10)  10-2102. Recreational courts, public. 
(11)  10-2104. Revival tent. 
(12)  10-2105. Roadside produce stands. 
(13)  10-2106. Roadside vending. 
(14)  10-2107. Seasonal business use. 
(15)  10-2110. Swimming pool, public. 
(16)  10-2112. Temporary structures. 
(17)  10-2114. Veterinary clinic/hospital or kennel. 
(d)  Uses permitted through use permit only. The following uses may be permitted per the procedures and standards set forth in Article D, Section 10-2115 et seq. in the C-2 District: 
(1)  10-2117. Adult day center. 
(2)  10-2119. Amateur radio antenna to exceed the administrative permit height. 
(3)  10-2120. Amphitheaters. 
(4)  10-2134. Outdoor event, large. 
(5)  10-2136. Recreational fields. 
(6)  10-2141. Self-storage/mini. 
(7)  10-2143. Skywalks. 
(8)  10-2146. Veterinary clinic/hospital or kennel outside. 
(E)  Development standards. 
a.  Height regulations - No building shall exceed forty (40) feet in height. 
b.  Minimum front yard - 20 feet 
c.  Minimum side yard 
•  5 feet adjacent to interior lot lines 
•  15 feet adjacent to street 
d.  Minimum rear yard - 20 feet 
e.  Minimum lot area - 7,500 square feet 
f.  Minimum width of lot frontage or width at building line - 30 feet 
g.  Minimum heated floor area per unit - 650 square feet 
h.  Minimum accessory structure requirements. Accessory structures may be located in the rear or side yards only but shall not be located within a minimum yard. 
Other regulations. The headings below contain provisions applicable to the C-2 District. 
Chapter 2 Zoning Regulations 
Chapter 3 Building Code Regulations 
Chapter 4 Subdivision Regulations 
Chapter 5 Flood Damage Prevention 
Chapter 6 Tree Protection and Landscape Ordinance 
Chapter 7 Signs 
Chapter 8 Uniform Roadway Addressing System 
Chapter 9 Condition and Use of Commercial and Industrial Buildings 
Chapter 10 Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control 
Chapter 11 Stormwater Management 
Chapter 12 Stream Buffer Protection 
Chapter 13 Enterprise Zones 
Chapter 14 Overlay Districts 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 3(Exh. C), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2074. - C-L Commercial Limited District. 
C-L District scope and intent. Regulations set forth in this section are the C-L District regulations. Article D should be consulted to determine uses and minimum standards for uses allowed by Administrative Permit or Use Permit. The C-L District is intended to provide an area for the establishment of high quality commercial and professional service enterprises free of conflicting and distracting uses. 
Use Regulations. Within the C-L District, land and structures shall be used in accordance with standards herein. Any use not specifically designated as a permitted use in this section or as a use allowed by Administrative Permit or Use Permit shall be prohibited. 
(a)  Permitted uses. Structures and land may be used for only the following purposes: 
(1)  Amusement, indoor commercial. 
(2)  Amusement, outdoor commercial. 
(3)  Art galleries. 
(4)  Banks and other financial institutions, including loan and finance companies. 
(5)  Brewpubs (Chapter 1, Alcoholic Beverages 11-1000). 
(6)  Country inn. 
a.  Lot area shall be a minimum of five acres.. 
b.  A minimum of 6 guest rooms and a maximum of 30 rooms are permitted. (See Section 10-2123, Bed and breakfast, for less than six guest rooms). 
c.  The country inn shall be owner occupied. 
d.  Permitted curb cut access shall be from a local road or higher road classification. 
e.  The establishment may provide meal services to guests. 
f.  Parking shall not be permitted within the minimum front yard setback. 
g.  The minimum landscape strip and buffer requirements for the MIX District as specified in Chapter 6 shall be required. 
h.  Parking requirements shall be the same as hotel/motel as specified in Article E. 
(7)  Food stores. 
(8)  Hotel/motel. 
(9)  Hotel, apartment. 
(10)  Libraries. 
(11)  Movie theater. 
(12)  Museums. 
(13)  Nightclub. 
(14)  Office, business. 
a.  Automobile/truck rental, lease, and equipment sales office is prohibited. 
(15)  Office, professional. 
(16)  Pawn shop/title pawn and same or similar uses. 
a.  Prohibited. 
(17)  Retail sales establishment, general merchandise. 
(18)  Retail sales, specialty. 
(19)  Restaurants, bars, grills, taverns, cafes, drive-ins, fast-food facilities and similar eating and drinking establishments. 
a.  Drive-thru restaurants shall not locate closer than 1,520 feet from another drive-thru restaurant or similar eating or drinking establishment. 
b.  Drive-thru restaurant lanes shall be designed in such a way as to be screened from the public right of way through elevation differences, landscaping, arbors, trellises, canopies, walls and other architectural features used to reduce the visual presence of drive-thru operations. 
c.  Drive-thru windows are prohibited on the front of the building directly facing a street frontage. 
(20)  Tasting room. 
(21)  Theatrical community center. 
(b)  Accessory Uses. 
(1)  Accessory uses and structures: 
a.  Accessory uses and structures incidental to any permitted use is allowed including but not limited to pools, or patio dining. 
b.  Temporary storage pods are intended for a limited period of time and not for permanent storage. 
c.  For sale, for rent, or for lease signs are allowed in accordance with Chapter 7, Signs. 
(c)  Uses permitted through administrative permit. The following uses may be permitted per the procedures and standards set forth in Article D, Section 10-2081 et seq. in the C-L District: 
(1)  10-2092. Club. 
(2)  10-2094. Driving range (not associated with a golf course). 
(3)  10-2096. Film production. 
(4)  10-2097. Food trucks. 
(5)  10-2098. Golf course. 
(6)  10-2099. Outdoor event, small. 
(7)  10-2105. Roadside produce stands. 
(8)  10-2106. Roadside vending. 
(9)  10-2107. Seasonal business use. 
(10)  10-2112. Temporary structures. 
(11)  10-2113. Utility substations (telephone, electric, or gas, etc.). 
(d)  Uses permitted through use permit only. The following uses may be permitted per the procedures and standards set forth in Article D, Section 10-2115 et seq. in the C-L District: 
(1)  10-2119. Amateur radio antenna to exceed the Administrative Permit Height. 
(2)  10-2123. Bed and breakfast. 
(3)  10-2134. Outdoor event, large. 
(4)  10-2136. Recreational fields. 
(e)  Design standards. To provide a guide to development proposals in the design and implementation of pedestrian circulation, streetscapes, landscape and site lighting. 
(1)  Streetscape: Street types, relationship of building to street; street furniture zone; tree planting; sidewalk requirements. 
a.  Sidewalks shall be located along all public streets and shall be a minimum of 15 feet in width which shall include a clear zone with a minimum width of ten feet and a street furniture zone located adjacent to the curb as described below. 
b.  A street furniture zone shall be located adjacent to the curb and shall be minimum width of five feet. In addition to the planting of trees as required in this section, this zone is also intended for the placement of street furniture including utility poles, waste receptacles, fire hydrants, bus shelters, bicycle racks and similar elements as approved by the city. 
c.  Front yards shall be permitted between the sidewalk and the building facade and shall be a maximum width of ten feet. 
d.  Accessory outdoor dining is permitted on or adjacent to the sidewalk only when all other sidewalk requirements are met, and may be separated from the sidewalk only with movable planters or fencing which shall have a maximum height of 36 inches. 
e.  A clear zone shall be unobstructed by any permanent or nonpermanent element for a minimum width often ten feet and a minimum height of eight feet. 
f.  Awnings and canopies shall encroach a maximum of five feet over the public sidewalk. 
g.  Balconies, bay windows, and overhangs shall encroach a maximum of five feet over the sidewalk. 
h.  Trees shall be planted a maximum of 35 feet on center within the street furniture zone and shall have either a minimum planting area of 16 square feet which shall be planted with evergreen ground cover such as mondo liriope or ivy or a decorative metal grate as approved by the City of East Point. All plantings, planting replacement and planting removal shall be approved by the Department of Planning and Community Development. 
i.  Street trees and other plants taller than 12 inches in height shall not be planted within the sight triangle and shall be arranged and maintained at intersections to provide reasonable visibility for warranted traffic control devices. 
j.  Where property within the district abuts a residential district without an intervening street, the sidewalk areas within 20 feet of the R district shall taper when necessary to provide a smooth transition to the exiting R district sidewalk. 
k.  A building may have zero lot lines; except if a building is not constructed to the lot line it shall be set back a minimum distance of five feet from the lot line, and except as required for a transitional yard. 
(2)  Design elements and street furniture: 
a.  Sidewalks: 15'-0" sidewalk (10'-0" clear zone with 5'-0" street furniture zone). 
b.  Tree: Legacy Sugar Maple 35'-0" on center. 
c.  Street furnishings: Wood bench and cast iron frame. 
•  Type: C-97 by Victor Stanley, Inc. or equal 
•  Litter receptacle: Ironsites style, 3-35, 24-gallon, black by Victor Stanley, Inc. or equal 
d.  Pedestrian street lamp: Aluminum post, ALN 414 by Architectural Area Lighting or equal. To be installed 35'-0" on center minimum 12'-0" high. 
e.  Landscape buffer: Evergreen shrubs to provide visual screens. 
f.  Pedestrian connections: Clear and direct sidewalk connections to be provided from all public rights-of-way onto which any development property has a building. 
g.  Fence: Maximum 5'-0" ornamentally detailed, black metal fence. Where fences are required in lieu of landscaped buffer. Chain link fence not permitted. 
h.  Siting building: Building footprints and orientations will be determined to compliment and promote pedestrian circulation. 
i.  Cross walk paver/street furniture zone: Must be constructed with brick paver or stamped concrete to be approved by the city. 
(3)  Standards of development: 
a.  In the CL district, buildings shall have a minimum height of 20 feet and shall appear at a minimum as a two-story building along each facade visible from any public right-of-way. This does not apply to existing one-story building renovations or infill projects between two existing one-story buildings. 
b.  Materials and colors used both, in new building construction, additions, and renovations should be of the highest quality and be compatible with surrounding architecture. Cementitious Stucco may be used as an accent only and may not be used on ground level. The principal material shall be either stone or brick and may include accents or details in precast concrete, or stucco. 
c.  A street address number shall be located above the primary building entrance, shall be clearly visible from the sidewalk and shall be a minimum of six inches in height. 
d.  All street fronting, ground level development shall provide clear, unpainted or otherwise treated fenestration for a minimum of 85 percent of the length of the frontage, beginning at a point not more than three feet above the public sidewalk, for a height no less than ten feet above the sidewalk. 
e.  All front facades of the principal building shall face and be parallel to the street. 
f.  The placement of mechanical equipment, utility meters, transformers, and storage tanks, window air-conditioners, and satellite dishes shall be located and/or screened so as to minimize their visual impact. 
g.  The primary pedestrian entrance to all uses with street frontage shall face and be visible from the street, shall be directly accessible from the public sidewalk adjacent to such street and shall open directly onto the adjacent public sidewalk, or an outdoor dining area or plaza adjacent to the public sidewalk. 
h.  Provisions for separate vehicular and pedestrian traffic on individual sites is required. This includes parking areas. At a minimum, striping that identifies pedestrian paths is required. 
i.  Dumpsters and loading areas shall be screened so as not to be visible from any public plaza, outdoor dining area, public right-of-way or residential area. 
j.  Parking deck facades shall conceal automobiles from visibility and shall have the appearance of a horizontal storied building. 
k.  Above ground parking structures shall provide continuous street fronting retail or other uses, except at ingress and egress points into the structure. 
l.  A common or joint driveway may be required by the director of public works, when adjacent lots have direct vehicular access to a street. A pedestrian walkway a minimum of four feet in width shall be provided, connecting the public sidewalk to the surface parking area. See Tree Protection and Landscaping Ordinance. 
m.  Curb cut widths shall be 24 feet for two-way entrances and 12 feet for one-way entrances, unless otherwise permitted by the director of public works. 
n.  One curb cut is permitted for each development with the exception of properties with more than one front yard, which may have two curb cuts. 
o.  No chain link fencing shall be visible from any public plaza, outdoor dining area or public right-of-way. 
p.  All outdoor vending machines, telephones, and newsstands shall be located in designated areas as approved by the city. 
q.  Underground utilities shall be used in all new construction in the Commercial Limited (C-L) District and are subject to approval by the public utilities and public works departments. 
(f)  Development standards. 
a.  Height regulations - No building shall exceed 40 feet in height. 
b.  Minimum front yard setback - 10 feet 
c.  Minimum side yard setback - none 
d.  Minimum rear yard setback - 25 feet 
e.  Minimum lot area - none 
f.  Minimum width of lot frontage or width at building line - 30 feet 
g.  Minimum heated floor area per unit - none 
h.  Minimum accessory structure requirements. Accessory structures may be located in the rear or side yards only but shall not be located within a minimum yard. 
Other regulations. The headings below contain provisions applicable to the C-L District. 
Chapter 2 Zoning Regulations 
Chapter 3 Building Code Regulations 
Chapter 4 Subdivision Regulations 
Chapter 5 Flood Damage Prevention 
Chapter 6 Tree Protection and Landscape Ordinance 
Chapter 7 Signs 
Chapter 8 Uniform Roadway Addressing System 
Chapter 9 Condition and Use of Commercial and Industrial Buildings 
Chapter 10 Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control 
Chapter 11 Stormwater Management 
Chapter 12 Stream Buffer Protection 
Chapter 13 Enterprise Zones 
Chapter 14 Overlay Districts 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 3(Exh. C), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2075. - C-R Commercial Redevelopment. 
C-R District scope and intent. Regulations set forth in this Section are the C-R District regulations. Article D should be consulted to determine uses and minimum standards for uses allowed by Administrative Permit or Use Permit. The C-R District is intended to facilitate and encourage innovative, functional, aesthetically pleasing and creative design and development of the most compatible and desirable mixed-use pattern of retail, commercial service, institutional and residential land uses which are primarily pedestrian and public transit oriented. 
Use regulations. Within the C-R District, land and structures shall be used in accordance with standards herein. Any use not specifically designated as a permitted use in this section or as a use allowed by Administrative Permit or Use Permit shall be prohibited. 
(a)  Permitted uses. Structures and land may be used for only the following purposes: 
(1)  Art galleries. 
(2)  Artisan's workshop, including but not limited to: 
a.  Tailoring. 
b.  Custom dressmaking. 
c.  Millinery. 
d.  Jewelry making. 
e.  Carpentry. 
(3)  Banks and other financial institutions including loan and finance companies. 
(4)  Barber shops and beauty shops. 
(5)  Brewpubs (Chapter 1, Alcoholic Beverages, Section 11-1000). 
(6)  Childcare learning center (allowed as an accessory use in association with an office, professional use. Facility shall locate no closer than 1,000 feet to another childcare learning center). 
a.  Provides care for 19 or more children under the age of 18. 
b.  Hours of operation shall be limited to Monday through Friday 6:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. 
c.  Copies of all applicable state and federal permits shall be provided to the Department of Planning and Community Development prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy and business license. 
d.  Provide minimum landscape strips, buffers, and improvement setbacks as specified for MIX when adjacent to residential. 
e.  Provide a minimum six-foot high decorative wrought iron of aluminum fence interior to required landscape strips and/or buffers around the periphery of the yard used for the play area. 
f.  Play areas shall be located within the rear or side yards. 
g.  No parking allowed in the front yard. 
h.  Driveway design shall permit vehicles to exit the property in a forward direction. 
(7)  Church, temple or place of worship. 
a.  Where existing; no new church, temple, or places of worship allowed. 
(8)  Country inn. 
a.  Lot area shall be a minimum of five acres. 
b.  A minimum of six guest rooms and a maximum of 30 rooms are permitted. 
c.  The country inn shall be owner occupied. 
d.  Permitted curb cut access shall be from a local road or higher road classification. 
e.  The establishment may provide meal services to guests. 
f.  Parking shall not be permitted within the minimum front yard setback. 
g.  The minimum landscape strip and buffer requirements for the MIX District as specified in Chapter 6 shall be required. 
h.  Parking requirements shall be the same as hotel/motel as specified in Article E. 
(9)  Dog day care facility. 
(10)  Food stores. 
(11)  Funeral home. 
(12)  Hotel/motel. 
(13)  Hotel/apartment. 
(14)  Laundry and dry-cleaning collection stations limited to no more than 2,500 square feet. 
(15)  Libraries. 
(16)  Movie theater. 
(17)  Museums. 
(18)  Nightclub. 
(19)  Office, business. 
a.  Automobile/truck rental, lease, and equipment sales office is prohibited. 
(20)  Office, professional. 
(21)  Pawn shop/title pawn and same or similar uses. 
a.  Prohibited. 
(22)  Pet shops and pet supply stores. 
(23)  Photographers' studios. 
(24)  Restaurants, bars, grills, taverns, cafes, cafeterias, delis, coffee shops, and similar eating and/or drinking places are permitted. 
a.  Drive-thru restaurants shall not locate closer than 1,520 feet from another drive-thru restaurant or similar eating or drinking establishment. 
(25)  Retail establishments, including catering establishments, delicatessens and bakeries. 
(26)  Retail sales, general merchandise. 
(27)  Retail sales, household. 
(28)  Retail sales, specialty. 
(29)  Studios, art, dance, photographer. 
(30)  Tasting room. 
(31)  Theatrical community center. 
Dwellings: 
a.  Multifamily permitted only on second story and above.. 
b.  Amenity package requirements: Multi-family, town home and condominium projects shall include an amenity package of two or more amenities. Amenities shall be defined as "a feature that increases the attractiveness or value of a project." These amenities shall include but not be limited to: 
1.  Pool and cabana; 
2.  Majority (51 percent) masonry materials in combination to include brick, stone or hard coat stucco; 
3.  Enhanced landscaping; 
4.  Clubhouse with meeting rooms and/or fitness gym; 
5.  Significant recreational opportunities - waterpark, lighted tennis courts, basketball courts, playground, tot lots, baseball field, soccer/football field, walking and jogging track; 
6.  Benches, architectural lighting, bike racks, and gazebos; 
7.  Ponds/enhanced detention facilities; 
8.  Mixture of uses within the development; 
9.  Trails; 
10.  Mini amphitheater; and 
11.  Structured parking. 
c.  Projects are eligible for density bonuses based on the following: 

 
Development on undeveloped land: Multi-family, town home, and condominium projects shall be required to place in a conservation easement which will be dedicated to the HOA and/or property maintenance firm, prior to the issuance of a land disturbance permit a minimum of twenty-five (25) percent of the project area reserved as open and/or green space when developing on undeveloped property. New projects on undeveloped property must include seven (7) of the required amenities. 
d.  Townhouses in accordance with the requirements for the R-T residential district. 
(b)  Accessory uses. 
(1)  Accessory uses and structures: 
a.  Accessory uses and structures are allowed incidental to any permitted use. 
b.  Temporary storage pods are intended for a limited period of time and not for permanent storage. 
c.  For sale, for rent, or for lease signs are allowed in accordance with Chapter 7, Signs. 
d.  Revival tents are allowed via an Administrative Permit accessory to an existing church, temple, or place of worship. 
(c)  Uses permitted through administrative permit. The following uses may be permitted per the procedures and standards set forth in Article D, Section 10-2081 et seq. in the C-R District: 
(1)  10-2089. Alternative antenna support structure. 
(2)  10-2090. Amateur radio antenna. 
(3)  10-2092. Club. 
(4)  10-2094. Driving range (not associated with a golf course). 
(5)  10-2096. Film production. 
(6)  10-2097. Food trucks. 
(7)  10-2098. Golf course. 
(8)  10-2099. Outdoor event, small. 
(9)  10-2101. Recreational court, private. 
(10)  10-2104. Revival tent. 
(11)  10-2112. Temporary structures. 
(d)  Uses permitted through use permit only. The following uses may be permitted per the procedures and standards set forth in Article D, Section 10-2115 et seq. in the C-R District: 
(1)  10-2119. Amateur radio antenna to exceed the administrative permit height. 
(2)  10-2123. Bed and breakfast. 
(3)  10-2134. Outdoor event, large. 
(e)  Development standards. 
a.  Height regulations - No specific height restriction 
b.  Minimum front yard setback - No specific restriction 
c.  Minimum side yard setback - No specific restriction 
d.  Minimum rear yard setback - No specific restriction 
e.  Minimum lot area - No specific area restriction 
f.  Minimum width of lot frontage or width at building line - 30 feet 
g.  Minimum heated floor area per unit - No specific restriction 
h.  Minimum accessory structure requirements. Accessory structures may be located in the rear or side yards only but shall not be located within a minimum yard. 
i.  Drive-thru businesses (applies to all businesses): 
i.  Restaurants shall maintain drive-thru lanes that are a minimum of 180 feet in length to provide on-site storage stacking of cars for a minimum of ten vehicles, as measured from the forward most drive-thru window to the entrance to queuing space. 
ii.  Each drive-thru lane shall be a minimum of 12 feet in width. The lane shall be independent of any on-site parking, parking maneuvering areas, public streets, alleys or traffic ways. 
iii.  Drive-thru windows are prohibited on the front of the building directly facing a street frontage. 
iv.  Double drive-thru lanes are prohibited. 
v.  Drive-thru lanes shall be designed in such a way as to be screened from view from the street through elevation differences, landscaping, arbors, trellises, canopies, walls and other architectural features used to reduce the visual presence of drive-thru operations. 
vi.  A five-foot wide landscaped planter shall be installed between the drive-thru lane and parking lot maneuvering area. 
j.  Structured parking. All parking structures, or any story thereof, located in whole or in part above finished grade and used as accessory parking for another use shall meet the following standards: 
i.  Parapet walls: On all level where parking is provided adjacent to an exterior wall, all facades shall have exterior opaque walls a minimum height of 42 inches above any finished grade and any finished floor. 
ii.  Public facades: When a parking structure façade is adjacent to or facing a public park or public right-of-way, such facades shall comply with the following: 
A.  Any such facades from finished grade to the fourth level of the parking structure shall have openings screened to prevent views into the structure except for vehicular ingress and egress openings at a maximum width of 30 feet and pedestrian access openings at a maximum width of eight feet. 
B.  Screening elements shall be designed in a structurally sound manner and have a gap no more than 18 inches from the frame of the screening element to the wall opening. Mesh or decorative panels, tinted or sandblasted opaque spandrel glass, or similar screening elements shall be used. Where mesh or other materials containing openings is used in conjunction with the screening frame, no individual opening shall exceed four square inches. Chain link fencing and similar screening elements shall be prohibited as an allowable mesh or similar screening element. 
Other regulations. The headings below contain provisions applicable to the C-R District. 
Chapter 2 Zoning Regulations 
Chapter 3 Building Code Regulations 
Chapter 4 Subdivision Regulations 
Chapter 5 Flood Damage Prevention 
Chapter 6 Tree Protection and Landscape Ordinance 
Chapter 7 Signs 
Chapter 8 Uniform Roadway Addressing System 
Chapter 9 Condition and Use of Commercial and Industrial Buildings 
Chapter 10 Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control 
Chapter 11 Stormwater Management 
Chapter 12 Stream Buffer Protection 
Chapter 13 Enterprise Zones 
Chapter 14 Overlay Districts 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 3(Exh. C), 9-19-16 ; Ord. No. 088-018 , § 5, 4-16-18) 
Sec. 10-2076. - MIX Mixed Use District. 
MIX District scope and intent. Regulations in this section are the MIX District regulations. Article D should be consulted to determine uses and minimum standards for uses allowed by Administrative Permit or Use Permit. The MIX District is intended to encourage flexible, innovative and creative concepts in site planning and efficient use of land and to provide a stable multiple use environment compatible with surrounding uses. The MIX District is particularly encouraged in areas designated by the Comprehensive Plan Land Use Map as suitable for commercial (including retail, service commercial and office) uses and in living-working corridors. Mixed-use developments are defined as projects containing three or more of the following uses: residential, commercial, office, institutional, industrial, and conservation. 
Use regulations. The MIX District mandates a residential component of single family dwellings, duplexes, triplexes, quadruplexes, townhouses, multifamily dwellings or any combination thereof along with at least two of the following: commercial, office or institutional uses. Within the MIX District, land and structures shall be used in accordance with standards herein. Any use not specifically designated as a permitted use in this section or as a use allowed by Administrative Permit or Use Permit shall be prohibited. 
(a)  Permitted uses. Structures and land may be used for the following purposes: 
(1)  All uses allowed in C-1, C-2, C-L and C-R. 
(2)  Community center buildings. 
(3)  Church, temple or place of worship. 
(4)  Dwellings. 
a.  Single-family detached dwelling. 
b.  Single-family townhouse dwelling; attached in structures containing no more than ten dwelling units. 
c.  Two-family dwelling. 
d.  Multi-family dwelling. 
e.  Triplexes. 
f.  Quadraplexes. 
(5)  Education. 
a.  College and university. 
b.  K-12 private or special. 
c.  Technical school. 
d.  Vocational school. 
(6)  Family day care home. 
a.  Home occupation license required. 
(7)  Funeral home. 
(8)  Hospitals. 
(9)  Parking garages/decks. 
(b)  Accessory uses. Structures and land may be used for uses customarily incidental to any permitted use and a dwelling may be used for a home occupation. No more than 25 percent of the total floor area of a building may be devoted to storage. Temporary storage pods are intended for a limited period of time and not for permanent storage. 
(c)  Uses permitted through administrative permit. The following uses may be permitted per the procedures and standards set forth in Article D, Section 10-2081 et seq. in the MIX District: 
(1)  10-2089. Alternative antenna support structure. 
(2)  10-2090. Amateur antenna. 
(3)  10.2094. Driving range (not associated with a golf course). 
(4)  10-2096. Film production. 
(5)  10-2098. Golf course. 
(6)  10-2099. Outdoor event, small. 
(7)  10-2101. Recreational court, private. 
(8)  10-2102. Recreational courts, public. 
(9)  10-2103. Relocated residential structure. 
(10)  10-2104. Revival tent. 
(11)  10-2107. Seasonal business use (with a commercial component). 
(12)  10-2110. Swimming pool, public. 
(13)  10-2111. Temporary classroom. 
(14)  10-2113. Utility substations (telephone, electric, or gas, etc.) 
(d)  Uses permitted through use permit only. The following uses may be permitted per the procedures and standards set forth in Article D, Section 10-2115 et seq. in the MIX District: 
(1)  10-2117. Adult DAY Center. 
(2)  10-2119. Amateur radio antenna to exceed the administrative permit height. 
(3)  10-2121. Antenna tower, and associated structure (radio, T.V., microwave broadcasting, etc.). 
(4)  10-2122. Assisted living facility. 
(5)  10-2124. Cemetery and/or mausoleum (human or pet). 
(6)  10-2127. Community living arrangement. 
(7)  10-2134. Outdoor event, large. 
(8)  10-2135. Personal care home. 
(9)  10-2143. Skywalks. 
(10)  10-2144. Stadium (offsite) associated with a private school. 
(e)  Development standards. 
a.  Height regulations - As specified in conditions 
b.  Minimum development front yard - As specified in conditions 
c.  Minimum development side yards - As specified in conditions 
d.  Minimum development rear yard - As specified in conditions 
e.  Minimum development frontage - 35 feet 
f.  Minimum internal setbacks, separations, landscaping and buffering between uses - As specified in conditions 
g.  Minimum lot area per dwelling unit for single family or duplex - As specified in conditions 
h.  Minimum lot frontage for single family or duplex - 20 feet adjoining a street 
i.  Minimum lot width for single family or duplex - None, unless specified in conditions 
j.  Minimum interior setbacks for single family or duplex 
1.  Minimum front yard - As specified in conditions 
2.  Minimum side yard - As specified in conditions 
3.  Minimum rear yard - As specified in conditions 
k.  Minimum building separations - All building separations shall be as specified by the International Code Council. 
l.  Minimum heated floor area per dwelling unit - As specified in conditions 
m.  Conservation subdivision - The development standards of a conservation subdivision shall be in accordance with Chapter 4 of the East Point Subdivision Regulations. 
n.  Minimum accessory structure requirements - Single family, duplex and townhouse accessory structures may be located in the rear or side yards only but shall not be located within a minimum yard. 
Multifamily accessory structures shall not be located in the minimum front yard. 
o.  Minimum common outdoor area - 20 percent of the total site area shall be common outdoor area and shall be maintained by the property owner(s). 
p.  Pedestrian connectivity. All components. are required to be interconnected with pedestrian paths constructed of either colored/textured materials or conventional sidewalk materials and clearly identified. 
q.  Parking - Subject to the approval of the Director of Planning and Community Development, off-street parking as required by Article E may be reduced and shared parking among uses may be permitted. 
r.  A.  Amenity package requirements: Multi-family, town home and condominium projects shall include an amenity package of two or more amenities. Amenities shall be defined as "a feature that increases the attractiveness or value of a project." These amenities shall include but not be limited to: 
1.  Pool and cabana; 
2.  Majority (51 percent) masonry materials in combination to include brick, stone or stucco; 
3.  Enhanced landscaping; 
4.  Clubhouse with meeting rooms and/or fitness gym; 
5.  Significant recreational opportunities - waterpark, lighted tennis courts, basketball courts, playground, tot lots, baseball field, soccer/football field, walking and jogging track; 
6.  Benches, architectural lighting, bike racks, and gazebos; 
7.  Ponds/enhanced detention facilities; 
8.  Mixture of Uses within the development; 
9.  Trails; 
10.  Mini amphitheater; and 
11.  Structured parking. 
B.  Projects are eligible for density bonuses based on the following: 

 
  
Development on undeveloped land: Multi-family, town home, and condominium projects shall be required to place in a conservation easement which will be dedicated to the HOA and/or property maintenance firm, prior to the issuance of a land disturbance permit a minimum of 25 percent of the project area reserved as open and/or green space when developing on undeveloped property. New projects on undeveloped property must include seven (7) of the required amenities. 
s.  Drive-thru businesses (applies to all businesses) 
1.  Restaurants shall maintain drive-thru lanes that are a minimum of 180 feet in length to provide on-site storage stacking of cars for a minimum of ten vehicles, as measured from the forward most drive-thru window to the entrance to queuing space. 
2.  Each drive-thru lane shall be a minimum of 12 feet in width. The lane shall be independent of any on-site parking, parking maneuvering areas, public streets, alleys or traffic ways. 
3.  Drive-thru windows are prohibited on the front of the building directly facing a street frontage. 
4.  Double drive-thru lanes are prohibited. 
5.  Drive-thru lanes shall be designed in such a way as to be screened from view from the street through elevation differences, landscaping, arbors, trellises, canopies, walls and other architectural features used to reduce the visual presence of drive-thru operations. 
6.  A five-foot wide landscaped planter shall be installed between the drive-thru lane and parking lot maneuvering area. 
t.  Structured parking - All parking structures, or any story thereof, located in whole or in part above finished grade and used as accessory parking for another use shall meet the following standards: 
A.  Parapet walls: On all level where parking is provided adjacent to an exterior wall, all facades shall have exterior opaque walls a minimum height of 42 inches above any finished grade and any finished floor. 
B.  Public facades: When a parking structure façade is adjacent to or facing a public park or public right-of-way, such facades shall comply with the following: 
i.  Any such facades from finished grade to the fourth level of the parking structure shall have openings screened to prevent views into the structure except for vehicular ingress and egress openings at a maximum width of 30 feet and pedestrian access openings at a maximum width of eight feet. 
ii.  Screening elements shall be designed in a structurally sound manner and have a gap no more than 18 inches from the frame of the screening element to the wall opening. Mesh or decorative panels, tinted or sandblasted opaque spandrel glass, or similar screening elements shall be used. Where mesh or other materials containing openings is used in conjunction with the screening frame, no individual opening shall exceed four square inches. Chain link fencing and similar screening elements shall be prohibited as an allowable mesh or similar screening element. 
Other regulations. The headings below contain some additional, but not necessarily all, provisions applicable to the MIX District: 
Chapter 2 Zoning Regulations 
Chapter 3 Building Code Regulations 
Chapter 4 Subdivision Regulations 
Chapter 5 Flood Damage Prevention 
Chapter 6 Tree Protection and Landscape Ordinance 
Chapter 7 Signs 
Chapter 8 Uniform Roadway Addressing System 
Chapter 9 Condition and Use of Commercial and Industrial Buildings 
Chapter 10 Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control 
Chapter 11 Stormwater Management 
Chapter 12 Stream Buffer Protection 
Chapter 13 Enterprise Zones 
Chapter 14 Overlay Districts 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 3(Exh. C), 9-19-16 ; Ord. No. 088-018 , § 6, 4-16-18) 
Sec. 10-2078. - B-P Business Park District. 
B-P District scope and intent. Regulations set forth in this Section are the B-P District regulations. Article D should be consulted to determine uses and minimum standards for uses allowed by Administrative Permit or Use Permit. The B-P District is to encourage the development of a quality multi-use business community where office, research, assembly, warehouse and distribution needs can be met at a single location. Such uses shall be designed for ease of access to truck loading areas. It is intended that such uses exist in a "park-like" setting. 
Use regulations. Within the B-P District, land and structures shall be used in accordance with standards herein. Any use not specifically designated as a permitted use in this section or as a use allowed by Administrative Permit or Use Permit shall be prohibited. 
(a)  Permitted uses. Structures and land may be used for only the following purposes: 
(1)  Assembly and production of electronic equipment. 
(2)  Banks and other financial institutions including loan and finance companies. 
(3)  Distribution and/or assembly provided such activity is limited to assembly of completed parts or components into finished or semi-finished products, and involves no hazardous materials and no excessive noise, odor, vibration or other negative impact. 
(4)  Education. 
a.  College and university. 
b.  K-12 private or special. 
c.  Technical school. 
d.  Vocational school. 
(5)  Health clubs and physical fitness center. 
(6)  Hospitals and clinics: Medical, dental, chiropractic and similar facilities for humans. 
(7)  Laboratories and research facilities. 
(8)  Office, business. 
(9)  Office, professional. 
(10)  Printing and publishing operations. 
(11)  Training facilities related to other permitted uses. 
(12)  Warehousing, provided such is auxiliary to other permitted uses or such use is related to distribution activities. 
(b)  Accessory uses. 
(1)  Accessory uses and structures: 
a.  Accessory uses and structures incidental to any permitted use are allowed. 
b.  Temporary storage pods are intended for a limited period of time and not for permanent storage. 
c.  For sale, for rent, or for lease signs are allowed in accordance with Chapter 7, Signs. 
(c)  Uses permitted through administrative permit. The following uses may be permitted per the procedures and standards set forth in Article D, Section 10-2081 et seq. in the B-P District: 
(1)  10-2089. Alternative antenna support structure. 
(2)  10-2090. Amateur radio antenna. 
(3)  10-2091. Antenna, tower, and associated structures (radio, t.v., microwave broadcasting. etc.). 
(4)  10-2094. Driving range (not associated with a golf course). 
(5)  10-2096. Film production. 
(6)  10-2097. Food trucks. 
(7)  10-2098. Golf course. 
(8)  10-2099. Outdoor event, small. 
(9)  10-2101. Recreational court, private. 
(10)  10-2109. Swimming pool, private. 
(11)  10-2111. Temporary classroom. 
(12)  10-2112. Temporary structures. 
(d)  Uses Permitted Through Use Permit Only. The following uses may be permitted per the procedures and standards set forth in Article D, Section 10-2115 et seq. in the B-P District 
(1)  10-2119. Amateur radio antenna to exceed the Administrative Permit height. 
(2)  10-2126. Commercial amusement, outdoor. 
(3)  10-2134. Outdoor event, large. 
(4)  10-2136. Recreational fields. 
(5)  10-2144. Stadium (offsite) associated with a private school. 
(e)  Design Standards. In order to establish and maintain the B-P Business Park District as a quality business area which will preserve the investments of all land owners and developers, as well as the tax base of the City of East Point, all construction and development within the B-P district must comply with the following site development and improvement standards: 
a.  Setbacks for front, rear and side yards: 
1.  Structures fronting or adjoining a public street shall be located at least 45 feet from the front property; 
2.  Structures, except fences shall be at least eight feet from the side line of any tract; 
3.  Structures shall be at least thirty (30) feet from the rear line of any tract; 
4.  Only driveways, parking spaces, permitted signs, and landscaped areas shall be allowed between a structure and the front property line; 
5.  All paved areas must have concrete curbs. 
b.  Buildings: 
1.  Exterior wall materials shall be one or more of the following: 
i.  Hard burned clay brick; 
ii.  Stone with either a weathered face or a polished, fluted or broken face. No quarry faced stone shall be used except in the retaining walls; 
iii.  Concrete masonry. Units shall be those generally described by the National Concrete Masonry Association as "Customize Architectural Concrete Masonry Units" or shall be broken-faced brick-type units with marble aggregate. There shall be no exposed concrete block on the exterior of any building, however, rear walls which do not front any street or building may be painted concrete block. Any concrete masonry units that have a gray cement color shall be coated with a coating approved by the building inspector; 
iv.  Concrete may be poured in-place, tilt-up or precast. Poured in-place and tilt- up walls shall have a finish of stone, a texture or a coating. Textured finishes shall be coated. Coating shall be an approved cementitious type. 
2.  Roof-mounted equipment. Roof-mounted equipment shall be located and/or screened to minimize visibility from streets or surrounding buildings. 
i.  Parking and maneuvering. Parking shall not be permitted on streets. Parking spaces and loading docks shall be so located as to make maneuvering in the streets unnecessary. Ample parking spaces shall be provided as required in Article E to accommodate the parking for the subject development. All parking areas and driveways shall be paved with concrete, asphalt, their equivalent or better. 
ii.  Outside storage. No outside storage of any type will be permitted without specific approval of the Planning and Zoning Commission. When such approval is given, the outside storage area shall be enclosed with an approved screen so that storage is not from neighboring property or streets and in no event may storage exceed the height of the screen. In no event shall outside storage be permitted in front of any building. 
iii.  The entire area of any lot containing a building site, including the area between the lot line and street curb line, shall be landscaped except for areas covered by buildings and paved areas. A minimum strip of landscaping ten feet wide shall be installed and maintained along any portion of the lot bordering a public street right-of-way except for entrance driveways onto the lot. The landscaping plan submitted to the planning and zoning commission for approval shall identify such features as the planting of trees, shrubs and grass and the installation of screens as appropriate. The landscaping, as approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission, shall be installed prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. The maintenance of the landscaping shall be the responsibility of the owner and shall include the operation and maintenance of an irrigation system. 
iv.  Exterior lighting. All exterior lighting shall be designed, erected, altered and maintained in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
v.  Loading areas. No materials, supplies, merchandise or equipment shall be stored in any area on a lot except inside of a closed building, or behind an approved visual barrier screening such areas so that they are not unsightly from surrounding properties or public streets. Loading doors and docks shall not be constructed facing any public street or highway without the express prior approval of the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
(f)  Development standards. 
a.  Height regulations - 40 feet 
b.  Minimum front yard setback - 45 feet 
c.  Minimum side yard setback - 8 feet 
d.  Minimum rear yard setback - 30 feet 
e.  Minimum lot area - Per conditions specified 
f.  Minimum width of lot frontage or width at building line - 75 feet 
g.  Minimum heated floor area per unit - Per conditions specified 
h.  Minimum accessory structure requirements - Accessory structures may be located in the rear or side yards only but shall not be located within a minimum yard. 
Other regulations. The headings below contain provisions applicable to the B-P District. 
Chapter 2 Zoning Regulations 
Chapter 3 Building Code Regulations 
Chapter 4 Subdivision Regulations 
Chapter 5 Flood Damage Prevention 
Chapter 6 Tree Protection and Landscape Ordinance 
Chapter 7 Signs 
Chapter 8 Uniform Roadway Addressing System 
Chapter 9 Condition and Use of Commercial and Industrial Buildings 
Chapter 10 Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control 
Chapter 11 Stormwater Management 
Chapter 12 Stream Buffer Protection 
Chapter 13 Enterprise Zones 
Chapter 14 Overlay Districts 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 3(Exh. C), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2079. - I-1 Light Industrial District. 
I-1 District scope and intent. Regulations set forth in this section are the I-1 District regulations. Article D should be consulted to determine uses and minimum standards for uses allowed by Administrative Permit or Use Permit. The intent of this section, in establishing the I-1 District, is to provide areas within the City for the manufacture, storage, sale and distribution of goods and the conduct of related commercial and industrial activities. The I-1 District is comprised primarily of those existing industrial areas that are located on or have ready access to major thoroughfares and/or rail facilities, and are well adapted to industrial development and are not objectionable by reasons of dust, odor, noise, traffic safety or congestion. 
Use regulations. Within the 1-1 District, land and structures shall be used in accordance with standards herein. Any use not specifically designated as a permitted use in this section or as a use allowed by Administrative Permit or Use Permit shall be prohibited. 
(a)  Permitted uses. Structures and land may be used for only the following purposes: Any permitted use, provided that all manufacturing, processing, assembly and/or disassembly operations and all storage operations associated with such uses not specifically identified below shall be housed entirely within an enclosed building or buildings. All outside storage shall be enclosed by an opaque fence meeting the district height regulations. 
(1)  Ambulance and emergency radical services. 
(2)  Animal hospitals, kennels (boarding and breeding) and veterinary clinics. 
a.  All structures shall be located and activities conducted at least one hundred (100) feet from any property zoned for residential purposes. 
b.  All animals shall be located within an enclosed building and adequate sound and odor control shall be maintained. 
(3)  Animal grooming shops. 
a.  All structures shall be located and activities conducted at least 100 feet from any property zoned for residential purposes 
(4)  Artisan's workshop. 
(5)  Automobile and truck sales (including retail parts sales and/ or tire store). 
a.  Such use shall not be permitted within 50 feet of any property used for a school, park, playground or hospital. 
b.  All activities shall be carried on entirely within an enclosed building. 
c.  Such use shall not be established on a lot which is adjacent to or directly across the street from any single-family residential district. 
d.  All outdoor storage must be in the rear of the principal structure and enclosed by opaque fence no less than eight feet in height. 
(6)  Automobile, trailer and boat sales/service. 
a.  Minimum one acre lot size. 
b.  All vehicles shall be set back at least ten feet from the street right-of-way line. 
c.  Such use shall be located at least 50 feet from any properties zoned for residential purposes. 
d.  A solid fence or wall no less than eight feet in height shall be maintained to provide a visual screening between the residential and commercial properties. 
(7)  Automobile and truck repair (including paint, body, brake repair, installation of tires, tune-up shops, oil change services, and emission stations). 
a.  Such use shall not be permitted within 50 feet of any property used for a school, park, playground or hospital. 
b.  All activities shall be carried on entirely within an enclosed building. 
c.  Such use shall not be established on a lot which is adjacent to or directly across the street from any single-family residential district. 
d.  All outdoor storage must be in the rear of the principal structure and enclosed by an opaque fence no less than eight feet in height. 
e.  No engine/body dismantling is allowed. 
(8)  Automobile towing. 
a.  All outside storage must be in rear of the principal structure and enclosed by opaque fence no less than eight feet in height. 
(9)  Bookbinding and related work. 
(10)  Carnival, video, horseshow, shooting or athletic event. 
(11)  Car wash, automatic, hand car wash, and self service. 
a.  Establishment shall provide an oil water separator and a sand trap. 
b.  Establishment shall have no more than 4 washing bays. 
(12)  Commercial greenhouses or plant nursery. 
(13)  Cultural facilities. Art galleries, museums, legitimate theaters, libraries, and other uses similar in character to those listed. 
(14)  Drive-in movie theater. 
a.  The theater screen and all buildings shall be set back at least 50 feet from any property line. 
b.  Central loudspeakers are prohibited. 
c.  The theater screen shall not be visible from an interstate or arterial roadway. 
(15)  Dwellings; residence for watchmen or caretaker employed on premises. 
(16)  Education. 
a.  College and university. 
b.  K-12 private or special. 
c.  Technical school. 
d.  Vocational school. 
(17)  Electric supply store. 
(18)  Electric transformer station, gas regulator station and telephone exchange. 
(19)  Farm equipment sales. 
(20)  Fuel and ice dealers, manufacturers and wholesalers. 
(21)  Food processing plants not to include slaughterhouses. 
(22)  Gas station minimart. 
a.  All gasoline pumps, tanks and other service facilities shall be set back at least 20 feet from all property lines. 
b.  Canopies over fuel islands shall not encroach within fifteen (15) feet of any property line. 
c.  Minor automobile repair shall be allowed in conjunction with such use provided all such activities shall take place within an enclosed building. 
d.  No outside storage or engine/body dismantling is allowed. 
(23)  Home appliance repair and related service. 
(24)  Laundry and dry-cleaning pickup stations. 
(25)  Linen and diaper services, garment pressing, alteration and repair. 
(26)  Light assembly and fabrication. No activity which produces liquid effluent, odor, fumes or dust which can be detected beyond the walls of the building is permitted. 
(27)  Lumber, hardware and other building material establishments. 
a.  All outdoor storage must be in the rear of the principal structure and enclosed by opaque fence no less than eight feet in height. 
(28)  Manufacturing, wholesaling, repairing, compounding, assembly, processing, preparation, packaging of treatment articles, foods (smoking, curing and canning), components, products, clothing, machines and appliances and the like, where character of operations, emissions and by- products do not create adverse effects beyond the boundaries of the property. 
(29)  Newspaper publishing facilities. 
(30)  Office, business. 
(31)  Office, professional. 
(32)  Paint, glass and wallpaper stores. 
(33)  Plumbing and heating equipment dealers. 
(34)  Printing, publishing and reproducing establishments. 
(35)  Radio and television broadcasting stations. 
(36)  Railroad car classification yards and train truck yards. 
(37)  Railroad stations for freight. 
(38)  Research and experimental testing laboratories including medical and dental laboratories. 
(39)  Restaurants, bars grills, taverns, cafés, drive-ins, fast food facilities and similar eating and drinking establishments. 
a.  Drive-thru restaurants shall not locate closer than 1,520 feet from another drive-thru restaurant or similar eating or drinking establishment. 
b.  Drive-thru restaurant lanes shall be designed in such a way as to be screened from the public right of way through elevation differences, landscaping, arbors, trellises, canopies, walls and other architectural features used to reduce the visual presence of drive-thru operations. 
c.  Drive-thru windows are prohibited on the front of the building directly facing a street frontage. 
(40)  Self-storage mini-warehouse facilities. 
(41)  Taxi stands and dispatching agencies. 
(42)  Truck terminals. 
(43)  Veterinary clinic/hospital or kennel. 
(44)  Warehousing and storage. 
(45)  Wholesale trade and distribution establishments and warehousing facilities, including offices. 
(b)  Accessory uses. 
(1)  Accessory uses and structures incidental to any legal permitted use, provided: 
a.  Retail sales and services must be conducted and accessed wholly within the building(s) housing the use to which the activities are accessory. Temporary PODS/temporary storage units are intended for a limited period of time and not for permanent storage. 
b.  For sale, for rent, or for lease signs are allowed in accordance with Chapter 7, Signs. 
(c)  Uses permitted through administrative permit. The following uses may be permitted per the procedures and standards set forth in Article D, Section 10-2081 et seq. in the I-1 District: 
(1)  10-2089. Alternative Antenna Support Structure 
(2)  10-2090. Amateur Radio Antenna 
(3)  10-2091. Antenna, tower, and associated structures (radio, T.V., microwave broadcasting, etc.). 
(4)  10-2092. Club. 
(5)  10.2094. Driving Range (not associated with a golf course). 
(6)  10-2095. Electrified fences. 
(7)  10-2096. Film production. 
(8)  10-2098. Golf course. 
(9)  10.2099. Outdoor event, small. 
(10)  10-2107. Seasonal business use. 
(11)  10-2109. Swimming pool, private. 
(12)  10-2111. Temporary classroom. 
(13)  10-2112. Temporary structures. 
(d)  Uses permitted through use permit only. The following uses may be permitted per the procedures and standards set forth in Article D, Section 10-2115 et seq. in the I-1 District. 
(1)  10-2116. Adult Bookstore 
(2)  10-2119. Amateur Radio Antenna to Exceed the Administrative Permit Height 
(3)  10-2121. Antenna tower, and associated structure (radio, T.V., microwave broadcasting, etc.). 
(4)  10-2124. Cemetery and/or mausoleum (human or pet). 
(5)  10-2128. Composting. 
(6)  10-2134. Outdoor event, large. 
(7)  10-2144. Stadium (offsite) associated with a private school. 
(e)  Development standards. 
a.  Height regulations - 40 feet 
b.  Minimum front yard setback - 40 feet 
c.  Minimum side yard setback - 8 feet 
d.  Minimum rear yard setback - 30 feet 
e.  Minimum lot area - Per conditions specified 
f.  Minimum width of lot frontage or width at building line - 30 feet 
g.  Minimum heated floor area per unit - Per conditions specified 
h.  Minimum accessory structure requirements - Accessory structures may be located in the rear or side yards only but shall not be located within a minimum yard. 
Other regulations. The headings below contain provisions applicable to the I-1 District. 
Chapter 2 Zoning Regulations 
Chapter 3 Building Code Regulations 
Chapter 4 Subdivision Regulations 
Chapter 5 Flood Damage Prevention 
Chapter 6 Tree Protection and Landscape Ordinance 
Chapter 7 Signs 
Chapter 8 Uniform Roadway Addressing System 
Chapter 9 Condition and Use of Commercial and Industrial Buildings 
Chapter 10 Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control 
Chapter 11 Stormwater Management 
Chapter 12 Stream Buffer Protection 
Chapter 13 Enterprise Zones 
Chapter 14 Overlay Districts 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 3(Exh. C), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2080. - I-2 Heavy Industrial District. 
I-2 District scope and intent. Regulations set forth in this section are the I-2 District regulations. Article D should be consulted to determine uses and minimum standards for uses allowed by Administrative Permit or Use Permit. The I-2 District is to provide for light and heavy manufacturing, processing, assembly, packaging and warehousing operations, free from incompatible residential and commercial activities not directly serving or compatible with the industrial uses in order to achieve a favorable balance of land uses within the City. 
Use regulations. Within the I-2 District, land and structures shall be used in accordance with standards herein. Any use not specifically designated as a permitted use in this section or as a use allowed by Administrative Permit or Use Permit shall be prohibited. 
(a)  Permitted uses. Structures and land may be used for only the following purposes: Any heavy industrial use provided that all manufacturing, processing, assembly and/or disassembly shall be housed entirely within an enclosed building or buildings. Storage of any accessory materials specifically related to the use shall be housed behind opaque fencing no less than eight feet in height. 
(1)  All uses allowed in I-1. 
(2)  Basic wood processing including sawmills, planing mills, veneering and laminating of wood. 
(3)  Battery manufacture. 
(4)  Blast furnace. 
(5)  Boiler works. 
(6)  Cement products manufacture and production of ready-mix concrete. 
(7)  Cooperage and bottling works. 
(8)  Dry cleaning plants. 
a.  Such use shall be at least 300 feet from any property zoned or used for residential properties. 
b.  All applicable state, federal and local codes must be complied with 
(9)  Enameling, galvanizing and electroplating. 
(10)  Exterminating facilities. 
(11)  Heavy construction contractors. 
(12)  Heavy repair services and trade shops. 
a.  Such use shall not be permitted within 50 feet of any property used for a school, park, playground or hospital. 
b.  All activities shall be carried on entirely within an enclosed building. 
c.  Such use shall not be established on a lot which is adjacent to or directly across the street from any single-family residential district. 
d.  All outdoor storage must be in the rear of the principal structure and enclosed by an opaque fence no less than eight feet in height. 
(13)  Iron or steel foundry or fabrication plant for heavy castings. 
(14)  Manufacturing of: 
a.  Acetylene gas. 
b.  Acid. 
c.  Asphalt. 
d.  Bleaching powder. 
e.  Brick. 
f.  Cement. 
g.  Chlorine gas. 
h.  Coal tar. 
l.  Fertilizers. 
j.  Glue. 
k.  Gypsum board. 
l.  Linoleum. 
m.  Mineral dye. 
n.  Oil. 
o.  Oilcloth. 
p.  Paint. 
q.  Paper. 
r.  Paper pulp. 
s.  Patent leather. 
t.  Petroleum products. 
u.  Pottery. 
v.  Shellac. 
w.  Terra cotta. 
x.  Tile. 
y.  Turpentine. 
z.  Varnish. 
aa.  Yeast. 
(15)  Outdoor advertising services. Includes construction, repair, and maintenance of outdoor advertising signs. 
(16)  Removal or extraction of dirt, sand and soil. 
(17)  Repair services and trade shops, including sheet metal, upholstering, electrical, plumbing, carpentry, sign painting and other similar activities. 
(18)  Storage of fuels, oils, gases and other combustible materials. 
(19)  Tar distillation. 
(20)  Tire retreading and recapping. 
(b)  Accessory uses. 
(1)  Accessory uses and structures: 
a.  Accessory uses and structures incidental to any permitted use are allowed. Retail sales and services must be conducted and accessed wholly within the building(s) housing the use to which the activities are accessory. 
b.  Temporary storage PODS are intended for a limited period of time and not for permanent storage. 
c.  For sale, for rent, or for lease signs are allowed in accordance with Chapter 7, Signs. 
(c)  Uses permitted through administrative permit. The following uses may be permitted per the procedures and standards set forth in Article D, Section 10-2081 et seq. in the I-2 District: 
(1)  10-2089. Alternative antenna support structure. 
(2)  10-2090. Amateur RADIO Antenna. 
(3)  10-2091. Antenna, tower, and associated structures (radio, T.V., microwave broadcasting, etc.). 
(4)  10-2092. Club. 
(5)  10.2094. Driving range (not associated with a golf course). 
(6)  10-2095. Electrified fences. 
(7)  10-2096. Film production. 
(8)  10-2098. Golf course. 
(9)  10-2107. Seasonal business use. 
(10)  10-2109. Swimming pool, private. 
(11)  10-2111. Temporary classroom. 
(12)  10-2112. Temporary structures. 
(d)  Uses permitted through use permit only. The following uses may be permitted per the procedures and standards set forth in Article D, Section 10-2115 et seq. in the I-2 District. 
(1)  10-2116. Adult bookstore. 
(2)  10-2118. Adult entertainment establishments. 
(3)  10-2119. Amateur radio antenna to exceed the administrative permit height. 
(4)  10-2124. Cemetery and/or mausoleum (human or pet). 
(5)  10-2128. Composting. 
(6)  10-2131. Landfill, solid waste disposal. 
(7)  10-2132. Lodge, retreat and/or campground. 
(8)  10.2134. Outdoor event, large. 
(9)  10-2137. Recycling center, processing. 
(10)  10-2139. Salvage, storage, and/or junk facility. 
(11)  10-2144. Stadium (offsite) associated with a private school. 
(12)  10-2145. Transfer station, solid waste. 
(e)  Development standards. 
a.  Height regulations - 40 feet 
b.  Minimum front yard setback - 40 feet 
c.  Minimum side yard setback - 8 feet 
d.  Minimum rear yard setback - 30 feet 
e.  Minimum lot area - Per conditions specified 
f.  Minimum width of lot frontage or width at building line - 30 feet 
g.  Minimum heated floor area per unit - Per conditions specified 
h.  Minimum accessory structure requirements - Accessory structures may be located in the rear or side yards only but shall not be located within a minimum yard. 
Other regulations. The headings below contain provisions applicable to the I-2 District. 
Chapter 2 Zoning Regulations 
Chapter 3 Building Code Regulations 
Chapter 4 Subdivision Regulations 
Chapter 5 Flood Damage Prevention 
Chapter 6 Tree Protection and Landscape Ordinance 
Chapter 7 Signs 
Chapter 8 Uniform Roadway Addressing System 
Chapter 9 Condition and Use of Commercial and Industrial Buildings 
Chapter 10 Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control 
Chapter 11 Stormwater Management 
Chapter 12 Stream Buffer Protection 
Chapter 13 Enterprise Zones 
Chapter 14 Overlay Districts 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 3(Exh. C), 9-19-16 ) 
ARTICLE D. - ADMINISTRATIVE PERMITS AND USE PERMITS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 061-016, § 4, adopted Sept. 19, 2016 , in its entirety and enacted new provisions as herein set out. Former Art. D pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 003-09, 3-2-09; Ord. No. 012-11, § 1, 6-20-11; Ord. No. 009-13, §§ 2—10, 4-15-13; Ord. No. 029-13, § 1, 12-16-13; Ord. No. 036-15, § 2, 9-8-15 ; 041-15, § 2, 10-19-15 . 

Sec. 10-2081. - Scope and intent. 
This article specifies uses which are not classified as permitted uses in zoning districts, and are therefore only allowed through the approval of an Administrative Permit or a Use Permit. The standards which apply to each use are enumerated and must be met in order for an application to be granted. 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 4(Exh. D), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2082. - Application and approval. 
Uses allowable with an Administrative Permit and the minimum standards for such uses are listed in Section 10-2089 through Section 10-2114.1 of this article. 
Uses allowable with a Use Permit and the minimum standards for such uses are listed in Section 10-2115 through Section 10-2150 of this article. 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 4(Exh. D), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2083. - Application of regulations. 
Uses enumerated herein may be authorized by an Administrative Permit or Use Permit within districts allowing such uses, upon the completion of the application form, payment of the filing fee and provision of supporting documents required by the Planning and Community Development Director and approval of said application either by the City Council or the Director of Planning and Community Development as set forth in this article. The regulations contained in this article shall not apply to any permitted use in any zoning district. 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 4(Exh. D), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2084. - Administrative permits. 
Any use authorized by an Administrative Permit shall be approved and permitted by the Director of Planning and Community Development whenever the proposed use complies fully with the requirements of the subject property's zoning district and standards as set forth in Section 10-2086 through Section 10-2114.1. Each requested use for which an Administrative Permit is required shall be assigned an Administrative Permit number and charged a fee. Said permit shall be posted on site prior to commencement of use. If the permit is for a parade, the parade chairman or other person heading or leading such activity shall carry the parade permit upon his person during the conduct of the parade. Variances to Administrative Permit standards may be requested by application to the Planning and Zoning Commission. In certain cases, conditions may be imposed with respect to roadway, water, sewer and/or other infrastructure improvements, and rights-of-way dedications and alcohol service. 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 4(Exh. D), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2085. - Use permits. 
Any use authorized by a Use Permit shall be approved by the City Council in accordance with standards enumerated under each use set forth in Section 10-2115 through 10-2150 and the general restrictions of Sections 10-2085 and 10-2087 provided: 
(a)  The subject use is allowable in the subject property's zoning district; 
(b)  The standards for the Use Permit as specified in Article D can be met, as well as Use Permit Considerations pursuant to Section 10-2086; 
(c)  A public hearing has been held in relation to the Use Permit before the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council in conformance with the procedures set forth in Article J; 
(d)  Recommendations have been received from the Planning and Community Development Department and the Planning and Zoning Commission; and 
(e)  Any conditions imposed with respect to right-of-way dedication and roadway, water, sewer and/or other infrastructure improvements are met; and 
(f)  Any conditions recommended by the Police Chief or his/her designee with respect to alcohol service are met. 
(1)  Applications. Use Permit requests shall require a separate application when included with a petition for rezoning. Each requested use for which a Use Permit is required shall be charged a standard Use Permit fee and assigned a Use Permit number which will be listed on the petition for rezoning. Each request shall be voted on separately, and each Use Permit request submitted as part of a rezoning petition shall be treated independently in the minutes of the City Council meeting. 
(2)  Expiration. All Use Permits shall expire within three years from the date of approval by the City Council or as otherwise conditioned unless a Land Disturbance Permit, Building Permit, Business License or Certificate of Occupancy has been issued. Requests for extensions shall be made in accordance with the standards for extensions contained in Article J. 
(3)  Re-application. The same or substantially similar petition for a Use Permit which has been denied by the City Council shall not be resubmitted to the Planning and Community Development Department for a period of six months from the date of the denial. 
(4)  Variances. Variances to Use Permit standards contained in 10-2115 through 10-2150 for receiving a Use Permit may be considered by the City Council concurrently with a Use Permit petition if submitted with such petition. Such a variance request shall not require a separate variance application, but shall be assigned a variance number, charged a standard variance fee and be listed on the Use Permit petition as a Concurrent Variance in accordance with Article I, Appeals. 
(g)  Accessory uses. Structures and land may be used for uses customarily incidental to any approved use. 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 4(Exh. D), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2086. - Administrative Permits and Use Permits—General considerations. 
In the interest of the public health, safety and welfare, the Department of Planning and Community Development (for Administrative Permits) and the City Council (for Use Permits) shall consider each of the following: 
(1)  Whether the proposed use is consistent with the Comprehensive Land Use Plan and/or Economic Development Revitalization plans adopted by the City Council 
(2)  Whether the proposed use is compatible with land uses and zoning districts in the vicinity of the property; 
(3)  Whether the proposed use is consistent with local, state and/or federal statutes, ordinances or regulations governing land development; 
(4)  Whether the proposed use can operate without a negative effect of the proposed use on traffic flow, vehicular and pedestrian, along adjoining streets and whether any negative traffic effects can be ameliorated; 
(5)  Whether the proposed location and number of off-street parking spaces complies with the requirements of the zoning ordinance; 
(6)  Whether the amount and location of open space for the proposed use is adequate for the location, intensity and type of use proposed; 
(7)  Whether any protective screening is needed to ameliorate negative effects on adjacent or nearby properties and whether such screening proposed is adequate; 
(8)  Whether the hours and manner of operation of the special use can be structured so as not to have any negative effects on adjacent or nearby properties; 
(9)  Whether there is any outdoor lighting proposed and whether any impacts of that lighting on adjacent and nearby properties can be ameliorated; 
(10)  Whether adequate ingress and egress is provided to the property on which the use is located; 
(11)  Whether the use will produce noise, odor, dust, or vibrations which can be minimized so as not to have significant negative effects on adjacent or nearby properties; 
(12)  Whether the size and location of the site for the proposed use and the projected number of attendees is adequate; 
(13)  Whether adequate provisions are being proposed for refuse, security, sanitation, emergency services access (i.e. fire, police and medical) and security areas; and 
(14)  Whether remedial measures to reduce the impact of any other special events for which permits have been issued can be taken to prevent interference with or negative impacts on the proposed event. 
No Use Permit will be granted unless City Council finds affirmatively in regard to the above factors and satisfactory provisions have been made for each factor applicable to the specific uses set forth in Sections 10-2115 through 10-2150. In granting such permits, conditions may be attached as are deemed necessary in the particular case for the protection or benefit of neighbors to ameliorate the effects of the proposed development/use. 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 4(Exh. D), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2087. - Additional general restrictions. 
Any use that may be authorized by an Administrative Permit or Use Permit shall comply with all other City regulations, including but not limited to, business and alcohol licensing requirements, electrical, mechanical, food service permits, any health department requirements, building requirements, zoning district regulations, conditions of zoning approval and any other applicable requirements set forth in the City of East Point Code of Ordinances. Organizers of special events with proposed alcohol service must, include in the application for a special event permit information required for authorization of alcohol service ay the event as per the requirements of Article G (Sections 11-1150 through 11-1155) of the Alcohol Licensing provisions of the City of East Point Code of Ordinances. All buffers required shall have a ten-foot improvement setback in accordance with Chapter 6, Tree Protection and Landscaping Ordinance. The reduction of said setback shall be subject to the approval of the Department of Planning and Community Development in accordance with Article I, Appeals. Whenever a standard contained in this section is in conflict with another provision of this Ordinance, the more restrictive provision shall prevail. 
Unless otherwise specified, standards, conditions and stipulations attached to a Use Permit by the City Council shall supersede conflicting zoning conditions approved on the same site. 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 4(Exh. D), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2088. - Additional Administrative Permit standards for specified uses {10-2089 through 10-2114.1}. 
In addition to the factors set forth in Section 10-2086 and 10-2087, applicants for Administrative Permits must comply with any standards or requirements set forth in Section 10-2089 through 10-2114.1 for the identified specific use. No administrative permit will be approved by the Director of Planning and Community Development unless it is determined that, in addition to making satisfactory provision for the factors set forth in Section 10-2086 and 10-2087, the application meets the criteria set forth below for applicable specified uses. 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 4(Exh. D), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2089. - Alternative antenna support structure. 
Intent. Pursuant to Section 704(a) of the Federal Telecommunications Policy Act of 1996, it is not the intent of this section to prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of personal wireless services in the City of East Point. It is the intent of this Section to address the aesthetic effect of telecommunication facilities on our landscapes, our citizens' demands for these services, and the needs of service providers. 
(a)  Standards: 
(1)  Alternative structures are not allowed as an accessory to a single family use or as a principal use in a single family district. 
(2)  Alternative structures must be set back a distance equal to the height of the structure adjacent to residential and/or AG-1 zoned property unless said structure is proposed to be located on an existing building. 
(3)  Above ground equipment shelters shall be surrounded by a minimum ten-foot wide landscape strip planted to buffer standards unless the Director of Planning and Community Development determines that existing plant materials are adequate. 
(4)  Roof top antennas and associated structures shall not project more than 10 feet above roof line. 
(5)  Height shall not exceed 130 feet measured from the finished grade of the base structure. 
(6)  The alternative structure shall comply with applicable state and local statutes and ordinances, including, but not limited to, building and safety codes. Alternative structures which have become unsafe or dilapidated shall be repaired or removed pursuant to applicable state and local statutes and ordinances. 
(7)  Facilities shall not be artificially lighted except to assure human safety or as required by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). 
(8)  Communication towers shall be designed and constructed to ensure that the structural failure or collapse of the tower will not create a safety hazard to adjoining properties, according to applicable federal standards which may be amended from time to time. 
(9)  Telecommunications facilities shall not be used for advertising purposes and shall not contain any signs for the purpose of advertising. 
(10)  Any telecommunications facility may co-locate on any existing tower, pole or other structure as long as there is no increase in height to the existing facility. 
(11)  A telecommunication facility that ceases operation for a period of 12 consecutive months shall be determined to have terminated and shall be removed within 90 days of termination at the property owner's expense. It shall be the duty of both the property owner and the tower owner to notify the city in writing of any intent to abandon the use of the tower. 
(12)  An application for a telecommunications facility shall be submitted in accordance with the Department's Plan Review submittal requirements. 
(13)  An application for a telecommunication facility shall include a certification from a registered engineer that the structure will meet the applicable design standards for wind loads. 
(14)  Communications facilities shall not be located in 100-year flood plain or delineated wetlands. 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 4(Exh. D), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2089.1 - Reserved. 
Sec. 10-2090. - Amateur radio antenna. 
Intent. It is the intent of this Article to regulate the placement of amateur towers in a manner that does not impose on public health, safety, or general welfare. The following regulations on design, location, placement, and height limits of antennas in residential districts implements East Point's governmental interests in land planning, aesthetics and public safety by requiring the following standards: 
(a)  Standards: 
(1)  Antennas shall be located in the rear yard. 
(2)  The maximum height shall be 90 feet. Any request to exceed the maximum height shall require a Use Permit. 
(3)  All antennas shall be set back from all property lines 1/3 the height of the antenna or the district setback requirements, whichever is greater. The antenna must be located a distance equal to or greater than the antenna height from the nearest residential dwelling, excluding the owner's primary dwelling or structure. 
(4)  Antennas shall not be lighted. 
(5)  All antennas must be constructed with an anti-climbing device. 
(6)  Antennas shall be painted in a neutral color identical or closely compatible with surroundings. 
(7)  All guy wires must be anchored on site and outside of right-of-way. 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 4(Exh. D), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2090.1. - Reserved. 
Sec. 10-2091. - Antenna, tower, and associated structures (radio, T.V., microwave broadcasting, etc.). 
Intent. Pursuant to Section 704(a) of the Federal Telecommunications Policy Act of 1996, it is not the intent of this section to prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of personal wireless services in East Point. It is the intent of this Section to address the aesthetic effect of telecommunication facilities on our landscapes, our citizens' demands for these services, and the needs of service providers. 
The following regulations on design, location, placement, and height limits of antennas implement East Point's governmental interest in land planning, aesthetics and public safety by requiring the following Administrative Permit Standards: 
(a)  Standards: 
(1)  Tower/accessory structures must be set back a distance equal to the height of the tower adjacent to residential and/or AG-1 zoned property. 
(2)  Cables and structures designed to anchor the tower shall be set back at least ten feet from all property lines. 
(3)  Tower and/or associated facilities shall be enclosed by fencing not less than six feet in height and shall also be equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing device. 
(4)  A minimum ten-foot wide landscape strip planted to buffer standards shall be required around the facility exterior to any fence or wall unless the Director of Planning and Community Development determines that existing plant materials are adequate. 
(5)  Height shall not exceed 90 feet measured from the finished grade of the base structure. 
(6)  The tower shall comply with applicable state and local statutes and ordinances, including, but not limited to, building and safety codes. Towers which have become unsafe or dilapidated shall be repaired or removed pursuant to applicable state and local statutes and ordinances. 
(7)  Facilities shall not be artificially lighted except to assure human safety or as required by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). 
(8)  Communication towers shall be designed and constructed to ensure that the structural failure or collapse of the tower will not create a safety hazard to adjoining properties, according to applicable federal standards which may be amended from time to time. 
(9)  Telecommunications facilities shall not be used for advertising purposes and shall not contain any signs for the purpose of advertising. 
(10)  Any telecommunications facility may co-locate on any existing tower, pole or other structure as long as there is no increase in height to the existing facility. 
(11)  A commercial telecommunication facility that ceases operation for a period of 12 consecutive months shall be determined to have terminated and shall be removed within 90 days of termination at the property owner's expense. It shall be the duty of both the property owner and the tower owner to notify the city in writing of any intent to abandon the use of the tower. 
(12)  Communication facilities not requiring FAA painting/marking shall have either a galvanized finish or [be] painted a dull blue, gray, or black finish. 
(13)  An application for a telecommunications facility shall be submitted in accordance with the Department's Plan Review submittal requirements. 
(14)  An application for a telecommunication facility shall include a certification from a registered engineer that the structure will meet the applicable design standards for wind loads. 
(15)  Communications facilities shall not be located in 100-year flood plain or delineated wetlands. 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 4(Exh. D), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2091.1 - Reserved. 
Sec. 10-2092. - Club. 
(a)  Standards: 
(1)  All buildings and accessory uses other than parking shall be located at least 50 feet from all property lines of any residential district and/or AG-1 district used for single family. 
(2)  Permitted curb cut access shall not be from a local street. 
(3)  Outdoor facilities within 200 feet of any residential district or dwelling shall limit the hours of operation from 8:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. 
(4)  Outdoor recreational facilities shall be set back a minimum of 100 feet from all property lines of any residential district and/or AG-1 district used for single family, except as otherwise permitted with an Administrative Permit for a recreational court or swimming pool. 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 4(Exh. D), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2092.1 - Reserved. 
Sec. 10-2093. - Community garden, landscaping business, plant nursery, or garden center with indoor retail component. 
(a)  Standards: 
(1)  Minimum one acre lot required. 
(2)  No access shall be allowed from local streets. 
(3)  No parking is permitted in the minimum front yard. 
(4)  All use areas/structures other than parking and pedestrian walkways shall be located at least 25 feet from any adjoining residential district or AG-1 (Agricultural) district. 
(5)  Limit hours of operation from 6:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. 
(6)  The minimum buffers and landscape strips required for the M-I-X (Mixed Use District) zoning district when adjacent to residential zoning districts as specified in Chapter 6 shall be required. 
(7)  Structure(s) for retail sales shall be limited to 1,000 total gross square feet. 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 4(Exh. D), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2093.1 - Reserved. 
Sec. 10-2094. - Driving range (not associated with a golf course). 
(a)  Standards: 
(1)  Lot area shall be a minimum of ten acres. 
(2)  Permitted curb cut access shall be from a major collector or arterial. 
(3)  Loudspeakers/paging systems are prohibited adjacent to residential districts and districts used for single family. 
(4)  The hours of operation shall be limited to 8:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. adjacent to residential districts and/or AG-1 districts used for single family. 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 4(Exh. D), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2094.1. - Reserved. 
Sec. 10-2095. - Electrified fences. 
(a)  Standards: 
(1)  Allowed only on single tenant commercial sites zoned C-2 with a minimum lot size of 20 acres. Electrified fences are prohibited as an allowable fence type in any other commercial zoning district. Properties zoned B-P, I-1 and I-2 are exempt from this standard. 
(2)  Electrified fences are prohibited on commercial-zoned multi-tenant development sites. 
(3)  The use of barbed wire, razor wire or concertina wire is prohibited in conjunction with an electrified fence. 
(4)  A five-foot vegetative buffer is required when adjacent to a residentially zoned property. 
(5)  A five-foot vegetative screen is required when adjacent to the public right-of-way. 
(6)  Electrified fences shall not be located within required landscape buffers. 
(7)  Five copies of a drawing, no larger in size than 11" × 17", with dimensions (distances in feet) of the site, depicting location of fencing and vegetative buffers. 
(8)  Electrified fences shall not exceed ten feet in height. 
(9)  A fence pursuant to the standards for fencing in the City of East Point shall be constructed parallel to and on the exterior side of the electrified fence. This fence shall not be electrified. The exterior fence shall be no less than four inches from the electrified fence. 
(10)  Electrified fences shall be a minimum of (25) twenty-five feet from all perimeter property lines when adjacent to residential zoning districts. 
(11)  Electrified fences shall be clearly identified with warning signs stating "Danger, premises are protected with an electrified fence," and shall be placed on the electrified fence no less than five feet high from finished grade and spaced every 20 feet along the fence length. Signage shall be a minimum of one square foot. 
(12)  The energizer for electric fences must be driven by a commercial storage battery not to exceed 12 volts DC. The storage battery shall be charged primarily by a solar panel, which may be augmented by a commercial trickle charger. 
(13)  Electrically charged portions of a security fence shall be separated from all publically accessible areas by security buffers. 
(14)  A Knox Box rapid entry system, unlocked by a key, shall be required and installed per the standards of the City of East Point Fire Department. 
(15)  Power source for electrified fences shall come from an internal source and not be generated directly from a City powered source. 
(16)  The conductors of an electrified fence shall not be energized until after the owner or operator of the fence has complied with number (11) of this section. 
(17)  Electrified fence conductors shall not be mounted on a support surface used for any overhead power line. 
(18)  Electrified fences shall meet UL standards. 
(19)  It shall be unlawful for any person to install, maintain or operate an electrified fence in violation of this section. 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 4(Exh. D), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2095.1 - Reserved. 
Sec. 10-2096. - Film production. 
(a)  Standards: 
(1)  Application. 
A.  Applicant must request permission to use City property including but not limited to, parks, streets, alleys, sidewalks, or buildings owned by the City, for a film production prior to submission of the application. 
B.  Rush approvals (permits requested within less than 14 days of production) will be assessed due to increased demand for staff time and coordination. The application shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
i.  The filming project name; 
ii.  The name and contact information of the applicant, including postal address, email address, and telephone number; 
iii.  A valid photo identification of the applicant; 
iv.  The name and contact information of the producer (if the applicant is not the producer); 
v.  The dates, times and locations of the filming for which permit is being requested, and a general description of the filming activity that will occur at each location; 
vi.  Where the producer is a student, an official letter or document from his/her school confirming that s/he is currently enrolled there. In addition, the student identification card and a valid driver's license. Where the student does not have a driver's license, s/he may present a different form of identification that includes his/her photo. 
(2)  Public Works/Public Safety. 
a.  If roads are to be blocked or traffic disrupted in any manner, off-duty City of East Point police officers must be hired and compensated at a minimum of three hours per day. (Note: Closure of State roads requires a 45-day lead time and approval from the Georgia Department of Transportation.) 
b.  Removal, cutting or trimming of vegetation in the public right-of-way is prohibited unless specifically approved by the permit. 
c.  No film activity which involves the use of explosives, pyrotechnics, fire, smoke-making machines or other special effects may be undertaken unless specifically approved by the City of East Point Fire Department. 
d.  Tents or temporary membrane structures having an area in excess of 5,000 square feet require an inspection by the City of East Point Fire Marshall. 
e.  Emergency vehicle access shall be maintained at all times. EMS personnel are required on-site for productions with stunts being performed. 
f.  The City of East Point Fire Marshall shall have full access to any film production to ensure safety for crew members, the public, and surrounding properties. 
(3)  Permit issuance. 
a.  If permission is granted by the City, a written permit will be issued including time, date and location of filming and acceptable activities within the scope of the permit. 
b.  A producer and/or applicant that receives a permit is responsible for knowing and complying with this ordinance and all other laws, including other ordinances and regulations that establish prerequisites, authorizations and other required permissions applicable to the filming. 
c.  Upon receipt of the permit, the production company must provide a certificate of insurance naming the City of East Point as an additional insured. The City requires an insurance policy rider for general liability and worker's compensation for $1,000,000 each occurrence and aggregate with endorsement naming the City of East Point as additional insured. The East Point BIDA (Business and Industrial Development Authority) requires an insurance policy rider for general liability and worker's compensation for $1,000,000 each occurrence and aggregate with endorsement naming East Point BIDA as additional insured for film production on properties owned by the authority. 
d.  Upon receipt of the permit, the production company must notify affected businesses and property owners within 500 feet of production and all representatives of East Point City Council. Compensation may be necessary if business and home environments are greatly disrupted. 
e.  The City shall require the production company to have the permit on site at all times. 
f.  Notwithstanding any other part of this Code, any producer that performs filming without receiving a permit, violates the material terms of a permit, or is otherwise in violation of this ordinance, shall be subject to the provisions of Section 1-1006. 
(4)  Film production wrap-up. Upon completion of work, all materials and debris shall be entirely removed and the right-of-way left in the same condition it was in immediately prior to filming. Any costs for clean-up by the City will be charged to the permit holder who will be invoiced by the City for such costs. Invoices for such costs must be paid in full within thirty (30) days from the date of issuance by the City. 
(5)  Advertising. 
a.  The City of East Point logo its buildings or the name of the City may not be included in the film or its marketing and advertising without written permission. 
b.  Where permitted filming includes advertising signs or other displays of commercial speech, the signs and/or displays must be removed upon the expiration of the permit. 
(6)  Indemnification. 
a.  The producer must sign an indemnification provision on the permit whereby the producer agrees to indemnify the City and its officials and employees from all claims, losses and expenses, including attorneys' fees and costs, that may arise from the permit and any of the activities performed pursuant to the permit by, on behalf of, or at the direction of the producer, except to the extent that claims, losses and/or expenses are caused by the gross negligence or intentional misconduct of the City, its officials and or employees. 
b.  For use of properties owned by East Point BIDA, an indemnification provision must be signed by the producer whereby the producer agrees to indemnify East Point BIDA and its officials and employees from all claims, losses and expenses, including attorneys' fees and costs, that may arise from the permit and any of the activities performed pursuant to the permit by, on behalf of, or at the direction of the producer, except to the extent that claims, losses and/or expenses are caused by the gross negligence or intentional misconduct of East Point BIDA, its officials and/or employees. 
(7)  Exception. A permit shall not be required for filming on private property or for the filming of public events such as rallies, protests, demonstrations, or other events held on City property and open to the public at large. 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 4(Exh. D), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2096.1 - Reserved. 
Sec. 10-2097. - Food trucks. 
(a)  Standards: 
Application. 
(1)  The application shall, at a minimum, consists of the following data: 
a.  Applicant's name and current address; 
b.  Social security number; 
c.  A dimensional drawing that clearly shows the footprint and placement of the food truck and the operating area; 
d.  GDOR retail identification tax number; 
e.  State issued picture identification; 
f.  Make, model, and license plate number of food truck; 
g.  City business license; 
h.  Applicant must provide a copy of approved permit from the Fulton County Health Department; 
i.  A general description of the items permissible for sale to be sold or offered for sale; and 
j.  A valid licensing agreement authorizing the vendor to engage in sales of licensed branded merchandise if applicable. 
Vending operational rules. 
(1)  No permit shall be effective for more than 180 consecutive days. An application for said permit shall be submitted no less than 14 days prior to commencement. 
(2)  Food trucks are not allowed in residential zoning districts. 
(3)  Hours of operation shall be 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. During Daylight Savings Time the hours of operation shall be 9:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. 
(4)  The license and all applicable health certificates under which a food truck is operating must be firmly attached and visible on the food truck at all times. 
(5)  Vending operations may not obstruct vehicular traffic flow. 
(6)  Any driver of a food truck must possess a valid Georgia driver's license. 
(7)  Food trucks shall not make sounds or announcements to call attention to the food truck either while traveling on the public rights-of-way or when stationary. At all times said food truck shall comply with the City of East Point Noise Ordinance. 
(8)  Permitted signage shall mean any signage marketing and/or advertising for any food truck that meet the following requirements: 
a.  Sandwich board signage located on the premises of where the food truck is operating. Sandwich and sidewalk signs are allowed not to 16 square feet in size. Sign material should be of durable weather resistant PVC or hardwood. Lettering should not exceed four feet in height. A permit is required. 
b.  Wall signage that is safely affixed to the food truck so as to be flat against the surface of the food truck. No permit is required. 
(9)  Vendors may sell food and non-alcoholic beverage items only. 
(10)  Food trucks shall not be left unattended or stored at any time in the operating area when vending is not taking place or during restricted hours of operation. 
(11)  The area within which a food truck is operating shall, at all times, be kept clean and free from litter, garbage, rubble, and debris. To that end, each food truck vendor must provide a trash and garbage receptacle in which patrons or customers may place their litter or garbage. The receptacle shall be within ten feet of the food truck. The receptacle must be adequate in size so waste does not begin to overflow from the receptacle. The operator of the food truck must remove this litter or garbage from the permitted location when he or she leaves the permitted location. 
(12)  Food trucks may only be open to and may only serve customers from the side of the truck facing the sidewalk. Food trucks are prohibited from operating with their trucks open to the roadway. 
(13)  Designated food truck areas shall be open to food truck vendors on a first come first serve basis. 
(14)  A food truck vendor shall maintain $1,000,000.00 liability insurance policy. Proof of current liability insurance, issued by an insurance company licensed to do business in Georgia, protecting the food truck, the public and the City from all claims for damage to property and bodily injury, including death, which may arise from operation under or in connection with the permit. Such insurance shall name the City as an additional insured and shall provide that the policy shall not terminate or be canceled prior to the expiration date without 30 days advanced written notice to the City. 
(15)  A drive-through shall not be used at any food truck. A person operating a food truck shall not conduct business with or accept orders from any patrons or customers while such patrons or customers are in their motor vehicles. 
(16)  Operators of a food truck must maintain a minimum distance of 300-feet from any building housing an established licensed eating and drinking establishment. This distance will be measured from the serving window in a straight line to the property line of the nearest bricks and mortar food establishment. If a food truck operates less than 300-feet from any building housing an established licensed eating and drinking establishment, they must have expressed and signed consent from all affected establishments. 
(17)  Activity or structure shall also maintain a minimum setback of ten (10) feet from any internal drive or permitted curb cut. 
(18)  City designated food truck areas shall be open to food truck vendors on a first come first serve basis. City designated locations follow: 
a.  Main Street (west side of street) designated two-hour parking spaces between West Cleveland Avenue and Ware Avenue. 
(19)  Food trucks operating on private property shall provide a notarized written authorization statement of the property owner or lease holder of the subject site to the Department of Planning and Community Development. A 24-hour contact number of the property owner or leaseholder shall be provided along with the application. All provisions of this ordinance shall apply. Food trucks shall not obstruct required parking spaces on private property. 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 4(Exh. D), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2097.1. - Reserved. 
Sec. 10-2098. - Golf course. 
(a)  Standards: 
(1)  A minimum 100-foot setback for all buildings and parking areas shall be provided adjacent to any residential district and/or AG-1 district used for single family. 
(2)  Driving range, tees, greens and fairways shall be required to have a 100-foot setback from minor, arterial, and major collector roads. 
(3)  Permitted curb cut access shall be from a major thoroughfare unless shown on the approved preliminary plat of a single family subdivision. 
(4)  When located outside a golf course/subdivision development, a minimum 50-foot wide buffer and a 10-foot improvement setback shall be provided adjacent to all buildings and parking areas when said facilities are located adjacent to any residential district and/or AG-1 district used for single family. 
(5)  A minimum 25-foot buffer and a 10-foot improvement setback shall be provided adjoining any residential district and/or AG-1 district used for single family located outside the golf course development or any associated development. 
(6)  When located adjacent to any residential district and/or AG-1 district used for single family, the hours of operation shall be limited to 8:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 4(Exh. D), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2098.1. - Reserved. 
Sec. 10-2099. - Outdoor event, small. 
The City Council finds that uniform regulation of indoor and outdoor events on public and private (excludes private party or event held at a location on residential property occupied by the host) property is necessary to adequately protect the health, safety and welfare of the public, to conserve and properly allocate City resources and to simplify the process applicants use to secure Administrative Permits. The Department of Planning and Community Development shall be responsible for the review and processing of all small special event administrative permits (as defined herein) regardless of the type of event being held. If approval of other City departments is necessary prior to the approval of such a permit, the Department of Planning and Community Development will be responsible for circulation of the application to the relevant City departments for review and comment All applications for a small special event administrative permit must secure approval through the Administrative Permit process and must meet the following criteria for approval: 
(a)  Standards: 
(1)  No permit shall be effective for more than 14 consecutive days for a single event on the same property. An application for an Administrative Permit shall be made no less than 7 days prior to the event for an event with less than 250 projected attendees and no less than 14 days for an event with 250 to less than 2000 projected attendees, unless road closure is proposed or alcohol service at the event is proposed. If road closure or alcohol service at the event is proposed, an Administrative Permit application, regardless of projected attendance numbers, must be made no less than 45 days prior to the event. Said permit must be posted on site such that it is visible from the street. If such permit is for a parade, the parade chairman or other person heading or leading such activity shall carry the parade permit upon his person during the conduct of the parade. 
(2)  The hours of operation shall be specified and shall be within the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m., Sunday through Thursday and 8:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m., Friday through Saturday. 
(3)  The entire property shall comply with the zoning district's setback requirements. 
(4)  No temporary sanitary facility or trash receptacle may be located within 100 feet of a property line of any residential use. 
(5)  No tent, table or other temporary structure shall be located within 250 feet of a single family detached residential structure except within the C-R district. Tents less than 5,000 square feet do not require a building permit; tents equal to or greater than 5,000 square feet require structural plan review and a building permit. All tents are subject to the approval of the Fire Marshall and Chief Building Official. 
(6)  Sales from vehicles with the exception of permitted vending carts and food trucks are prohibited. 
(7)  The entire property shall comply with East Point's parking requirements. 
(8)  No equipment, vehicle, display or sales activity shall block access to a public facility such as a telephone booth, mail box, parking meter, fire hydrant, fire alarm box, traffic control box, driveway or other access point. 
(9)  A sound level of 65 dBA shall not be exceeded at adjacent property lines of any residential use. 
(10)  Signage shall be in accordance with Chapter 7, Signs. 
(11)  Eight (8) copies of a drawing, no larger in size than 11" × 17", with dimensions (distances in feet) of the activity's location from the site's property lines and other minimum distance requirements as specified by this Section shall be submitted to the Department of Planning and Community Development for approval. Said drawing shall also depict the north arrow, curb cuts and traffic patterns. 
(12)  Projected attendance for the event must total 2,000 people or less for the entire duration of the event. If projected attendance exceeds 2,000, the applicant must secure approval from City Council for the event through the Use Permit Process set forth in Article J of the Zoning Regulations and pursuant to the standards set forth in Sections 10-2086 through 10-2087 and 10-2115 through 10-2150. 
(13)  Additional permits required for the proposed event, including but not limited to food service permit, electrical permit, mechanical permit, building permit, business license, alcohol license, vendor permit, must be secured prior to the approval of the special event Administrative Permit. Those relevant permits must be applied for separately in accordance with the City of East Point Code. 
(b)  Procedures: Applications for Administrative Permits shall be on forms provided by the Department of Planning and Community Development and shall be accompanied by the following documents and/or information in written form: 
1.  A notarized written authorization statement of the property owner or lease holder of the subject site. 
2.  A 24-hour contact number of the property owner or lease holder. 
(c)  Applicability: This section shall not apply to special events with projected attendance of more than 2,000 people. Special events with greater than 2,000 in projected attendance must meet the standards and follow the procedures for securing a Use Permit approved by the City Council. 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 4(Exh. D), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2099.1. - Reserved. 
Sec. 10-2100. - Reserved. 
Sec. 10-2100.1. - Reserved 
Sec. 10-2101. - Recreational court, private. 
(a)  Standards: 
(1)  Detached dwellings. Recreational courts serving single family detached dwellings shall be located in side or rear yards but shall not be located within a minimum yard. 
(2)  Multi-family. Recreational courts, accessory structures, and fencing shall be located a minimum of 100 feet from any residential building, adjoining property line or street. 
(3)  Neighborhood. Recreational courts serving a neighborhood must be located within the limits of the underlying zoning. 
a.  Use of the recreational courts shall be limited to residents and guests of the neighborhood in which they are located. 
b.  Recreational courts, accessory structures, fencing, and parking shall be located a minimum of 100 feet from all adjoining property lines. 
c.  Landscape strips and buffer requirements shall be as specified by Chapter 6. 
d.  A maximum 4-square foot sign identifying the future use of the property for a recreational court shall be posted adjoining the lot's frontage until a Certificate of Occupancy is issued for the facility. 
e.  Sources of exterior illumination shall be directed away from adjoining residences and shall not exceed 1.2 foot candles along an adjoining residential property line. Outdoor lighting of recreation facilities in or adjoining residential districts or uses shall be allowed only between dusk and 11:00 p.m. 
f.  A maximum continuous sound level of 60 dBA and a maximum peak sound level of 75 dBA shall not be exceeded at property lines adjacent to single family residential uses. 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 4(Exh. D), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2101.1. - Reserved. 
Sec. 10-2102. - Recreational courts, public. 
Recreational courts operated as a club (except those serving residential developments), or courts operated as a business are defined herein as public courts. 
(a)  Standards: 
(1)  Recreational courts, accessory structures, fencing, and parking shall be located a minimum of 100 feet from all property lines which abut single family residential uses. Adjacent to all other zonings and uses, the district setback requirements shall apply. 
(2)  Landscape strips and buffer requirements shall be as specified by Chapter 6. 
(3)  Sources of exterior illumination shall be directed away from adjoining residences and shall not exceed 1.2 foot candles along an adjoining residential property line. Outdoor lighting of recreation facilities in or adjoining residential districts or uses shall be used only between dusk and 11:00 P.M. 
(4)  A maximum continuous sound level of 60 dBA and a maximum peak sound level of 75 dBA shall not be exceeded at property lines of adjacent residential districts and/or AG-1 districts used for single family. 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 4(Exh. D), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2102.1. - Reserved. 
Sec. 10-2103. - Relocated residential structure. 
(a)  Standards: 
(1)  The applicant shall include the following with the application for the Administrative Permit: 
a.  The address from which the structure is being relocated. 
b.  A photograph of the structure prior to its relocation. 
c.  The total heated floor area of both the existing structure and the renovated structure. 
(2)  The location of the structure and the heated floor area of the structure shall be in compliance with the minimum standards of the zoning district and/or conditions of zoning. 
(3)  The residential structure shall be affixed to a permanent foundation within six months of the date of the house moving permit, and the certificate of occupancy shall not be issued until such improvements are completed. 
(4)  All standards of this Ordinance (except number (2) above) and other applicable regulations shall be met within one year from the date of this permit issuance. 
(5)  A House Moving Permit shall be obtained from the Planning and Community Development Department in conjunction with this Administrative Permit. 
(6)  A building permit for the repair and construction of said structure shall be obtained within 30 days of the issuance of the Administrative Permit. 
(7)  The exterior of the structure shall be brought into compliance with the East Point Building Regulations within six months of the issuance of this Administrative Permit. 
(8)  Prior to occupancy, a Certificate of Occupancy must be obtained from the Department of Planning and Community Development. 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 4(Exh. D), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2103.1. - Reserved. 
Sec. 10-2104. - Revival tent. 
(a)  Standards: 
(1)  In an AG-1 (Agricultural) or a residential district, a revival tent may be placed only on property occupied by an existing building used as a church, temple, or place of worship. 
(2)  A permit may be granted for a maximum of 14 days in a calendar year. 
(3)  The revival tent or any area used for assembly shall be located at least 200 feet from a property line of any residential district and/or AG-1 district used for single family. 
(4)  No temporary, sanitary facility or trash receptacle may be located within 200 feet of an existing dwelling, and no tent shall be located within 250 feet of an existing dwelling. 
(5)  Provide one parking space per four seats. 
(6)  A drawing to scale shall accompany the application and shall accurately depict the number of seats and the standards of this section. 
(7)  The hours of operation shall be no earlier than 8:00 a.m. or later than 11:00 p.m. 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 4(Exh. D), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2104.1. - Reserved. 
Sec. 10-2105. - Roadside produce stands. 
(a)  Standards: 
(1)  No more than four Administrative Permits shall be granted per year and no single permit shall be effective for more than 30 consecutive days; however, two or more permits, not to exceed four, may be combined for a duration of 60 days, 90 days or a maximum of 120 days. An application for said permit(s) shall be made no less than 14 days prior to the event. Said permit must be posted on site such that it is visible from the street. 
(2)  The hours of operation shall be 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. 
(3)  Two copies of a drawing, no larger in size than 11" × 17", with dimensions (distances in feet) of the activity's location from the site's property lines and other minimum distance requirements as specified by this section shall be submitted to the Department of Planning and Community Development for approval. Said drawing shall also depict north arrow, curb cuts and traffic patterns. 
(4)  The applicant shall provide a notarized written authorization statement of the property owner or lease holder of the subject site to the Department of Planning and Community Development. A 24-hour contact number of the property owner or lease holder shall be provided along with permit application. 
(5)  The property on which the applicant is permitted must be located at least 1,500 feet from a permanent business or another vendor which offers the same or similar merchandise as that of the applicant. The applicant shall provide names of all established businesses which sell similar or the same merchandise within 1,500 feet of the proposed vendor site. 
(6)  Any activity or structure shall maintain a minimum 20-foot setback from the right-of-way and not be located within a required landscape strip or buffer. Said activity or structure shall also maintain a minimum setback of ten feet from any internal drive or permitted curb cut. 
(7)  A minimum of six parking spaces shall be provided for the exclusive use of the roadside produce stand and shall not occupy the minimum required parking spaces for any other use on site. 
(8)  No temporary sanitary facility or trash receptacle may be located within 100 feet of a property line of a residential use. 
(9)  No tent, table is allowed. All vending shall be conducted from a pushcarts/vending cart. 
(10)  All pushcarts/vending carts must fit within an area four feet in width, not including protective overhang, by eight feet in length, not including trailer hitch, and eight feet in height. 
(11)  All pushcarts/vending carts must meet all Fulton County Health Department regulations. 
(12)  No vending station or any item related to the operation of a vending business shall be leaned against or hung from any building or any other structure, including but not limited to, lampposts, parking meters, mailboxes, traffic signal stations, fire hydrants, trees, tree boxes, benches, bus shelters or traffic barriers. 
(13)  All items related to the operation of a vending business shall be kept either on, in or under a vending station. No such items shall be stored or placed upon any public space adjacent to the vending stand, pushcart or station. 
(14)  No equipment, vehicle, display or sales activity shall block access to a public facility such as a telephone booth, mail box, parking meter, fire hydrant, fire alarm box, traffic control box, driveway or other access point. 
(15)  A sound level of 65 dBA shall not be exceeded at adjacent property lines of any residential use. 
(16)  Signage advertising the vending operation is prohibited. 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 4(Exh. D), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2105.1. - Reserved. 
Sec. 10-2106. - Roadside vending. 
(a)  Standards: 
(1)  No more than two Administrative Permits shall be granted per year and no permit shall be effective for more than nine consecutive days. An application for said permit shall be made no less than 14 days prior to the event. Said permit must be posted on site such that it is visible from the street. 
(2)  The hours of operation shall be 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. 
(3)  Two copies of a drawing, no larger in size than 11" × 17", with dimensions (distances in feet) of the activity's location from the site's property lines and other minimum distance requirements as specified by this Section shall be submitted to the Department of Planning and Community Development for approval. Said drawing shall also depict north arrow, curb cuts and traffic patterns. 
(4)  The applicant shall provide a notarized written authorization statement of the property owner or lease holder of the subject site to the Department of Planning and Community Development. A 24-hour contact number of the property owner or lease holder shall be provided along with permit application. 
(5)  The property on which the applicant is permitted must be located at least 1,500 feet from a permanent business or another vendor which offers the same or similar merchandise as that of the applicant. The applicant shall provide names of all established businesses which sell similar or the same merchandise within 1,500 feet of the proposed vendor site. 
(6)  Any vending displays or activity shall maintain a minimum 20-foot setback from the right-of-way and not be located within a required landscape strip or buffer. Said displays or activities shall also maintain a minimum setback of ten feet from any internal drive or permitted curb cut. 
(7)  A minimum of six parking spaces shall be provided adjacent to the vending area for the exclusive use of the roadside vending and shall not occupy the minimum required parking spaces for any other use on site. 
(8)  No temporary sanitary facility or trash receptacle may be located within 100 feet of a property line of a residential use. 
(9)  No pushcarts/vending cart shall be located within 250 feet of a residential structure. Tents and tarps are prohibited. Sales from vehicles are prohibited. 
(10)  No tent, table is allowed. All vending shall be conducted from a pushcarts/vending cart. 
(11)  All pushcarts/vending carts must fit within an area four feet in width, not including protective overhang, by eight feet in length, not including trailer hitch, and eight feet in height. 
(12)  All pushcarts/vending carts must meet all Fulton County Health Department regulations. 
(13)  No vending station or any item related to the operation of a vending business shall be leaned against or hung from any building or any other structure, including but not limited to, lampposts, parking meters, mailboxes, traffic signal stations, fire hydrants, trees, tree boxes, benches, bus shelters or traffic barriers. 
(14)  All items related to the operation of a vending business shall be kept either on, in or under a vending station. No such items shall be stored or placed upon any public space adjacent to the vending stand, pushcart or station. 
(15)  No equipment, vehicle, display or sales activity shall block access to a public facility such as a telephone booth, mail box, parking meter, fire hydrant, fire alarm box, traffic control box, driveway or other access point. 
(16)  A sound level of 65 dBA shall not be exceeded at adjacent property lines of any residential use. 
(17)  Signage advertising the vending operation is prohibited. 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 4(Exh. D), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2106.1. - Reserved. 
Sec. 10-2107. - Seasonal business use. 
(a)  Standards: 
(1)  An Administrative Permit shall not be issued for the same seasonal business use more than once in any calendar year. Said seasonal business use must correlate to a calendar holiday or event. Said permit shall not exceed a total of 30 consecutive days for each use. Said permit must be posted on site such that it is visible from the street. An application for said permit shall be made no less than 14 days prior to the event. Example: One permit may be issued for the sale of Christmas trees for a maximum of 30 consecutive days. A second permit may be issued for the sale of pumpkins for a maximum of 30 consecutive days. 
(2)  The hours of operation shall be 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m., Sunday through Thursday and 8:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m., Friday through Saturday. 
(3)  Two copies of a drawing, no larger in size than 11" × 17", with dimensions (distances in feet) of the activity's location from the site's property lines and other minimum distance requirements as specified by this Section shall be submitted to the Department of Planning and Community Development for approval. Said drawing shall also depict north arrow, curb cuts and traffic patterns. 
(4)  The applicant shall provide a notarized written authorization statement of the property owner or lease holder of the subject site to the Department of Planning and Community Development. A 24- hour contact number of the property owner or lease holder shall be provided along with permit application. 
(5)  The property on which the roadside vendor is permitted must be located at least 1,500 feet from a permanent business or another vendor which offers the same or similar merchandise as that of the vendor. Vendor shall provide names of all established businesses which sell similar or the same merchandise within 1,500 feet of the proposed vendor site. 
(6)  Any display or sales activity shall maintain a minimum 20-foot setback from the right-of-way and shall not be located within a required landscape strip or buffer. Said displays shall also maintain a minimum setback of ten feet from any internal drive or permitted curb cut. 
(7)  A minimum of six parking spaces shall be provided for the exclusive use of the seasonal business and shall not occupy the minimum required parking spaces for any other use on site. 
(8)  No temporary sanitary facility or trash receptacle may be located within 100 feet of a property line of a residential use. 
(9)  No tent, table or other temporary structure shall be located within 100 feet of a residential structure. Sales from vehicles are prohibited. Tents less than 5,000 square feet do not require a building permit; tents equal to or greater than 5,000 square feet require structural plan review and a building permit. All tents are subject to the approval of the Fire Department. 
(10)  No equipment, vehicle, display or sales activity shall block access to a public facility such as a telephone booth, mail box, parking meter, fire hydrant, fire alarm box, traffic control box, driveway or other access point. 
(11)  A sound level of 65 dBA shall not be exceeded at adjacent property lines of any residential use. 
(12)  Signage shall be in accordance Chapter 7, Signs. 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 4(Exh. D), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2107.1. - Reserved. 
Sec. 10-2108. - Senior housing. 
(a)  Standards: In circumstances where conflict exists between overlay guidelines and this Ordinance or resolution: (1) Overlay guidelines will generally supersede general ordinance and/or resolutions; (2) If the issue is specifically excluded in the Overlay, the ordinance and/or resolution will apply; (3) If the issue is addressed in both documents, the more restrictive will apply. 
(1)  Building height shall be in accordance with the underlying zoning. 
(2)  No more than 20 dwelling units per acre shall be allowed in a multi-family development. 
(3)  No dwelling unit shall contain more than two (2) bedrooms. 
(4)  Multi-family dwelling units shall have a minimum of 600 square feet of gross floor area. 
(5)  Parking spaces shall be calculated as one and four tenths (1.4) spaces per dwelling unit. 
(6)  No parking shall be allowed in the minimum front yard setback. 
(7)  Senior facilities must be served by public water and sewer. 
(8)  Landscape strips and buffers shall be provided as specified in the MIX district in Chapter 6 when adjacent to residential. 
(9)  The property shall be deed restricted to senior housing except as provided for by Fair Housing laws. 
(10)  Facility shall comply with all applicable local, state, and federal regulations and copies of any applicable permits shall be provided to the Department of Planning and Community Development prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(11)  Projects are encouraged to incorporate Easy Living and applicable accessibility standards (as administered and copyrighted by a coalition of Georgia citizens including AARP of Georgia, Atlanta Regional Commission, Concrete Change, Georgia Department of Community Affairs, Governor's Council on Developmental Disabilities, Home Builders Association of Georgia, Shepherd Center and the Statewide Independent Living Council of Georgia). 
(12)  Housing shall have at least 80 percent of the occupied dwelling units occupied by at least one person who is 55 years of age or older which shall be verified by the property owner in a manner deemed acceptable pursuant to policies and procedures adopted by the Director of Planning and Community Development. 
(Ord. No. 061-016 , § 4(Exh. D), 9-19-16; Ord. No. 017-017A , § 1, 7-17-17) 
Sec. 10-2108.1. - Reserved. 
Sec. 10-2109. - Swimming pool, private. 
(a)  Standards: All swimming pools shall be completely surrounded by an enclosure. Such enclosure shall be a fence, wall, or building, to prevent access to the pool by unsupervised children and/or animals. The enclosure shall be an effective fence or wall not less than five feet high with self-closing, positive-latching gates provided on the outer side of the deck area. The enclosure entrance shall be locked when the pool is not open for use and all surrounding objects or structures must have a separation of five feet from the enclosure to provide an unclimbable space. The enclosure shall be in place prior to pool completion. Materials and construction shall comply with the regulations administered by the Fulton County Health Department. 
(1)  Detached dwellings. Swimming pools shall be allowed in side and rear yards of single family dwellings in any district and may also be allowed at the back of the house on a double frontage single family residential lot as approved by the Department. Pools, pool equipment, and their decks must be a minimum of ten feet from all property lines, except that when perimeter setbacks are required, for example in CUP zoned districts, pools, pool equipment, and decks cannot be located in perimeter setbacks. 
(2)  Neighborhood. Swimming pools serving a neighborhood must be located within the limits of the underlying zoning. 
a.  Use of swimming pools shall be limited to residents and guests of the neighborhood in which they are located. 
b.  Pools, pool equipment, and decks must be located at least 100 feet from all adjoining property lines. 
c.  Landscape strips and buffer requirements shall be as specified by Chapter 6. 
d.  A maximum four-square foot sign identifying the future use of the property for a swimming pool shall be posted adjoining the lot's frontage until a certificate of occupancy is issued for the facility. 
e.  Sources of exterior illumination shall be directed away from adjoining residences and shall not exceed 1.2 foot candles along an adjoining residential property line. Outdoor lighting of recreation facilities in or adjoining residential districts or uses shall be allowed only between dusk and 11:00 p.m. 
f.  A maximum continuous sound level of 60 dBA and a maximum peak sound level of 75 dBA shall not be exceeded at property lines adjacent to single family residential uses. 
(3)  Multi-family. Swimming pools, pool equipment, accessory structures, and fencing shall be located a minimum of 100 feet from any residential building, adjoining property line or street. 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 4(Exh. D), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2109.1. - Reserved. 
Sec. 10-2110. - Swimming pool, public. 
(a)  Standards: 
(1)  Pools operated as a club (except clubs serving residential developments) or pools operated as a business are defined herein as public pools. 
(2)  Pools, pool equipment, decks, and parking shall be located a minimum of 100 feet from all property lines which abut single family residential uses. Adjacent to all other zonings and uses, the district setback requirements shall be provided. 
(3)  Landscape strips and buffer requirements shall be as specified by Chapter 6. 
(4)  Sources of exterior illumination shall be directed away from adjoining residences and shall not exceed 1.2 foot candles along an adjoining residential property line. Outdoor lighting of recreation facilities in or adjoining residential districts or uses shall be allowed only between dusk and 11:00 p.m. 
(5)  A maximum continuous sound level of 60 dBA and a maximum peak sound level of 75 dBA shall not be exceeded at property lines adjacent to single family residential uses. 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 4(Exh. D), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2110.1. - Reserved. 
Sec. 10-2111. - Temporary classroom. 
(a)  Standards: 
(1)  The structure must be constructed for use as a temporary classroom and certified as such by the Planning and Community Development Department. 
(2)  The principal use must exist prior to the issuance of the permit. 
(3)  The temporary classroom shall not be used to increase the capacity or enrollment as conditioned by zoning, or as limited by other Use Permit conditions. 
(4)  An Administrative Permit for a temporary classroom shall expire three years from the date of approval at which time the structure shall be removed unless a new Administrative Permit is obtained within 30 days of the expiration date. 
(5)  The structure shall not be located within any principal building setbacks or within any required landscape strips or buffers. 
(6)  Two copies of a drawing showing dimensions shall accompany the application and shall accurately depict the proposed location of temporary structures, the traffic patterns and curb cuts and compliance with this section and all other applicable standards of this ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 4(Exh. D), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2111.1. - Reserved. 
Sec. 10-2112. - Temporary structures. 
(a)  Standards: 
(1)  Temporary structures (whether tents, site-built, mobile or manufactured structures) utilized for construction offices, ticket booths, security guard shelters, storage structures in association with construction, emission inspection stations, portable toilets and other similar uses may be permitted by the Planning and Community Development Department in any district. 
(2)  Temporary structures shall be located outside of any required buffers and landscape areas, and shall maintain the principal building setback of the district except portable toilets must maintain a 200-foot setback from existing dwelling(s). 
(3)  Temporary structures must be removed prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or within five days of completion of the temporary event or activity for which the structure was approved. 
(4)  Temporary structures used in conjunction with other permitted Administrative and Use Permits shall not be required to obtain a separate Administrative Permit. 
(5)  An Administrative Permit for a temporary structure shall expire three years from the date of approval at which time the structure shall be removed unless a new Administrative Permit is obtained within 30 days of the expiration date. 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 4(Exh. D), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2112.1. - Reserved. 
Sec. 10-2113. - Utility substations (telephone, electric, or gas, etc.). 
(a)  Standards: 
(1)  Utility substations measuring less than 35 square feet and less than five feet in height from finished grade are exempt from these regulations. 
(2)  All substation structures shall be contained within the boundaries of the subject parcel and meet the minimum development standards of the district unless otherwise required in this article section. 
(3)  Minimum setback of all utility structures from a residential structure shall be: 
a.  Electric — 200 feet. 
b.  Gas and telephone — the applicable minimum setback for the district in which located. 
(4)  A minimum ten-foot wide landscape strip planted to buffer standards shall be required around the perimeter of all utility sites except along lines where buffers are required. 
(5)  For electric substations, provide a minimum 50-foot wide replanted or natural buffer adjacent to the property lines of any residential district and/or AG-1 district used for single family. 
(6)  Interior to landscape strips or buffers that do not accomplish 100 percent visual screening as defined in the Tree Protection and Landscaping Ordinance, provide an eight-foot high opaque fence or, masonry wall, a minimum four-foot high landscaped earthen berm, a vegetative screen or some combination thereof, subject to the approval of the Planning and Community Development Department. 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 4(Exh. D), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2113.1. - Reserved. 
Sec. 10-2114. - Veterinary clinic/hospital or kennel. 
(a)  Standards: 
(1)  All of the activities directly associated with animal treatment shall occur entirely within a completely enclosed soundproof structure. 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 4(Exh. D), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2114.1. - Reserved. 
Sec. 10-2115. - Use Permits {10-2115 through 10-2150}, 
Sec. 10-2115.1. - Minimum use permit standards. 
Sec. 10-2116. - Adult book store. 
Intent and findings. It is the intent of this article to regulate the place of operation of adult book stores as defined in this Ordinance. The City Council finds, based upon an October, 1980, study by the Minnesota Crime Prevention Center, Inc., Minneapolis, Minnesota, entitled An Analysis of the Relationship Between Adult Entertainment Establishments, Crime, and Housing Values, that adult book stores are significantly related to diminishing market values of neighboring residential uses, that adult book stores should not be located in residential areas, and that adult book stores should be permitted only in locations that are at least 1/10 mile, or approximately 500 feet, from residential areas. 
The Council further finds, based upon a June, 1978, study by the Division of Planning of the St. Paul, Minnesota, Department of Planning and Economic Development and the Community Crime Prevention Project of the Minnesota Crime Control Planning Board entitled Effects on Surrounding Area of Adult Entertainment Businesses in Saint Paul, that the presence of adult book stores correlates with a decreasing market value of neighboring residential areas, that adult book stores tend to locate in areas of poorer residential condition, tend to be followed by a relative worsening of the residential condition, and that more than two adult entertainment businesses in an immediate area is associated with a statistically significant decrease in residential property market value, and that such a concentration of adult entertainment businesses in a given area should be discouraged. The Council also finds that such worsening of residential conditions will adversely affect uses found in residential areas or in the proximity of residential areas, such as public recreational facilities, public or private institutional uses, churches, schools, universities, colleges, trade-schools, libraries, and day care centers. 
The Council further finds, based upon a May 19, 1986, land use study conducted in Austin, Texas, that an adult book store within one block of a residential area decreases the market value of homes, that adult book stores are considered a sign of decline by lenders, making underwriters hesitant to approve the 90—95 percent financing many home buyers require, and that patrons of adult book stores tend to be from outside the immediate neighborhood in which the adult book store is located. 
The Council further finds, based upon a March 3, 1986, study conducted by the Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, Community Development Department entitled Adult Entertainment Businesses in Oklahoma City - A Survey of Real Estate Appraisers, that an adult bookstore will have a negative effect on residential property market values if it is located closer than one block to residential uses. 
This section is intended to be a carefully tailored regulation to minimize the adverse land use impacts caused by the undesirable secondary effects of adult bookstores, and the City Council finds that restricting adult book stores to industrially zoned areas and imposing development standards can legitimately regulate adult book stores by establishing zones where adult book stores are most compatible with other uses or the surrounding neighborhood, and by requiring minimum distances to be maintained between adult bookstore uses and other uses so as to afford the most protection to residential uses. 
It is not the intent of the City Council, in enacting this amendment to the zoning ordinance, to deny to any person rights to speech protected by the United States or Georgia Constitutions, nor is it the intent to impose any additional limitations or restrictions on the contents of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented films, videotapes, books, or other materials; further, in the adoption of this amendment to the zoning ordinance, the City Council does not intend to deny or restrict the rights of any adult to obtain or view any sexually oriented materials protected by the United States or Georgia Constitutions, nor does it intend to restrict or deny any constitutionally protected rights that distributors or exhibitors of such sexually oriented materials may have to sell, distribute, or exhibit such constitutionally protected materials; finally, in the enactment of this ordinance, the City Council intends to adopt a content neutral measure to address the secondary effects of adult bookstores. 
(a)  Standards: 
(1)  All boundary lines of the property included within the use permit as filed must be located at least 1,000 feet from the properties listed below: 
a.  The property line of RL, R-1, R-1A, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, CUP, zoned property or property conditioned or used for residential purposes. 
b.  The property line of any public recreational facilities, public or private institutional uses, including but not limited to churches, schools, universities, colleges, trade-schools, libraries, day care centers and other training facilities where minors are the primary patrons. 
(2)  The boundary line of the Use Permit must be located at least 1,500 feet from the property line of any other adult entertainment establishment or adult book store. 
(3)  Submit with the application for a Use Permit, a certified boundary survey by a licensed surveyor of the site and the property lines of surrounding properties identifying the use of properties at or within 1,000 feet of the boundary lines of the subject property and adult entertainment establishments or adult bookstores within 1,500 feet of the boundary line of the subject property. 
(4)  If the adult book store is to be located in an existing structure where a land disturbance permit is not required, an existing building permit review application must be filed and determined by the Planning and Community Development Department to be in compliance with the terms of this Ordinance prior to any occupancy. 
(5)  Permitted curb cut access shall be from a local road. 
(6)  No depiction of anatomical areas or sexual activities specified in the definition of "adult entertainment" shall be visible from outside the structure or on signage outside the structure. 
(7)  The minimum landscape areas required for the MIX zoning district as specified in Chapter 6, shall be required. Where buffers are required, the underlying zoning district buffer standards shall apply. 
(b)  Permit issuance: Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 10-2085 and Section 10-2086, any applicant meeting the above requirements and standards shall be entitled to the issuance of a use permit. 
(c)  Permit applications:. Notwithstanding any other provision herein, any material omission or untrue or misleading information contained in or left out of an application for a use permit shall be grounds for denial of said permit. 
(d)  Permit processing: The city shall have 120 days (unless the application is suspended by failure of the applicant to provide data, information or records as reasonably requested by the city and required by this Ordinance, to complete the investigation) from receipt of a completed application for a use permit to make a decision in which to grant or deny a use permit. The Department of Planning and Community Development and the Planning and Zoning Commission shall make recommendations to the City Council regarding the approval or denial of the use permit and the Council shall make the final decision after a public hearing regarding the same. In the event the City Council has not granted or denied the application within 120 days (unless the application is suspended by failure of the applicant to provide data, information or records as reasonably requested by the City to complete the investigation), the use permit shall automatically issue. 
(e)  Denial of use permit: In the event an application for a use permit is denied by the City Council, the applicant shall be notified in writing of such denial within ten business days by U.S. Mail. A decision by the City Council regarding the denial of said permit is a final action; therefore, any appeal of such decision shall be pursued by application for writ of certiorari filed with the Superior Court of Fulton County within 30 days of the decision. This appeal shall in no way preclude an applicant from seeking any other remedies available at law or equity. 
(f)  Permit application: Nothing in this section shall allow for the conducting or zoning of any business or entity which would otherwise be illegal. 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 4(Exh. D), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2116.1. - Reserved. 
Sec. 10-2117. - Adult day center. 
(a)  Standards: 
(1)  Permitted curb cut access shall be from an arterial or major collector. Permitted curb cut access may be allowed from a minor collector if within 1,000 feet of the property line of an institutional use. 
(2)  Provide a 50-foot building setback from single family detached dwelling districts and/or AG/1 districts when used for single family. 
(3)  No parking allowed in the minimum front yard. 
(4)  The minimum parking spaces provided shall be in conformance with health care facilities per Article E, Off Street Parking. 
(5)  Provide landscape strips and buffers as required in the MIX district as specified on Chapter 6 of the Zoning Code and Development Regulations when adjacent to residential. 
(6)  Facility shall comply with all applicable local, state, and federal regulations, and provide applicable permits to the Department of Planning and Community Development prior to issuance. 
(7)  Facility shall not be located closer than 1,320 feet to the nearest adult day center. 
(8)  The hours of operation shall be limited to Monday through Friday from 6:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 4(Exh. D), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2117.1 - Reserved. 
Sec. 10-2118. - Adult entertainment establishments. 
Intent. It is the intent of this section to regulate the place and manner of the operation of businesses or facilities that offer adult entertainment as defined in this Ordinance. It is well established and has been the experience of other communities in Georgia and throughout the United States that adult entertainment, which includes public nudity, has been associated with and may encourage disorderly conduct, prostitution and sexual assault. This section advances the substantial government interest in promoting and protecting public health, safety, and general welfare, maintaining law and order and prohibiting public nudity. The section is narrowly constructed to protect the First Amendment rights of citizens of East Point while furthering the substantial governmental interest of combating the secondary effects of public nudity and adult entertainment from areas and uses of the community which are incompatible. Areas and uses which are to be protected from adult entertainment include but are not limited to residential, churches, day care centers, libraries, recreational facilities, and schools. 
(a)  Standards: 
(1)  All boundary lines of the property included within the use permit must be located at least 1,000 feet from the properties listed below: 
a.  The property line of RL, R-1, R-1A, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, CUP, AG-1 zoned property or property conditioned or used for residential purposes. 
b.  The property line of any public recreational facilities, public or private institutional uses, including but not limited to churches, schools, universities, colleges, trade-schools, libraries, day care centers and other training facilities where minors are the primary patrons. 
(2)  The boundary line of the Use Permit must be located at least 1,500 feet from the property line of any other adult entertainment establishment or adult bookstore. 
(3)  Submit with the application for a Use Permit, a certified boundary survey of the site and the property lines of surrounding properties identifying the use of properties at or within 1,000 feet of the boundary lines of the subject property and adult entertainment establishments and/or adult bookstores within 1,500 feet of the boundary line of the subject property. 
(4)  No final land disturbance permit, building permit, certificate of occupancy, or building permit review certificate may be issued until the approved City of East Point adult entertainment business license is filed with the Director of the Planning and Community Development Department. 
(5)  If the adult entertainment business is to be located in an existing structure where a land disturbance permit is not required, an existing building permit review application must be filed and approved in the Planning and Community Development Department prior to any occupancy. 
(6)  The adult entertainment business shall be located a minimum of 50 feet from all property lines. 
(7)  Parking spaces at a ratio of ten per 1,000 gross square feet of floor space shall be provided. 
(8)  Permitted curb cut access shall be directly from a local road. 
(9)  On-premise signs shall not display lewd or graphic depictions of body parts or acts which are defined in Chapter 7, Signs. 
(10)  No adult entertainment shall be visible from outside the structure. 
(11)  The minimum landscape areas required for the MIX zoning district as specified in Chapter 6 shall be required. Where buffers are required, the underlying zoning district buffer standards shall apply. 
(b)  Permit issuance: Notwithstanding the provisions of Sections 10-2085 and 10-2086, any applicant meeting the above requirements and standards shall be entitled to the issuance of a use permit. 
(c)  Permit applications: Notwithstanding any other provision herein, any material omission or untrue or misleading information contained in or left out of an application for a Use Permit shall be grounds for denial of said permit. 
(d)  Permit Processing: The City shall have 120 days (unless the application is suspended by failure of the applicant to provide data, information or records as reasonably requested by the City and required by this code, to complete the investigation) from receipt of a completed application for a Use Permit to make a decision in which to grant or deny a use permit. The Department of Planning and Community Development and the Planning and Zoning Commission shall make recommendations to the City Council regarding the approval or denial of the use permit and the Council shall make the final decision after a public hearing regarding the same. In the event the City Council has not granted or denied the application within 120 days (unless the application is suspended by failure of the applicant to provide data, information or records as reasonably requested by the City to complete the investigation), the use permit shall automatically issue. 
(e)  Denial of Use Permit: In the event an application for a use permit is denied by the City Council, the applicant shall be notified in writing of such denial within ten business days by U.S. Mail. A decision by the City Council regarding the denial of said permit is a final action; therefore, any appeal of such decision shall be pursued by application for writ of certiorari filed with the Superior Court of Fulton County within 30 days of the decision. This appeal shall in no way preclude an applicant from seeking any other remedies available at law or equity. 
(f)  Permit application: Nothing in this section shall allow for the conducting of zoning of any business or entity which would otherwise be illegal. 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 4(Exh. D), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2118.1 - Reserved. 
Sec. 10-2119. - Amateur radio antenna to exceed the administrative permit height (see Administrative Permit 10-2090). 
Intent. It is the intent of this article to regulate the placement of amateur radio towers in a manner that does not impose on public health, safety, general welfare. 
The following regulations on design, location, placement, and height limits of antennas in residential districts implements East Point's governmental interest in land planning, aesthetics and public safety by requiring the following Use Permit Standards: 
(a)  Standards: 
(1)  Antennas shall be located in the rear yard. 
(2)  The request to exceed the height of 90 feet shall be accompanied by a written justification of its intent by the licensee. Under no circumstances shall an antenna exceed 200 feet in height. 
(3)  All antennas shall be set back from the property line one-third the height of the antenna or the district setback requirements, whichever is greater. However, the antenna must be located a distance equal to or greater than the antenna height from the nearest residential dwelling, excluding the primary dwelling or structure which is located on the same lot as the antenna. 
(4)  Antennas shall not be lighted. 
(5)  All antennas must be constructed with an anti-climbing device. 
(6)  Antennas shall be painted in a neutral color identical or closely compatible with surroundings. 
(7)  All guy wires must be anchored on site and outside of right-of-way. 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 4(Exh. D), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2119.1. - Reserved. 
Sec. 10-2120. - Amphitheaters. 
(a)  Standards: 
(1)  Lot area shall be a minimum of ten acres. 
(2)  The stage shall be located a minimum of 600 feet from adjacent properties zoned for residential use and/ or AG-1 districts used for single family. 
(3)  Permitted curb cut access shall be only from an arterial street. 
(4)  A minimum 100-foot buffer and ten-foot improvement setback shall be provided adjacent to residential districts, property zoned for residential use zoning or development or AG-1 districts when used for single family. 
(5)  A minimum 50-foot buffer and ten-foot improvement setback shall be provided adjacent to non-residential districts zoning or development. 
(6)  A maximum continuous sound level of 60 dBA and a maximum peak sound level of 75 dBA shall not be exceeded at the property lines of adjacent residential districts and/or AG-1 districts used for single family. 
(7)  Eight-foot high fencing shall be provided adjacent to properties zoned for residential use or AG-1 districts used for single family. 
(8)  The hours of operation of the facility shall be limited to 8:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. when adjacent to properties zoned for residential use and/or AG-1 districts used for single family. 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 4(Exh. D), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2120.1. - Reserved. 
Sec. 10-2121. - Antenna tower, and associated structure (radio, T.V., microwave broadcasting, etc.) (see Administrative Permit 10-2091) 
Intent. Pursuant to Section 704(a) of the Federal Telecommunications Policy Act of 1996, it is not the intent of this section to prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of personal wireless services in East Point. It is the intent of this Section to address the aesthetic effect of telecommunication facilities on our landscapes, our citizens' demands for these services, and the needs of service providers. 
The following regulations on design, location, placement, and height limits of antennas in residential and AG-1 zoned districts implements East Point's governmental interest in land planning, aesthetics and public safety by requiring the following Use Permit standards: 
(a)  Standards: 
(1)  Towers must be set back a distance equal to one and one-half times the height of the tower adjacent to residential and/or AG-1 zoned property. 
(2)  Height shall not exceed 200 feet from existing grade. 
(3)  Tower and associated facilities shall be enclosed by fencing not less than six feet in height and shall also be equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing device. 
(4)  A minimum ten-foot landscape strip planted to buffer standards shall be required surrounding the facility exterior to the required fence unless the Director of Planning and Community Development determines that existing plant materials are adequate. 
(5)  Antennas or towers shall not have lights unless required by federal or state law. 
(6)  Towers shall not be located within one-half mile from any existing telecommunication tower above the district height, excluding alternative structures. 
(7)  The tower shall comply with applicable state and local statutes and ordinances, including, but not limited to, building and safety codes. Towers which have become unsafe or dilapidated shall be repaired or removed pursuant to applicable state and local statutes and ordinances. 
(8)  Facilities shall not be artificially lighted except to assure human safety or as required by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). 
(9)  Communication towers shall be designed and constructed to ensure that the structural failure or collapse of the tower will not create a safety hazard to adjoining properties, according to applicable federal standards which may be amended from time to time. 
(10)  Telecommunications facilities shall not be used for advertising purposes and shall not contain any signs for the purpose of advertising. 
(11)  Any telecommunications facility may co-locate on any existing tower, pole or other structure as long as there is no increase in height to the existing facility. 
(12)  A commercial telecommunication facility that ceases operation for a period of 12 consecutive months shall be determined to have terminated and shall be removed within 90 days of termination at the property owner's expense. It shall be the duty of both the property owner and the tower owner to notify the county in writing of any intent to abandon the use of the tower. 
(13)  Communication facilities not requiring FAA painting/marking shall have either a galvanized finish or [be] painted a dull blue, gray, or black finish or shall be screened through fencing and landscaping. 
(14)  An application for a telecommunications facility shall be submitted in accordance with the Department's plan review submittal requirements. 
(15)  An application for a telecommunication facility shall include a certification from a registered engineer that the structure will meet the applicable design standards for wind loads. 
(16)  Communications facilities shall not be located in 100-year flood plain or delineated wetlands. 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 4(Exh. D), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2121.1 - Reserved. 
Sec. 10-2122. - Assisted living facility. 
(a)  Standards. 
(1)  Facilities shall be for 25 persons or more. 
(2)  At least one administrator, on-site manager, or responsible staff person must be on the premises 24 hours a day. The minimum on-site, staff-to-resident ratio is 1:3 during waking hours and 1:5 during non-waking hours. 
(3)  Permitted curb cut access shall be from an arterial or a major collector. Permitted curb cut access may be allowed from a minor collector if within 1,000 feet of the property line of an institutional use. 
(4)  Facility must provide a 50-foot building setback from single-family detached dwelling districts and /or AG-1 districts when used for single family. 
(5)  No parking allowed in the minimum front yard setback. 
(6)  Off-street parking requirements shall be one per living unit plus one per nonresident employee. Parking is not allowed in the front yard setback. 
(7)  Facility must provide landscape strips and buffers as required in the MIX district when adjacent to residential as specified in Chapter 6. 
(8)  The assisted living community must have a kitchen and a comfortable dining area which is properly equipped and adequate in size for the number of residents being served. Rooms or suites may be designed with separate kitchen facilities.. 
(9)  Bedrooms or private living spaces assigned to individual residents must have at least 80 square feet of usable floor space per resident with no more than two residents sharing the private living space, or provide the amount required by the State of Georgia for the licensing of assisted living facilities, whichever is greater. 
(10)  Applicants must submit an 11" &times 17" floor plan showing the room layout of the assisted living facility, drawn to scale. 
(11)  Facility shall comply with all applicable local, state, and federal regulations, and provide applicable permits to the Department of Planning and Community Development prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy and business license. 
(12)  Assisted living communities must provide or have conveniently located access to outdoor spaces for the use of the residents and access to parking spaces for the use of residents and visitors. Such outdoor spaces may include solaria, porches, balconies, roof decks, gardens or patios. 
(13)  Each location shall be within 1,500 feet of a public transit station or transit stop or the operator of the assisted living facility shall be required to provide transportation service for its occupants. 
(14)  Facility shall provide to the East Point Fire and Police Departments a current and updated annually list of residents living in the facility who have disabilities, and information concerning special needs, so as to ensure each resident's safety and removal from the premises in the event of a fire or similar emergency within the facility. 
(15)  Off-street parking requirements shall be one per living unit plus one per nonresident employee. Parking is not allowed in the front yard setback. 
(16)  No such facility shall be located within 5,280 feet of any other assisted living facility, community living arrangement, personal care home, and medical related lodging or rehabilitation center. 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 4(Exh. D), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2122.1. - Reserved. 
Sec. 10-2123. - Bed and breakfast. 
(a)  Standards: 
(1)  A minimum of two guest rooms and a maximum of five guest rooms are permitted. 
(2)  No parking in the minimum front yard. 
(3)  The bed & breakfast shall be owner occupied. 
(4)  Permitted curb cut access shall be from a local street. 
(5)  The minimum landscape and buffer areas shall be required as specified in Chapter 6, Tree Protection and Landscape for AG-1 Agricultural District. 
(6)  Parking requirements shall be the same as hotel/motel as specified in Article E. 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 4(Exh. D), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2123.1. - Reserved. 
Sec. 10-2124. - Cemetery and/or mausoleum (human or pet). 
(a)  Standards: 
(1)  Permitted curb cut access shall be only from a major thoroughfare, unless in conjunction with a place of worship. 
(2)  No building shall be located within 50 feet of a residential district and/or AG-1 district used for single family. 
(3)  All structures, including graves, shall be inside and meet the minimum yard setbacks or 10 feet, whichever is greater. 
(4)  If located adjacent to a single-family detached dwelling district and/or AG-1 district used for single family, the minimum buffers and landscape strips required for the MIX District as specified in Chapter 6 shall be required. 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 4(Exh. D), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2124.1. - Reserved. 
Sec. 10-2125. - Church, temple or place of worship. 
(a)  Standards: 
(1)  Minimum three-acre lot required. 
(2)  All buildings and use areas/structures other than parking and pedestrian walkways shall be located at least 100 feet from any adjoining residential district and/or AG-1 district used for single family. 
(3)  No parking shall be located within the minimum front yard setback. 
(4)  Any associated day care centers, private schools, recreational fields or other uses requiring a Use Permit or Administrative Permit shall be allowed only under a separate approved Use Permit or Administrative Permit for each use. 
(5)  The minimum buffers and landscape strips required for the MIX zoning district as specified in Chapter 6, shall be required. 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 4(Exh. D), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2125.1. - Reserved. 
Sec. 10-2126. - Commercial amusement, outdoor. 
Including, but not limited to amusement parks, velodromes, bungee jumping parks, skateboard parks, ski slopes, batting cages, miniature golf, drive-in theaters, rock climbing walls, etc 
(a)  Standards: 
(1)  Permitted curb cut access shall be derived only from arterial streets. 
(2)  A minimum 100-foot buffer and 10-foot improvement setback shall be provided adjacent to residential districts and/or AG-1 districts used for single family. 
(3)  A minimum 50-foot buffer and 10-foot improvement setback shall be provided adjacent to non-residential zoning or development districts. 
(4)  A maximum continuous sound level of 60 dBA and a maximum peak sound level of 75 dBA shall not be exceeded at property lines of adjacent residential districts and/or AG-1 districts used for single family. 
(5)  Eight-foot high fencing shall be provided adjacent to any residential district and/or AG-1 district when used for single family and interior to any required landscape strips or buffers. 
(6)  The hours of operation of the facility shall be limited to 8:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. adjacent to residential districts and/or AG-1 when used for single family. 
(7)  All recreational structures and activities shall maintain a minimum setback of 100 feet from any public right-of-way. 
(8)  The height limits of the zoning district shall apply to all recreational structures unless a Use Permit to exceed the height is granted. 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 4(Exh. D), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2126.1. - Reserved. 
Sec. 10-2127. - Community living arrangement. 
(a)  Standards: 
(1)  Facilities shall be for not more than three unrelated adults. 
(2)  Permitted curb cut access shall be from an arterial or major collector. Permitted curb cut access may be allowed from a minor collector if within 1,000 feet of property line of an institutional use. 
(3)  Each community living arrangement must provide at least four parking spaces within a driveway, garage or carport, and must comply with all parking standards found in Article E, Off-Street Parking. No parking is allowed in the minimum front yard. 
(4)  The minimum parking spaces provided shall be in conformance with health care facilities per Article E, Off Street Parking. 
(5)  Provide landscape strips and buffers as required in the MIX district as specified in Chapter 6 of the Zoning Code and Development Regulations when adjacent to residential. 
(6)  Facility shall comply with all applicable local, state, and federal regulations, and provide proof of compliance with the Department of Human Resources, Division of Mental Health, Developmental Disabilities, and Addictive Diseases to the Department of Planning and Community Development prior to issuance of certificate of occupancy. 
(7)  Each location shall be within 1,500 feet of a public transit station or transit stop or the operator of the community living arrangement shall be required to provide transportation service for its occupants. 
(8)  At least one administrator, on-site manager, or responsible staff person must be on the premises 24 hours a day. The minimum on-site, staff-to-resident ratio is 1:3. 
(9)  No such facility shall be located within 5,280 feet of any other assisted living facility, community living arrangement, personal care home, and medical related lodging or rehabilitation center. 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 4(Exh. D), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2127.1. - Reserved. 
Sec. 10-2128. - Composting. 
(a)  Standards: 
(1)  Lot area shall be a minimum of five acres. 
(2)  Permitted curb cut access shall be derived from an arterial or major collector. 
(3)  The hours of operation shall be between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. 
(4)  All operations shall maintain a minimum setback of 100 feet from all property lines. 
(5)  The minimum buffers required are as specified for the I-1 District. (See Chapter 6) 
(6)  On-site traffic shall be limited to an all-weather surfaced area. 
(7)  Stored materials shall be contained in such a manner as to prevent the blowing of any materials onto any surrounding property or roadway. 
(8)  The composting facility shall obtain all necessary permits from the Department of Natural Resources, Environmental Protection Division. 
(9)  A maximum continuous sound level of 60 dBA and a maximum peak sound level of 75 dBA shall not be exceeded at property lines of adjacent residential districts and/or AG-1 districts used for single family. 
(10)  In accordance with Article J., submit an Environmental Impact Report as required. 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 4(Exh. D), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2128.1. - Reserved. 
Sec. 10-2129. - Country inn. 
(a)  Standards: 
(1)  Lot area shall be a minimum of five acres. 
(2)  A minimum of six guest rooms and a maximum of 30 rooms are permitted. (See Section 10-2116, Bed and breakfast, for less than six guest rooms). 
(3)  The country inn shall be owner occupied. 
(4)  Permitted curb cut access shall be from a local road or higher road classification. 
(5)  The establishment may provide meal services to guests. 
(6)  Parking shall not be permitted within the minimum front yard setback. 
(7)  The minimum landscape strip and buffer requirements for the MIX District as specified in Chapter 6 shall be required. 
(8)  Parking requirements shall be the same as hotel/motel as specified in Article E. 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 4(Exh. D), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2129.1. - Reserved. 
Sec. 10-2130. - Habitable accessory structure. 
Habitable accessory structures may be rented to another party so long as one of the dwelling units on the property is owner-occupied. The units must be aesthetically compatible with the principal structure, include one additional on-site parking space, and be limited to half the size of the primary structure. The habitable accessory structure may not take up more than half the rear yard of the lot. The use must remain single-family and the lot may not be subdivided nor may the unit be sold separately. A use permit is required for all habitable accessory structures. In the event a use permit application is approved, a building permit will also be required. 
Criteria: 
(1)  Full kitchen permitted. 
(2)  An accessory structure must be aesthetically compatible with principal structure. 
(3)  The accessory structure cannot be built or moved onto any lot before construction of the main house unless a building permit has been issued for the construction of the main house. 
(4)  The owner of the property must reside either in the principal structure or the accessory structure on premises. 
(5)  The lot must be a minimum of 5,000 square feet. 
(6)  The property must have a minimum of three unobstructed parking spaces. 
(7)  The accessory unit can only have one kitchen and may have a 220 volt power supply, a ventilation hood or gas line. 
(8)  The height must not exceed the height of the main house or 35 feet, whichever is less. 
(9)  The total floor area cannot exceed 50 percent of the floor area of the principal structure or exceed 50 percent of the rear lot coverage. All utilities for the structure must be fed from the primary structure. 
(10)  The structure must be at least 6 feet away from the principal structure. 
(11)  The structure must be at least three feet from all property lines and at least 15 feet from any structure on adjoining property. 
(12)  If the property is adjacent to an alley, it can be located on the property line. 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 4(Exh. D), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2130.1. - Reserved 
Sec. 10-2131. - Landfill, solid waste disposal. 
(a)  Standards: 
(1)  No access or travel over residential streets shall be allowed for landfill access. 
(2)  No disposal of biomedical or hazardous wastes is permitted. 
(3)  Access streets shall be paved and shall be able to withstand maximum load limits established by the State of Georgia as approved by the Director of Public Works. 
(4)  No portion of a new landfill shall be located within a three mile radius of the property lines of an existing landfill. 
(5)  The waste disposal boundary of a landfill shall be located at least 500 feet from all property lines and any operational domestic water supply well, except adjacent to I-1 (Light Industrial) and 1-2 (Heavy Industrial) zoned districts. Adjacent to all other zoning districts there shall be a minimum 200-foot buffer between the waste disposal boundary and all property lines. 
(6)  A minimum 200-foot buffer and 10-foot improvement setback shall be required along all property lines except public rights-of-way. 
(7)  A minimum 50-foot buffer and 10-foot improvement setback shall be required along all public rights-of-way. 
(8)  A minimum six-foot high solid fence or wall shall be located on property lines or interior to the required buffers and improvement setbacks. 
(9)  Limit hours of operation from 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday. 
(10)  The owner shall provide the Director of Planning and Community Development a current copy of all applicable permits from the Georgia Department of Natural Resource upon application for a land disturbance permit. 
(11)  Vehicles shall be allowed into a landfill site only if waste is covered to prevent blowing of material from the vehicle. 
(12)  In accordance with Article I., submit an Environmental Impact Report as required. 
(12)  No portion of a new or expanded landfill shall be located within a one-mile radius of the property lines of a residentially zoned or used property. An expanded landfill shall not include any expanded use within the parcel boundaries of an existing site or location. 
(13)  The landfill shall be sited and operated in accordance with the Rules of Georgia, Department of Natural Resources, Environmental Protection Division, Chapter 391-3-4 Solid Waste Management, Official Code of Georgia Annotated 12-8-20 Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Plan, and 40 CFR Part 258 (Subtitle D of RCRA). 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 4(Exh. D), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2131.1. - Reserved. 
Sec. 10-2132. - Lodge, retreat and/or campground. 
(a)  Standards: 
(1)  Minimum lot size shall be ten acres. 
(2)  Facilities to include lodging and food service for social, educational and/or recreational purposes. 
(3)  Permitted curb cut access shall not be derived from a local street. 
(4)  A minimum 100-foot wide buffer and 10 foot improvement setback are required adjacent to residential districts, AG-1 districts used for single family and adjoining a public street. 
(5)  A minimum 50-foot wide buffer and ten-foot improvement district are required adjacent to all other non-residential districts. 
(6)  Length of the stay for all but permanent staff shall not exceed 30 consecutive days. 
(7)  Sanitary facilities or trash receptacles shall be located a minimum of 200 feet from any residential district and/or AG-1 district when used for single family. 
(8)  A maximum continuous sound level of 60 dBA and a maximum peak sound level of 75 dBA shall not be exceeded at property lines of adjacent residential districts and/or AG-1 districts used for single family. 
(9)  Recreational facilities associated with the use shall be for staff and guests only. 
(10)  One parking space per lodging unit or five (5) per 1000 square feet of floor area, whichever is greater. 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 4(Exh. D), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2132.1. - Reserved. 
Sec. 10-2133. - Medical related lodging. 
(a)  Standards: 
(1)  Total number of bedrooms or units shall not exceed 20, including staff facilities. 
(2)  Rooms or suites of rooms may be designed with separate kitchen facilities. 
(3)  Lodging facility shall be located within one mile of a hospital or inpatient clinic. 
(4)  If located adjacent to a single-family district and/or an AG-1 district used for single-family, the minimum buffers and landscape strips required for the MIX District as specified in Chapter 6 shall be required. 
(5)  Off-street parking requirements shall be one per living unit plus one per nonresident employee. Parking is not allowed in the front yard setback. 
(6)  No such facility shall be located within 5,280 feet of any other assisted living facility, community living arrangement, personal care home, and medical related lodging or rehabilitation center. 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 4(Exh. D), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2133.1. - Reserved. 
Sec. 10-2134. - Outdoor event, large. 
All large special events as defined in this ordinance must meet the standards for Use Permit approval set forth in Sections 10-2085 through 10-2087, the standards for applicable uses specified in 10-2115 through 10-2150, and follow the Use Permit application procedures set forth in Article J of the Zoning Regulations. 
(a)  Standards: No use permit shall be effective for more than 14 consecutive days for a single event on the same property. An application for a special event, large use permit shall be made no less than 120 days prior to the event. Said permit must be posted on site such that it is visible from the street. If such permit is for a parade, the parade chairman or other person heading or leading such activity shall carry the parade permit upon his person during the conduct of the parade. 
(1)  The hours of operation shall be 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m., Sunday through Thursday and 8:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m., Friday through Saturday. 
(2)  The entire property shall comply with the zoning district's setback requirements. 
(3)  No temporary sanitary facility or trash receptacle may be located within 100 feet of a property line of any residential use. 
(4)  No tent, table or other temporary structure shall be located within 250 feet of a single family detached residential structure except within the C-R district. Tents less than 5,000 square feet do not require a building permit; tents equal to or greater than 5,000 square feet require structural plan review and a building permit. All tents are subject to the approval of the Fire Department. 
(5)  Sales from vehicles with the exception of permitted vending carts and food trucks are prohibited. 
(6)  The entire property shall comply with East Point's parking requirements. 
(7)  Persons accessing the controlled zone (alcoholic beverages) must be identified by wristband and must remain in the controlled zoned during consumption. 
(8)  No equipment, vehicle, display or sales activity shall block access to a public facility such as a telephone booth, mail box, parking meter, fire hydrant, fire alarm box, traffic control box, driveway or other access point. 
(9)  A sound level of 65 dBA shall not be exceeded at adjacent property lines of any residential use. 
(10)  Signage shall be in accordance with Chapter 7, Signs. 
(11)  Projected attendance for the event must total 2000 attendees or more for the entire duration of the event. 
(12)  Additional permits required for the proposed event including but not limited to food service permit, electrical permit, mechanical permit, building permit, business license, alcohol license, vendor permit, must be secured prior to the start of the special event, large use permit. Those relevant permits must be applied for separately in accordance with the City of East Point Code of Ordinances and Development Regulations. 
(b)  Procedures: Applications for a Use Permit for a large special event shall be on forms provided by the Department of Planning and Community Development and shall contained the documents and information required in Section 10-2085. 
(c)  Applicability: This section shall not apply to special events with projected attendance of 2,000 people or less. Special events with 2000 or less in projected attendance must meet the standards and follow the procedures for securing an administrative permit approved by the Department of Planning and Community Development. 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 4(Exh. D), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2134.1. - Reserved. 
Sec. 10-2135. - Personal care home. 
(a)  Standards: 
(1)  Facilities shall be for five to 24 unrelated adults. 
(2)  At least one administrator, on-site manager, or responsible staff person must be on the premises 24 hours a day. The minimum on-site, staff-to-resident ratio is 1:2 during waking hours and 1:6 during non-waking hours. 
(3)  Permitted curb cut access shall be from an arterial or a major collector. Permitted curb cut access may be allowed from a minor collector if within 1,000 feet of the property line of an institutional use. 
(4)  Provide a 50-foot building setback from single-family detached dwelling districts and/or AG-1 districts when used for single family. 
(5)  Off-street parking requirements shall be one per living unit plus one per nonresident employee. Parking is not allowed in the front yard setback. 
(6)  Provide landscape strips and buffers as required in the MIX district as specified in Chapter 6. 
(7)  Facility shall provide to the East Point Fire and Police Departments a current and updated annually list of residents living in the facility who have disabilities, and information concerning special needs, so as to ensure each resident's safety and removal from the premises in the event of a fire or similar emergency within the facility. 
(8)  Facility shall comply with all applicable local, state, and federal regulations, and provide applicable permits to the Department of Planning and Community Development prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(9)  Each location shall be within 1,500 feet of a public transit station or transit stop or the operator of the personal care home shall be required to provide transportation service for its occupants. 
(10)  No such facility shall be located within 5,280 feet of any other assisted living facility, community living arrangement, personal care home, and medical related lodging or rehabilitation center. 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 4(Exh. D), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2135.1. - Reserved 
Sec. 10-2136. - Recreational fields. 
(a)  Standards: 
(1)  Including but not limited to soccer, softball, baseball, polo, football, cricket, etc. 
(2)  Permitted curb cut access shall not be from a local street. 
(3)  A minimum 50-foot buffer and ten-foot improvement setback shall be provided adjacent to residential districts and/or AG-1 districts used for single family. 
(4)  Loudspeakers/paging systems are prohibited adjacent to residentially used property. 
(5)  The hours of operation shall be limited to daylight hours when said facility is located adjacent to residential districts and/or AG-1 districts used for single family. 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 4(Exh. D), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2136.1. - Reserved. 
Sec. 10-2137. - Recycling center, processing. 
(a)  Standards: 
(1)  Limit hours of operation from 7:00 a.m. to 8 p.m. Monday through Saturday. 
(2)  No portion of a new recycling facility shall be located within a three-mile radius of the property lines of an existing recycling facility. 
(3)  A minimum 200-foot buffer and ten-foot improvement setback shall be required along all property lines except public rights-of-way. 
(4)  A minimum 50-foot buffer and 10-foot improvement setback shall be required along all public rights-of-way. 
(5)  All recyclable materials shall be stored in containers with no stockpiling outside the containers. 
(6)  Collection, storage containers, or receptacles shall not be allowed in minimum yards. Storage shall be screened with a six-foot high, solid wall or fence, including access gates. 
(7)  The processing of recyclable materials must be done within an enclosed building. 
(8)  Driveways shall be designed so vehicles will exit the facility in a forward direction. 
(9)  A maximum continuous sound level of 65 dBA and a maximum peak sound level of 75 dBA shall not be exceeded at property lines of adjacent residential districts and/or AG-1 districts used for single family. 
(10)  The recycling center shall comply with regulations administered by the Fulton County Department of Health. 
(11)  In accordance with Article J., submit an Environmental Impact Report as required. 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 4(Exh. D), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2137.1. - Reserved. 
Sec. 10-2138. - Rehabilitation centers. 
(a)  Standards: 
(1)  Usage of such facility shall be restricted to the supervised rehabilitation of substance abusers. 
(2)  Parking shall comply with the requirements of Article E for dwellings. 
(3)  The minimum landscape strips and buffers required for the MIX district as specified in Chapter 6 shall be provided. 
(4)  Copies of applicable local, state and federal permits shall be provided to the Department of Planning and Community Development prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy and business license. 
(5)  Parking shall not be permitted within the minimum front yard. 
(6)  No such facility shall be located within 5,280 feet of any other group residence/shelter, personal care home/assisted living facility, and medical related lodging or rehabilitation center. 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 4(Exh. D), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2138.1. - Reserved. 
Sec. 10-2139. - Salvage, storage, and/or junk facility. 
(a)  Standards: 
(1)  No portion of a new salvage, storage, and/or junk facility shall be located within a three mile radius of the property lines of an existing salvage, storage, and/or junk facility. 
(2)  A minimum 200-foot buffer and ten-foot improvement setback shall be required along all property lines except public rights-of-way. 
(3)  A minimum 50-foot buffer and 10-foot improvement setback shall be required along all public rights-of-way. 
(4)  All facilities shall be screened from view from adjacent properties and roadways with a minimum 6-foot high, solid fence or wall, as approved by the Planning and Community Development Department, except for approved access crossings and utility easements. Said fence or wall shall be located interior to any required buffer or landscape strip. 
(5)  Vehicles and other materials shall not be stacked so that they are visible from any adjacent properties. 
(6)  In accordance with Article J., submit an Environmental Impact Report as required. 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 4(Exh. D), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2139.1. - Reserved. 
Sec. 10-2140. - School, private or special. 
(a)  Standards: 
(1)  Minimum lot area shall be four acres. 
(2)  If located adjacent to a single family dwelling district and/or AG-1 district used for single family, the minimum landscape strips, buffers, and improvement setbacks required for the MIX district as specified in Chapter 6 shall be required. 
(3)  Buildings, and refuse areas shall not be located within 100 feet of a residential district and/or AG-1 district used for single family. 
(4)  Active outdoor recreation areas shall not be located within 100 feet of an adjoining residential district or use. Recreational fields, such as playing fields, that are accessory to the school do not require a separate Use Permit. 
(5)  Day care facilities in association with the school do not require a separate Use Permit. 
(6)  Parking areas shall not be located within 50 feet of any residential district and/or AG-1 district used for single family. 
(7)  Student drop-off and vehicular turn-around facilities shall be provided on the site so that vehicles may re-enter the public street in a forward manner. 
(8)  Permitted curb cut access shall not be from a local street. 
(9)  In accordance with Article J, submit a Noise Study Report as required in Section 10-2224.6. 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 4(Exh. D), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2140.1. - Reserved. 
Sec. 10-2141. - Self storage/mini. 
(a)  Standards: 
(1)  At least 75 percent of the total on-site storage space shall be contained in individual enclosed stalls containing no more than 500 square feet each and being no more than ten feet high. 
(2)  No activities other than the dead storage or transfer of nonvolatile goods, or leasing of storage space are permitted. Prohibited uses include but are not limited to miscellaneous sales; fabrication or repair of vehicles, equipment or other goods; transfer-storage business based on site; residential uses (other than the resident manager's apartment), or any use which creates a nuisance due to noise, odor, dust, light or electrical interference. 
(3)  An on-site manager or resident manager shall be required and shall be responsible for the operation of the facility in conformance with conditions of approval. A resident manager's apartment is included in the Use Permit. 
(4)  Provide a minimum six-foot high, 100 percent opaque solid wooden fence or masonry wall along the entire length (except for approved access crossings) of all property lines. Said fence/wall shall to be located outside of any public right-of-way and interior to any required landscape strips or buffers. 
(5)  A new or expanded self-storage facility shall be located a minimum of 1,500 feet from the boundary of any other self storage facility (mini or multi). 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 4(Exh. D), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2141.1. - Reserved 
Sec. 10-2142. - Self storage/multi. 
(a)  Standards: 
(1)  No outside storage shall be allowed, including vehicle leasing. 
(2)  All buildings shall have windows or architectural treatments that appear as windows. 
(3)  No activities other than the dead storage or transfer of nonvolatile goods or leasing of storage space are permitted. Prohibited uses include but are not limited to miscellaneous sales; fabrication or repair of vehicles, equipment or other goods; transfer-storage business based on site; residential uses (other than the resident manager's apartment), or any use which creates a nuisance due to noise, odor, dust, light or electrical interference. 
(4)  Permitted curb cut access shall not be from a local street. 
(5)  A new or expanded self storage facility shall be located a minimum of 1,500 feet from the boundary of any other self storage facility (mini or multi). 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 4(Exh. D), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2142.1. - Reserved. 
Sec. 10-2143. - Skywalks. 
(a)  Standards: 
(1)  A minimum vertical clearance of 16 feet above all streets, and a minimum vertical clearance of 16 feet above the walkway shall be provided. 
(2)  Ample space for the free flow of pedestrians with a 12-foot minimum walkway width shall be provided. 
(3)  Prior to issuance of a building permit, a Bridge Agreement shall be filed with the Planning and Community Development Department as a condition of approval. The Planning and Community Development Department shall be responsible for the interpretation and application of the conditions set forth above and no building permit shall be issued by the Planning and Community Development Department except upon written approval of the Department of Public Works. 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 4(Exh. D), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2143.1. - Reserved. 
Sec. 10-2144. - Stadium (offsite) associated with a private school. 
(a)  Standards: 
(1)  Vehicular access is prohibited from a local street. 
(2)  A minimum 200-foot buffer and 10-foot improvement setback shall be provided along all property lines adjacent to residential and AG-1 zoned properties. 
(3)  The hours of operation shall be limited to 8:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. adjacent to residential and AG-1 zoned properties. 
(4)  A 100-foot setback along any public right-of-way is required for all structures and activities. 
(5)  The height limit of the zoning district shall apply to all structures unless a Use Permit to exceed the district minimum height is approved. 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 4(Exh. D), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2144.1. - Reserved. 
Sec. 10-2145. - Transfer station, solid waste. 
(a)  Standards: 
(1)  No access shall be allowed from local streets. 
(2)  Access streets shall be paved and shall be able to withstand maximum load limits established by the State of Georgia as approved by the Director of Public Works. 
(3)  No portion of a new transfer station shall be located within a three mile radius of the property lines of an existing transfer station. 
(4)  A minimum 200-foot buffer and ten-foot improvement setback shall be required along all property lines except public rights-of-way. 
(5)  A minimum 50-foot buffer and ten-foot improvement setback shall be required along all public rights-of-way. 
(6)  A minimum six-foot high solid fence or wall shall be located on property lines or interior to the required buffers and improvement setbacks. 
(7)  Limit hours of operation from 6:00 a.m. to 6 p.m., Monday through Saturday. 
(8)  The owner shall provide the Director of the Planning and Community Development Department a current copy of all applicable permits from the State of Georgia upon application for a Land Disturbance Permit. 
(9)  In accordance with Article J, submit an Environmental Impact Report as required. 
(10)  No portion of a new or expanded solid waste transfer station shall be located within a one— mile radius of the property lines of a residentially zoned or used property. An expanded solid waste transfer station shall not include any expanded use within the parcel boundaries of an existing site or location. 
(11)  Transfer stations shall be sited and operated in accordance with State Regulations 3891-3-4.06 Permit by Rule for Collection, Transportation, Processing, and Disposal, Official Code of Georgia Annotated 12-8-20 Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act, Fulton County Solid Waste Management Plan, and Waste Transfer Stations: A Manual for Decision-Making (EPA 530- R-02-002, June 2002) 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 4(Exh. D), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2145.1. - Reserved. 
Sec. 10-2146. - Veterinary clinic/hospital or kennel outside. 
(a)  Standards: 
(1)  Minimum one acre lot size is required. 
(2)  Buildings and runs, sun areas, exercise yards, patios or facilities other than parking shall be located at least 100 feet from all property lines and 200 feet from any single family district and/or AG-1 district used for single family. 
( Ord. No. 061-016, § 4(Exh. D), 9-19-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2146.1—10-2150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE E. - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING 

Sec. 10-2151. - Scope. 
The location, design and quantity of off-street parking and loading facilities for every use located within the corporate city limits for the City of East Point shall comply with requirements herein. 
Sec. 10-2152. - Parking spaces required. 
Every use shall be served by off-street parking spaces as specified below. Parking spaces shall serve only the designated use and shall be located on the same lot as the use unless another location is authorized in accordance with other provisions of this Zoning Ordinance. 
Sec. 10-2153. - Basic off-street parking requirements. 
Parking requirements shall be calculated based on the proportion that each use contributes to the total. All areas are expressed in gross square feet of building area unless ground area or some other measure is specified. Any fraction of one-half or larger shall constitute a whole. A bench seat shall consist of 18 inches. 
Sec. 10-2154. - Off-street parking or loading area layout, construction and maintenance. 
Whenever off-street parking or loading is required in accordance with the further provisions of this section, the parking or loading areas, as well as entrances, exits and maneuver areas shall conform to the geometric design standards of the Institute of Traffic Engineers and shall be laid out, constructed, and maintained in accordance with the following regulations: 
(1)  Adequate ingress and egress to the parking or loading area by means of clearly limited and defined drives shall be provided for vehicles. All drives and aisles shall be surfaced in a manner equivalent to that which is hereinafter required for the parking or loading area. 
(2)  Where a parking or loading area is proposed adjacent to a street right-of-way, there shall be established a minimum setback line of five (5) feet from the street lot line to the surfaced parking or loading area. 
(3)  The land between the street lot line and the five-foot setback line, except for the surface area of access drives, is for the purpose of this regulation called a clear area. 
(4)  There shall be bumper stops or wheel chocks provided so as to prevent any vehicle from projecting over the clear area. 
(5)  The ground of the clear area shall be prepared so as to be fertile, planted and maintained with grass or other plantings upon completion of the parking or loading area surfacing. Planted grass shall be maintained in a near trimmed condition, not exceeding three (3) inches in height, and planted shrubbery shall be maintained so as not to exceed two (2) feet in height. 
(6)  The parking or loading area shall be drained to eliminate surface water, and it shall be the responsibility of the property owner to make provision for conveying surface water to a point either on or off premises, acceptable to the city engineer. 
(7)  The surface of the parking or loading area, except the clear areas, shall be constructed of dustless and durable portland cement, concrete, asphaltic concrete, or other impervious materials complying with specifications established by the Director of Planning and Zoning, and said surface shall be maintained in good condition and repair. 
(8)  All off-street parking areas shall comply with disabled parking space requirements as specified in the Georgia Disability Accessibility Code (Title 30, Chapter 3 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as amended or superseded). 
(9)  In addition, each required "parking space" shall have a minimum height of ten (10) feet. A minimum of seventy (70) percent of all required parking spaces shall be at least nine (9) feet in width and eighteen (18) feet in length, while a maximum of thirty (30) percent of all required parking spaces may be at least eight (8) feet in width and sixteen (16) feet in length. All parking spaces provided which are eight (8) feet in width and sixteen (16) feet in length shall be located together in one area of the parking facility and shall be appropriately designated for compact cars only. All parking spaces shall be served by adequate internal driveway and maneuver areas. 
(10)  Each required "loading space" shall have minimum dimensions of fourteen (14) feet in height, twelve (12) feet in width and forty-eight (48) feet in length, except as otherwise provided herein, with adequate internal driveway and maneuver areas. 
(11)  Off-street parking and loading spaces and their respective maneuvering areas shall be set back not less than five (5) feet from all property lines, except where such spaces and areas for adjacent properties abut, or are in contiguous use, there need not be any setback. 
(12)  Lighting of one hundred (100) to one hundred fifty (150) foot-lamberts (one lumen per square foot) shall be provided for off-street parking or loading facilities to be used at night. This lighting shall be arranged and installed so as not to reflect or cause glare on abutting or surrounding properties. 
(13)  No required off-street parking or loading area shall be established or utilized until a scale drawing indicating the method of compliance with the off-street parking or loading requirements has been submitted to and approved by the Director of Zoning and a permit for such off-street parking or loading area has been secured from the Director of Planning and Zoning. 
(14)  No certificates of occupancy shall be issued for any building or group of buildings unless and until all required off-street parking and loading facilities are in place and ready to use. 

 
Sec. 10-2155. - Shared parking. 
The standards for shared parking may be utilized for any of the combinations of uses shown below on any number of properties when approval is reflected in the conditions of zoning for each such property. Similar provisions are provided under OFF-SITE AND SHARED PARKING REQUIREMENTS in the Use Permits article for those uses which were not zoned concurrently or as part of a multiple use project. The conditions of zoning or Use Permit, as applicable, establish the limits of parking requirements among uses and properties, and East Point shall not require any contractual relationship among property owners. 
The standards for determining parking requirements in a multiple use development are: 
(a)  Determine the minimum amount of parking required for each separate use. 
(b)  Multiply each parking requirement by the corresponding percentage for each of the time periods given below. 
(c)  Calculate the column total parking requirement for each time period. 
(d)  The largest column total is the shared parking requirement. 

 
EXAMPLE 
Properties proposed for individual uses would require the following number of parking spaces: 
Office       300 spaces    
Retail       280 spaces    
Entertainment       100 spaces    
Total       680 spaces    
Properties proposed for multiple uses under the provisions for shared parking would require the following number of parking spaces: 

 
Thus, 508 spaces would be needed for this development, a reduction of 172 spaces or 25 percent. 
Sec. 10-2156. - Reduction of the basic requirement. 
A reduction of the basic off-street parking requirement will be allowed for nonresidential and multifamily developments that locate within 1500 feet of a MARTA rail station which is complete or scheduled for completion within three years. A reduction will be allowed on the following scale whenever pedestrian access is provided between the use and the MARTA rail station as approved by the Director of Planning and Zoning. 
Sec. 10-2157. - Straight-line distance from marta station reduction property line to applicant property line. 
0—500 feet ..... 15%    
501—1,000 feet ..... 10%    
1,001-1,500 feet ..... 5%    
Sec. 10-2158. - Administrative reduction of spaces constructed. 
The Director of Planning and Zoning may authorize a reduction in the total number of parking spaces constructed on a site to no less than 90 percent of the basic requirement when all of following conditions are met: The request for reduction in parking shall show that the reduction is justified on the basis of characteristics unique to the specific proposed use of the property in contrast to the characteristics of other uses within the same category. 
(a)  Adequate land area for meeting the basic parking requirement is located on and designed for the site whether at grade or in parking decks) The unconstructed portion of the parking shall be clearly delineated and labeled "Future Parking" on the Site Plan. 
(b)  Prior to granting the reduction in total parking spaces constructed, the Director of Planning and Zoning shall conclude that the reduction is justified, and shall approve, in whole or in part, or deny the request stating the reasons therefore in the report. 
(c)  If the Director of Planning and Zoning finds that the parking reduction is no longer justified, the Director shall notify the owner to construct the number of parking spaces necessary to meet the required level. 
(d)  Prior to any change in ownership or use, the owner must apply to the Director of Planning and Zoning for an evaluation and confirmation of the reduction. 
Sec. 10-2159. - Acceptable locations for off-street parking. 
Sec. 10-2159.1. - Parking and loading locations. 
Note: The minimums required in this subsection may be less than the requirements necessary to accommodate the landscape area or buffer requirement of Chapter 6, Tree Protection and Landscaping. At a minimum, all required parking spaces must be located on an all weather surface as defined in Article A. 
(a)  Single Family Districts. Within single-family dwelling districts, the parking or storage of vehicles shall be prohibited except on parking spaces as defined in Article A. Off-site location of required parking spaces is prohibited. Unenclosed parking spaces may occupy a side yard, and no more than 50 percent of a required rear yard. A maximum of two spaces may be permitted adjoining the entrance to a front entry garage or carport, or adjoining the end of a driveway whenever no garage or carport exists. Garage and carport spaces may count toward the minimum required spaces in single family districts. 
Within single family districts when utilized for other than a single family dwelling, the parking or storage of vehicles shall be located in accordance with the O-I-T District requirements stated in subparagraph E below. 
The visible storage or parking of more than four vehicles at a single-family residence shall be unlawful. Parking or storage of a junk or salvage vehicle shall constitute an unlawful use except that no more than two such vehicles shall be permitted if parked or stored in a garage or carport not visible from a street or adjacent residential property. 
(b)  RT, Residential Townhouse District. Individually subdivided parcels shall adhere to single-family district standards except that no off-street parking or driveways shall be located within ten (10) feet of any perimeter lot line. Garage carport spaces count toward the minimum required spaces in the RT District. 
(c)  Apartment Dwelling District. No off-street parking shall be permitted within the required setback for the front yard and the side corner yard. Driveways shall not be located nearer than ten (10) feet to any side or rear property line. No off-street parking space shall be located within 25 feet of any side or rear property line adjacent to a single family dwelling district or use, nor within ten (10) feet of any other property line. RT District requirements shall apply to single-family detached units constructed within the R-3 and R-4. 
(d)  O-I-T, Office/Institutional Districts. No off-street parking shall be permitted within the required setback for the front yard and the side corner yard. No off-street parking shall be permitted within 25 feet of any property line which adjoins a single family residential district or use. Off-street loading areas shall be provided in the rear or interior side yards. 
(e)  C-1 and C-2, Commercial Districts. The off-street parking location regulations for dwellings, schools, institutions and similar uses are the same as for those uses in the R3 and R4 Districts. 
Uses permitted in commercial districts other than those devoted to dwellings, schools, institutions, and similar uses shall provide no off-street parking within 25 feet of any property line that adjoins a residential district or use. 
Off-street loading areas shall be provided in the rear or interior side yards. Minimums required in this subsection may be less than the requirements necessary to accommodate a landscape area or buffer required in Chapter 6, Tree Protection and Landscaping. 
(f)  I-1 and I-2, Industrial Districts. The off-street parking location regulations for dwellings, schools, institutions and similar uses are the same as for those uses in the A District. 
Uses devoted to manufacturing, warehousing, commercial and other uses permitted in industrial districts shall provide no off-street parking within 25 feet of any property line which adjoins a residential use or district. 
Sec. 10-2160. - Limitation on trucks. 
Except for trucks used in farming the property on which they are located, or trucks used in conjunction with a permitted use, trucks and/or trailers exceeding four tons empty weight shall not be stored or parked in any residential zoning district unless engaged in moving household goods or making deliveries. 
Sec. 10-2161. - Shared driveways. 
Driveways may be shared in all districts. 
Sec. 10-2162. - Off-site location of required parking. 
An Administrative Permit for off-site parking may be considered in accordance with the provisions of Article D. 
Sec. 10-2163. - Landscape areas and buffers. 
No required parking shall be permitted in any required landscape area or buffer. 
Sec. 10-2164. - Vehicles at automotive repair and specialty shops. 
Vehicles at automotive repair and specialty shops must be serviced and stored within the footprint of the building or at the rear of the structure but outside of any minimum yard. Vehicles must be totally screened from all property lines by a 100 percent opaque fence or wall together with landscape strips and buffers as specified by Chapter 6, Tree protection and Landscaping. 
Sec. 10-2165. - Off-street parking design requirements angled or parallel parking. 
Aisles serving off-street parking shall be no fewer than 22 feet in width, except that aisles designed for one-way circulation systems shall be no fewer than 14 feet in width for 0-45 degree parking, 18 feet in width for 46 to 60 degree parking and 22 feet in width for 61 to 90 degree parking. A standard parking space shall measure no fewer than 153 square feet, and shall be no fewer than 8.5 feet wide. Twenty percent of the total parking spaces may be designated as compact car spaces. A compact space shall measure a minimum of 120 square feet with a minimum width of eight feet. Each compact space shall be clearly marked. No part of a vehicle shall overhang into a landscaped portion of a required landscape area. 
Sec. 10-2166. - Landscape islands. 
Landscape islands shall be provided throughout parking lots in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 6, Tree Protection and Landscaping of this Ordinance. 
Sec. 10-2167. - Handicapped parking. 
Parking spaces designed for handicap persons shall be provided in accordance Georgia law. 
Sec. 10-2168. - Parking for specialized vehicles. 
Specialized vehicles such as earth moving equipment, tractors or other heavy construction vehicles are only to be stored in residential, agricultural districts and non-residential districts except I-1 and I-2 Industrial districts during construction under an active building permit and/or land disturbance permit. Other specialized vehicles such as recreational vehicles, campers, buses (including school buses), trailers, mobile home coaches, boats and boat trailers may be parked or stored in all residential districts under the following conditions: (Also See 10-2160 for trucks) 
(a)  That such vehicles are not used as living quarters. 
(b)  That the location of the parking or storage area shall be in the buildable area of the lot and shall not be in front of the principal structure. 
Sec. 10-2169. - Off-street loading. 
Sec. 10-2169.1. - Loading spaces required. 
Off-street loading spaces shall be provided as follows: 

 
Sec. 10-2170. - Design and arrangement of off-street loading areas. 
The following standards shall apply to off-street loading areas: 
(a)  A loading space shall measure no less than 12 feet by 35 feet and have 14 feet of vertical clearance. 
(b)  For any use required to furnish three or more loading spaces, at least one in every three shall measure no less than 12 feet by 55 feet. 
(c)  Maneuvering space shall not include required parking spaces or any portion of a public right-of-way. 
Sec. 10-2171. - Off-street loading location limitations. 
Off-street loading spaces and maneuvering areas shall be located only in those portions of a lot where off-street parking areas are allowed with the following additional limitations: 
(a)  Industrial Zoning Districts: If the loading and maneuvering areas are across from, or adjacent to, any non-industrial zoning district, a 50-foot landscaped strip shall be established, behind which the maneuvering and berth space may be located. 
(b)  Non-Industrial Zoning Districts: In the event that spaces and maneuvering areas are to be located in a yard adjacent to any established residential use, a 50-foot landscaped strip shall be established behind where the berths and maneuvering spaces may be located. 
ARTICLE F. - VIOLATION AND PENALTY 

Sec. 10-2172. - Violation. 
Any person, firm, partnership or corporation violating any of the provisions of this Ordinance shall be subject to the penalties herein. Each day's continuance of a violation shall be considered a separate offense. The owner and or tenants of any buildings or premises or parts thereof, where anything in violation of the Ordinance shall be placed or shall exist, and any architect, builder, contractor, or agent or the owner and or tenants who may have assisted in the commission of any such violation may be guilty of a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2012Z-012-07, § 1, 9-17-12) 
Sec. 10-2173. - Penalty. 
Where a determination is made that property is in violation of the Zoning Ordinance, and any other codes and laws enforced by the Department of Planning and Community Development, and all reasonable efforts and means to obtain compliance having been exhausted, the Director of Planning and Zoning is authorized to effect such compliance at public expense. The cost of effectuating compliance shall constitute a lien upon the property and said lien shall be recorded by the Director of Planning and Zoning in accordance with the laws for such. 
Any violations of this chapter shall be punishable under section 1-1006 of the City Code to the maximum extent permitted by law. 
(Ord. No. 2012Z-012-07, § 1, 9-17-12) 
ARTICLE G. - PLANS AND INSPECTIONS 

Sec. 10-2174. - Single family dwelling plans. 
Applications for building permits for single family dwellings shall be accompanied by two copies of a plat. Applications for building permits and land disturbance permits other than single family dwellings shall respond to the plan requirements set forth by the Planning and Zoning Department. Plats shall be based on a boundary line survey and drawn to scale. One copy of the plat shall be returned to the owner when plans have been approved by the Planning and Zoning Department. Plat shall show: 
(a)  The exact location of temporary and permanent pins, monuments and stakes used to mark the boundary. 
(b)  The exact footprint of existing and proposed buildings and their structures, and the footprint of proposed alterations and additions. 
(c)  The existing and proposed use of each building and other structure or part thereof, 
(d)  The required number of parking spaces, and their locations, 
(e)  Other information as may be necessary to determine compliance with this Ordinance. 
Sec. 10-2175. - Inspections. 
All plans must be in accordance with International Code Council. Prior to pouring footings, the owner shall notify the Planning and Zoning Department to conduct an inspection to determine that space for required setbacks are available on the site. This inspection shall, in no way, relieve the owner of total responsibility for complying with all provisions of the Ordinance. 
ARTICLE H. - RESERVED[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 004-10, adopted March 15, 2010, repealed former Art. H, § 10-2176, in its entirety. Former Art. H pertained to the posting of a certificate of occupancy and derived from Ord. No. 003-09, adopted March 2, 2009. 

Sec. 10-2176. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE I. - APPEALS 

Sec. 10-2177. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this Article is to establish procedures for appealing the strict application of regulations and conditions contained herein and conditions of zoning when those regulations impose a hardship on the development of the property, and to provide for interpretation of the text of this Ordinance and the official zoning map. Appeals are authorized herein to be considered by various bodies and individuals depending on the type of appeal and its relationship to applications for Use Permits or rezonings. Variances apply to the development standards and district standards per the Zoning Ordinance. Modifications apply to the approved conditions of zoning or Use Permit. 
Sec. 10-2178. - Decision making authority. 
The following are the powers and jurisdictions of the various decision makers and administrative bodies. 
Sec. 10-2179. - City council. 
The City Council shall have the following powers and duties under the provisions of this Ordinance: 
(a)  To hear and decide applications for re-zonings, Use Permits, and modifications pursuant to Article I. 
(b)  To hear and decide applications for concurrent variances in conjunction with applications for re-zonings, Use Permits, and/or zoning modifications pursuant to Article I. 
(c)  To initiate a modification of approved zoning conditions. 
Sec. 10-2180. - Planning and zoning commission. 
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall have the following powers and duties under the provisions of this Ordinance: 
(a)  To hear and decide appeals from the interpretation of any of the provisions of this Ordinance by the Director of Planning and Zoning in accordance with Section 10-2181; 
(b)  To hear and decide appeals when it is alleged that there is an error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the Director of Planning and Zoning in the enforcement of this Ordinance and; 
(c)  To hear and decide appeals from a permitting or procedural decision of the Department Director or Assistant Director regarding minor or administrative variance requests. 
(d)  To hear and recommend approval or denial of re-zonings, Use Permits, and modifications pursuant to Article I. 
(e)  To hear and defer an application for re-zonings, Use Permits, and modifications pursuant to Article I, a deferral may not exceed 90 days. 
Sec. 10-2181. - Director of the Department of Planning and Community Development (P&Z). 
The Director of Planning and Zoning (P&Z) shall have the following jurisdiction, powers and duties under the provisions of this Ordinance: 
(a)  To determine the type of appeal application or land use process the property owner/agent is required to apply for; 
(b)  To consider and decide on minor variances to minimum yard requirements, not to exceed ten percent of such requirement, as long as property owners with standing do not object; 
(c)  To consider and decide on administrative minor variances of no more than one foot; 
(d)  To consider and decide on administrative variances; 
(e)  To consider and decide on administrative modifications to conditions of zoning; 
(f)  To interpret the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance related to the following: 
(1)  Inconsistent, vague or obscure language; 
(2)  Provisions which are in conflict or are confusing; and 
(3)  Conflicting or redundant procedural requirements; and 
(g)  To establish procedural requirements for review of appeal applications. 
Sec. 10-2182. - Limitation on authority. 
The authority and jurisdiction of boards and individuals as provided herein shall be limited as outlined in the following. In exercising this jurisdiction, each hearing board or individual shall have authority to determine whether it has jurisdiction. 
(a)  There shall be no variances to permitted uses or accessory uses as specified in the zoning district regulations, administrative/Use Permit or zoning conditions. 
(b)  There shall be no variances to the minimum lot area nor the minimum district size required in each zoning district. 
(c)  There shall be no variances to the minimum lot frontage on a street as required in designated zoning districts of the Zoning Ordinance. 
(d)  There shall be no modification to increase the density or change the use approved under the rezoning case except to allow for the development of a conservation subdivision. 
(e)  There shall be no modification to revise a site plan that, as determined by the Director of Planning and Zoning (P&Z) results in a significant change in the approved concept. Such a site plan revision shall require rezoning pursuant to Article J. 
(f)  There shall be no relief or variance from the standards of Article I or Article J. 
Sec. 10-2183. - Variances. 
A variance is a request for relief from the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance. There are four types of variance applications. The type of variance necessary shall be determined by the Director of Planning and Zoning. The different types of appeals are listed below and described in the following sections: 
(1)  Primary Variance 
(2)  Minor Variance/Administrative Minor Variance 
(3)  Secondary Variance/Interpretation 
(4)  Concurrent Variance 
Sec. 10-2184. - Variance considerations. 
Variances from the provisions or requirements of the Ordinance shall be authorized only upon making all of the following findings: 
(1)  By reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness, or shape of a specific lot, or by reason of exceptional topographic conditions, which were not created by the owner or applicant, the strict application of the requirements of this Ordinance would deprive the property owner of rights and privileges enjoyed by other property owners in the same zoning district; 
(2)  The requested variance does not go beyond the minimum necessary to afford relief, and does not constitute a grant of special privilege inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the zoning district in which the subject property is located; 
(3)  Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public good or impair the purposes and intent of this Ordinance. No variance may be granted for a use of land or building or structure that is prohibited by this Ordinance. No variance may be granted that would conflict with or alter a stipulation or condition imposed by the Planning and Zoning Commission or City Council. No variance shall be granted to extend the time period for a temporary outdoor social, religious, entertainment or recreation activity approved by the City Council. 
(4)  No variance shall be granted by the Planning and Zoning Commission that permits the expansion or enlargement of any nonconforming use of land and buildings in combination, nonconforming use of land and structures in combination, or nonconforming use requiring special land use permit; 
(5)  No variance shall permit the reestablishment of any nonconforming use of land, nonconforming use of land and buildings in combination, nonconforming use of land and structures in combination, or nonconforming use requiring special land use permit where such use has lapsed pursuant the requirements and limitations of 10-2017; or 
(6)  Conditions resulting from existing foliage or structures bring about a hardship whereby a sign meeting minimum letter size, square footage and height requirements cannot be read from an adjoining public road. 
(Ord. No. 2012Z-016-08, § 2, 9-17-12) 
Sec. 10-2185. - Administrative minor variance. 
The Director of the Department of Planning and Community Development may grant an Administrative Minor Variance up to one foot from any minimum yard requirement. 
Sec. 10-2186. - Minor variance. 
The Director of the Department of Planning and Community Development may grant minor variances to minimum yard requirements, not to exceed ten percent of such requirement, as long as no objection has been submitted in writing to the Director of Planning and Zoning. The Applicant must notify the immediately adjacent property owners via e-mail and/or certified mail. Staff must be copied on all email notifications. An appeal to a minor variance decision must be filed as a Secondary Variance request. 
Sec. 10-2187. - Primary variance. 
A request for a variance from any Zoning Ordinance provision that is not being handled as a minor, administrative minor or concurrent variance and shall be heard and decided by the Planning and Zoning Commission in accordance with Article I. 
Sec. 10-2188. - Secondary variance/interpretation. 
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall consider appeals of variance decisions and interpretations made by the Department Director authorized to grant a variance request or interpretation. This type of appeal is considered a secondary variance. 
Sec. 10-2189. - Concurrent variances. 
The City Council may consider a concurrent variance from any standards of the Zoning Ordinance which shall be filed simultaneously with rezoning, Use Permit or zoning modification requests on the same property based on the conceptual plan submitted with the petition for the same agenda. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall also hear and make recommendations on concurrent variances filed with rezonings or Use Permit applications. The City Council shall consider such concurrent variance requests in accordance with the standards set forth in Section 10-2184. Public notification shall be in accordance with Sections 10-2206 and 10-2219. 
Sec. 10-2190. - Limitations on concurrent variances. 
(a)  The City Council may only consider variance requests as part of, or in conjunction with, a rezoning, Use Permit or modification application. 
(b)  If an application for a variance to the Planning and Zoning Commission duplicates a concurrent variance request denied by the City Council, such an application shall not be accepted by the Director of Planning and Zoning prior to the expiration of six months from the date of the City Council's denial of the concurrent variance request. A variance request to the Planning and Zoning Commission cannot be considered simultaneously with the same concurrent variance request pending before the City Council. 
Sec. 10-2191. - Application for concurrent variances. 
Applications for a concurrent variance shall be submitted to the Director of Planning and Zoning in accordance with the advertised filing deadlines for the City Council meetings. A regular variance fee shall be charged and the application shall comply with all advertising and notification requirements specified in Article J, REZONING AND OTHER AMENDMENT PROCEDURES. One notice sign may serve for both the rezoning, Use Permit, zoning modification, and concurrent variance request as long as the sign is marked to indicate all actions which are pending. 
The variance case file number for each concurrent variance requested shall be included on the rezoning petition. 
Sec. 10-2192. - Modifications. 
A modification is a request for relief from the conditions of zoning or Use Permit when a site development proposal does not comply with approved conditions. There are two different types of modifications which are listed below and described in the following sections: 
(1)  Administrative Modification 
(2)  Zoning Modification 
Sec. 10-2193. - Application for modification. 
A request to modify a condition of zoning or Use Permit may be initiated by the property owner, the Planning and Zoning Commission or the City Council. Applications shall be submitted to the Director of Planning and Zoning in accordance with the deadline schedule adopted by the City Council. A modification application shall include a legal description of the property for which the modification is requested and a written explanation of the circumstances upon which the requested change of condition is based including the reason why development or use of the property, as approved, cannot be accomplished without the modification of a condition. Applicants shall submit a revised site plan illustrating the requested modification. The type of modification necessary is determined by the Director of Planning and Zoning. 
Sec. 10-2194. - Administrative modification. 
An Administrative Modification application may be filed if the Director of Planning and Zoning determines that the modification request is not prohibited by Section 10-2182, LIMITATION ON AUTHORITY and, will constitute only a technical change and does not involve significant public interest, or public interest has been addressed by letters expressing no objections from property owner(s) with standing and/or neighborhood associations. The Director shall send the administrative modification decision to the City Council for confirmation at the next appropriate regular meeting. 
Sec. 10-2195. - Appeal of an administrative modification decision. 
If an applicant wishes to appeal the decision of the Director of Planning and Zoning regarding an Administrative Modification, or if it is determined by the Director that a request will involve a matter of public interest, the applicant must file a separate application requesting a Zoning Modification on forms available from the Director of Planning and Zoning. 
Sec. 10-2196. - Zoning modification. 
A zoning modification application shall be filed if an approved zoning condition cannot be met and it is determined by the Director that the application involves significant public interest and is in compliance with Section 10-2182, LIMITATION ON AUTHORITY. The zoning modification request shall be presented to the City Council for consideration in a public hearing. 
Sec. 10-2197. - General procedures. 
This section contains basic steps common to all variances and modifications. 
Sec. 10-2198. - Applications. 
All applications for variances, interpretations and modifications shall be filed with the Director of Planning and Zoning on forms available in the Department. The type of application process necessary to accomplish the change requested by the applicant shall be determined by the Director of Planning and Zoning. The Director shall transmit the petition and all documents constituting the record to the appropriate hearing body or individual. 
Sec. 10-2199. - Standing. 
Standing refers to a party or parties allowed to initiate a request for variances or modifications which are limited to the following: 
(a)  Modification Petition - A request for a modification may be initiated by the property owner or its agent, the Planning Commission or the City Council; 
(b)  Variance Petition - A request for a variance may be initiated by the property owner of subject property or its agent; 
(c)  Secondary Variance Petition - A request for a secondary variance appeal may be initiated by the property owner of the subject property or its agent, or the owner of other real property within 300 feet of the boundaries of the subject property; and 
(d)  Interpretation Petition - A request for an interpretation of a decision of the Director of Planning and Zoning may be requested by any individual. 
Sec. 10-2200. - Filing deadlines. 
(a)  Applications for variances, interpretations and modifications shall be submitted in accordance with the advertised filing deadlines, depending on the type of petition in accordance with 10-2206. 
(b)  Concurrent Variance applications shall be filed in accordance with the filing deadline for the parent petition of either a Use Permit, rezoning, or zoning modification request in accordance with Article I of the Zoning Ordinance. 
(c)  The Director of Planning and Zoning has the discretion to extend the filing deadline by two days for all applications except Administrative Minor and Minor Variance Applications. A letter from the applicant explaining the delay in filing shall be submitted prior to the close of the filing deadline. 
Sec. 10-2201. - Withdrawal of application. 
(a)  An application may be withdrawn by the applicant in writing at any time before the public hearing notice advertisement is published and/or the notice of the hearing is posted on the property. 
(b)  Applications which do not require a public hearing may be withdrawn at any time before notification of a decision is mailed. 
(c)  Once the public hearing has been properly advertised, the request for withdrawal of the application must be placed on the public hearing agenda and the appropriate decision-making body shall act on the withdrawal request. 
Sec. 10-2202. - Fees. 
At the time of application, applicants shall pay fees as established by the City Council. Fees paid are not refundable except where the Director of Planning and Zoning determines that an application was accepted in error, or the fee paid exceeded the amount due, in which case the amount of the overpayment will be refunded to the applicant. 
Sec. 10-2203. - Legal action stayed. 
The filing of an appeal authorized by this Article shall operate as a stay of any enforcement proceedings by East Point until final decision on the appeal. No City Council or Planning and Zoning Commission action shall be taken on any property which is the subject of any litigation pending in state or federal court wherein East Point or its agents or officials are parties. 
Sec. 10-2204. - Public hearing. 
A public hearing shall be conducted by the stated hearing body of each appeal application before taking action thereon except those authorized to be considered administratively. The schedule of public hearings and deadlines for the filing of an appeal shall be established by the City Council. 
Public hearings are not required for administrative variances, minor variances, administrative minor variances and administrative modifications; however, notification in accordance with Section 10-2206.B is required. 
Sec. 10-2205. - Evaluations and reports. 
The hearing body shall have before it, at the time of hearing, a report from the Director of Planning and Zoning which shall summarize the hardship or justification reported by the applicant as related to the application and background information for variances, modifications, and interpretations, and any other information requested by the hearing body. The hearing body shall, hear, analyze, consider, and make a written report of its decision in accordance with Section 10-2208, NOTICE OF DECISIONS . 
Sec. 10-2206. - Public notification. 
(a)  For those applications requiring a public hearing (Primary Variances, Secondary Variances, Concurrent Variances, and Zoning Modifications), the Director of Planning and Zoning shall: 
(1)  Publish notice of the public hearing in a newspaper of general circulation at least 15 days, but no more than 45 days prior to the public hearing at which an application will be heard. The published notice shall contain the time, place and purpose of the hearing and the location of the property if applicable (secondary variances may not always be property specific). Renotification is not required when a petition is deferred by the City Council or the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
(2)  The applicant or agent shall post a sign as issued by the Planning and Zoning Department in a conspicuous location on each public street frontage of the subject site, at least 20 days, but not more than 45 days, prior to the public hearing at which an application will be heard. 
The sign shall be mounted and posted as specified by the Planning and Zoning Department. Property that is not posted on the 20th day before the scheduled hearing date will be administratively removed from the agenda. The sign will remain posted on-site until final action by the appropriate hearing body is taken. 
When the Planning and Zoning Commission defers a petition, the applicant is required to post an updated sign with new hearing dates 20 days prior to the next scheduled hearing date. When the City Council defers a petition, an updated sign is not required. 
The posted sign shall contain the date, time, place and purpose of the hearing. 
For zoning modifications, all notices shall contain all of the items listed in the previous sentence, the location of the property, the zoning and/or Use Permit case number to be modified and the condition number(s) to be modified. 
The posting of a sign is not required when a secondary variance is not requested by the property owner or owner's representative. 
(3)  Notice of the public hearing shall be postmarked 15 days prior to the hearing date and shall be given by regular mail to all property owners within 500 feet of the boundaries of the property who appear on the current tax records of East Point as retrieved by the City's Geographic Information System. Applications seeking a rezoning, special use permit, or variance to or from B-P, 1-1, and I-2 notification shall be given to all property owners within 1000 feet of the boundaries of the property owner who appear on the current tax records as retrieved by the City's Geographic Information System. Re-notification is not required when a petition is deferred by the City Council or the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
The mailing of public notices is not required when a secondary variance is sought by an individual other than the property owner. 
(b)  For those applications not requiring a public hearing, notification shall be provided as follows: 
(1)  Administrative Variance: The owners of property adjacent and contiguous across the right-of-way of the subject site shall be notified via a letter of notification. 
(2)  Minor Variance: The owners of property adjacent and contiguous across the right-of-way of the subject site shall be notified via a letter of notification. 
(3)  Administrative Modification: The Director of the Planning and Zoning Department shall determine what notification, if any, is reasonable on a case by case basis. 
(4)  Administrative Minor Variance: No written notification. 
( Ord. No. 055-016, § 1, 5-16-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2207. - Planning and zoning commission decision on secondary variances/interpretations. 
The Planning and Zoning Commission may take the following actions pursuant to a secondary variance and/or an interpretation appeal: 
(a)  Affirm an order, requirement, or decision, wholly or partly. 
(b)  Reverse an order, requirement, or decision, wholly or partly. 
Sec. 10-2208. - Notice of decisions. 
Written notice of all decisions shall be placed in the official case file and a letter shall be forwarded to the applicant by regular mail within ten (10) working days from the date of the decision by the following authority: 
(a)  The Director of Planning and Zoning shall provide written notification of the Planning and Zoning Commission's decisions; 
(b)  The Director of Planning and Zoning shall, with respect to minor variances, administrative variances, and administrative modifications provide written notification of such decisions. The approval of a building permit shall constitute notice of approval for an administrative minor variance; and 
(c)  The Clerk to the City Council shall, with respect to zoning modifications and concurrent variances, provide written notification of the City Council's decisions. 
Sec. 10-2209. - Reconsideration of denied application. 
If a variance or modification application is denied by an authorized Department Director, City Council or the Planning and Zoning Commission, an application for the same variance or modification item shall not be considered until: 
(a)  At least six (6) months has elapsed from the date of the decision; or 
(b)  New information pertinent to the subject, not previously considered, is submitted by the petitioner and the 6-month period is waived by the hearing body. 
(c)  If an application is denied by the Director of Planning and Zoning, the applicant may appeal the decision to the appropriate hearing body depending on the type of petition. 
This provision is not intended to supersede provisions of 10-2213 as related to decisions regarding rezonings and/or Use Permits. 
Sec. 10-2210. - Time limitation on appeals to superior court. 
The decision of the Planning and Zoning Commission to grant or deny variances is a final decision; therefore, any appeal of such a decision shall be pursued by application for writ of certiorari filed with the Superior Court of Fulton County within 30 days of the date of the decision. Application for writ of certiorari, and any other initial filings with the Superior Court shall be served upon the named defendants/respondents in accordance with O.C.G.A. Section 9-11-4. 
Upon filing such an appeal, the Clerk of Superior Court shall give immediate notice thereof to the Director of Planning and Zoning, and within 30 days from the date of such notice, the Director of Planning and Zoning shall cause to be filed with the Clerk of Superior Court a certified copy of the proceedings and the decision of the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
Appeals of decisions (Secondary Variances/Interpretation) of the Director of Planning and Zoning, or the Director of Public Works shall be brought within 30 days from the date of the decision to the Planning and Zoning Commission 
Sec. 10-2211. - Expiration of variance. 
If not used, a variance shall be valid only for a period of 36 months from the date it is granted. Extensions may be sought under the provisions of Article J, REZONING AND OTHER AMENDMENT PROCEDURES. 
ARTICLE J. - REZONING AND OTHER AMENDMENT PROCEDURES 

Sec. 10-2212. - General amendments. 
Whenever the public necessity, convenience, general welfare or good zoning practice justify such action, and after consideration by the Planning and Zoning Commission, the City Council may, by resolution, change the regulations set forth in this Ordinance (text amendment) or amend the Zoning Maps. 
In amending the Zoning Maps, the City Council may approve a Use Permit and/or zoning district applied for by the applicant or a more restrictive zoning district based on the ranking of East Point zoning district intensities. The City Council may consider a variance filed concurrently with a request for a rezoning and/or Use Permit. 
In approving any zoning district change and/or Use Permit, the City Council shall impose conditions of zoning or Use Permit approval as deemed necessary and appropriate to mitigate potentially adverse influences or otherwise promote the public health, safety or general welfare. 
Rezonings and/or Use Permit requests are referred to in this text as land use petitions. All land use petitions approved by the City Council are subject to conditions approved by the City Council. 
Sec. 10-2213. - Land use petitions. 
Land use petitions may be initiated by the property owner or the City Council on forms available from the Department. 
No final action shall be taken on a land use petition affecting the same parcel more often than once every 12 months when the petition is initiated by the property owner. 
At any time, the City Council may initiate a land use petition on property which was previously rezoned. However, a six-month waiting period from the date of final City Council action is required when a rezoning and/or Use Permit request was previously denied. 
If a petition was previously denied, the owner must demonstrate that the proposed land use petition is significantly different from the previous denial to the satisfaction of the City Council before it can be considered for a re-initiation. A significant difference includes, but is not limited to, a change in zoning district, use, density, height, buffers or other methods of screening, or other items which were discussed at a public hearing. 
Sec. 10-2214. - Appeals to superior court. 
Any appeal of, or other legal challenge to a City Council final decision regarding a land use petition/and or Use Permit shall be pursued by direct appeal and filed with the Superior Court of Fulton County within 30 days of the date of the City Council's decision. 
Sec. 10-2215. - Filing deadlines. 
A complete land use petition shall be submitted in accordance with the advertised filing deadlines. The Director may extend the filing deadline by two days with a letter of explanation from the applicant justifying the delay of submittal. An incomplete petition shall not be accepted. 
Sec. 10-2216. - Withdrawal prior to advertising. 
If a land use petition or rezoning has not been advertised for public hearing, a written request for withdrawal with the reason for the request shall be made to and accepted by the Director. No refunds of petition fees will be made. 
Sec. 10-2217. - Withdrawal after advertising. 
After a land use petition or rezoning has been advertised for public hearing, it may only be withdrawn by the City Council and Planning and Zoning Commission at the public hearing. A withdrawal shall not be deemed final action and shall not bar submission of a new petition. A written request for withdrawal with the reason for the request shall be made to the Director. 
Sec. 10-2218. - Petition requirements. 
All petitions shall include the following with 23 copies of each as prescribed by the Director: 
(1)  Signed and notarized petition with original signatures; 
(2)  Legal Description; 
(3)  Letter of Intent; 
(4)  Site plan which meets the requirements specified in 10-2226; 
(5)  Site plan checklist which indicates compliance with site plan requirements specified in 10-2226; 
(6)  Environmental Site Analysis; 
(7)  8 ½" x 11" transparency of site plan; 
(8)  Impact Analysis for rezoning petitions; 
(9)  Disclosure Form; 
(10)  Community Zoning Information Meeting; 
(11)  Traffic Study, if applicable; 
(12)  Development of Regional Impact Review Form, if applicable; 
(13)  Noise Study Report, if applicable; 
(14)  Other documents as identified in the pre-application review; 
(15)  Non-refundable filing fee; and 
(16)  Copy of deed(s). 
Sec. 10-2219. - Public hearing and notice requirements. 
(1)  Public hearing procedures. Before adopting any change to the Zoning Maps or text of the Zoning Ordinance, the City Council shall hold a public hearing following the public hearing by the Planning and Zoning Commission where a recommendation was made on the petition. Public hearings before the City Council shall be conducted as follows; 
(a)  The presiding officer will call for a motion to open and close the hearing. 
(b)  The presiding officer or his/her designee will introduce the proposed zoning amendment before the City Council. Staff will then be called upon to present the Planning Commission's recommendation and summarize the staffs written report. 
(c)  Persons both favoring and opposing the proposed amendment will then be provided an opportunity to address the Council. The applicant for the proposed amendment (or applicant's designated representative), if any, will be entitled to speak first, followed by other speakers in favor of the proposal, for a total of fifteen (15) minutes. Those who oppose the proposed zoning amendment will then be permitted to speak for a total of fifteen (15) minutes. By majority vote the Council may increase the total time for speakers provided that each side is given the same amount of time. If there is more than one speaker for a side, the presiding officer may limit the time allotted to each individual speaker, other than the zoning applicant. The zoning applicant may reserve a portion of his allotted time for rebuttal. 
(d)  Speakers must adhere to rules of decorum. Prior to speaking, each speaker shall identify himself/herself and state his/her current address. Each speaker shall speak only to the merits of the proposed zoning decision under consideration, shall address remarks only to the Council, and shall refrain from making personal attacks on any other speaker. The presiding officer may refuse a speaker the right to continue if, after first being cautioned, the speaker continues to violate the rules of decorum. 
(2)  Notice requirements. The Department shall require that the applicant give notice by regular mail to all property owners within 500 feet radius of the boundaries of the subject property who appear on the tax records of East Point as retrieved by the City's Geographic Information System. Applications seeking a rezoning, special use permit, or variance to or from B-P, 1-1, and I-2 notification shall be given to all property owners within 1000 feet of the boundaries of the property owner who appear on the current tax records as retrieved by the City's Geographic Information System. The notices shall be mailed a minimum of 15 days prior to the hearing date. Re-notification by mail is not required when a petition is deferred by the City Council. 
(a)  The applicant or agent shall post a sign as issued by the Department of Planning and Community Development in a conspicuous location on each public street frontage of the subject property no later than 8:30 a.m. on the 20th day prior to the Planning and Zoning Commission meeting. 
(b)  The sign shall be mounted and posted as specified by the Department of Planning and Community Development. Property that is not posted on the 20th day before the scheduled first hearing date will be administratively removed from the agenda. 
(c)  When the Planning and Zoning Commission or the City Council defers a petition, the applicant is required to post an updated sign with new hearing dates 20 days prior to the next scheduled hearing date. When a petition is deferred by the City Council for less than 20 days, posting an updated sign is not required. 
(d)  The Department shall require that the applicant give notice by regular mail to all property owners within a 500-foot radius of the boundaries of the subject property who appear on the tax records of East Point as retrieved by the City's Geographic Information System. The notices shall be mailed a minimum of 15 days prior to the hearing date. Re-notification by mail is not required when a petition is deferred by the City Council. 
(e)  The published and mailed notices shall contain the time, place, and purpose of the hearing, the location of the property, and the present and proposed zoning classifications and/or requested Use Permit. The posted sign shall include all the items required in the published notice except the location of the property. Notice shall not be considered inadequate if the mail is not delivered. 
(Ord. No. 007-09, § 1, 4-20-09; 9-19-11; Ord. No. 022-11, 9-19-11; Ord. No. 019-12, 12-17-12; Ord. No. 019-12, § 1, 12-17-12; Ord. No. 055-016, § 2, 5-16-16) 
Sec. 10-2220. - Secretary. 
The Director or his/her appointee shall serve as Secretary to the Planning and Zoning Commission. The Secretary shall keep minutes of proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact; and shall keep records of evidence, examinations and official actions, all of which shall be filed and shall be a public record. 
Sec. 10-2221. - Technical evaluations and reports. 
Proposed land use petitions shall be considered by the Planning and Zoning Commission only after the evaluations and reports required below have been completed and the Planning and Zoning Commission has made a recommendation. Such reports shall be public record. 
Sec. 10-2222. - Zoning impact analysis by the planning and zoning commission and the department. 
For each rezoning petition, the Planning and Zoning Commission and the Department shall investigate and make a recommendation with respect to the factors listed below. The Department shall make a written record of its investigation and recommendation on each rezoning petition, as well as any other factors it may find relevant, and carry out any other duties with which it is charged by the City Council members. 
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall make a recommendation which the Department shall transmit in writing to the City Council. 
The zoning impact analysis factors are as follows: 
(a)  Whether the zoning proposal will permit a use that is suitable in view of the use and development of adjacent and nearby property; 
(b)  Whether the zoning proposal will adversely affect the existing use or usability of adjacent or nearby property; 
(c)  Whether the property to be affected by the zoning proposal has a reasonable economic use as currently zoned; 
(d)  Whether the zoning proposal will result in a use which will or could cause an excessive burdensome use on existing streets, transportation facilities, utilities, or schools; 
(e)  Whether the zoning proposal is in conformity with the policies and intent of the land use plan; 
(f)  Whether there are other existing or changing conditions affecting the use and development of the property which give supporting grounds for either approval or disapproval of the zoning proposal; and 
(g)  Whether the zoning proposal will permit a use which can be considered environmentally adverse to the natural resources, environment and citizens of East Point. 
Sec. 10-2223. - Zoning impact analysis by applicant. 
If a rezoning is initiated by the property owner, a written documented analysis of the impact of the proposed zoning with respect to each of the matters enumerated in 10-2224 is required at the time of filing the land use petition. 
Sec. 10-2224. - Environmental reports. 
If a rezoning and/or land use petition is initiated by the property owner, an Environmental Site Analysis and/or an Environmental Impact Report shall be filed with the land use petition per the following: 
Sec. 10-2224.1. - Environmental site analysis (esa). 
All rezoning and/or land use petitions shall include an Environmental Site Analysis to identify environmental conditions on the site to determine if the proposed use may be considered environmentally adverse. 
The Environmental Site Analysis shall detail the following: 
(1)  How the project conforms to the Comprehensive Land Use Plan; 
(2)  The presence or absence of the following and does the project encroach or adversely affect any of the following: 
(a)  Wetlands; 
(b)  Floodplains; 
(c)  Streams/stream buffers; 
(d)  Slopes exceeding 25 percent over a ten-foot rise in elevation; 
(e)  Vegetation (including endangered species; areas of confirmed Georgia Department of Natural Resources listed endangered species shall comply with the Federal Endangered Species Act); 
(f)  Wildlife species (including fish and endangered species; areas of confirmed Georgia Department of Natural Resources listed endangered species shall comply with the Federal Endangered Species Act); 
(g)  Archeological/historical sites. 
(3)  How the project implements the following: 
(a)  Protection of environmentally sensitive areas (floodplains, slopes exceeding 25 percent, river corridors); 
(b)  Protection of water quality; 
(c)  Minimization of negative impacts on existing infrastructure; 
(d)  Minimization of negative impacts on archeological/historically significant areas; 
(e)  Minimization of negative impacts on environmentally stressed communities; 
(f)  Creation and preservation of green space and open space; 
(g)  Protection of citizens from the negative impacts of noise and lighting; 
(h)  Protection of parks and recreational green space; 
(i)  Minimization of impacts to wildlife habitats; 
Sec. 10-2224.2. - Environmental impact report (EIR). 
Any petition for an industrial rezoning and/or land use petition shall include an Environmental Impact Report to determine if the proposed use is environmentally adverse. 
The Environmental Impact Report shall detail the following: 
(1)  Conformance to the Comprehensive Plan; 
(2)  Impacts on noise levels of the surrounding area; 
(3)  Impacts on air quality of the surrounding area; 
(4)  Impacts on water quality/resources including surface water, ground water, flood plains, and wetlands; 
(5)  Impacts on vegetation, fish, and wildlife species and habitats; 
(6)  Impacts of thermal and explosive hazards on the surrounding area; 
(7)  Impacts of hazardous wastes on the surrounding area; the report shall cite all uses and quantities of any agents listed on the Federal Environmental Protection Agency Lists of Hazardous Wastes. 
The Environmental Impact Report shall detail strategies to mitigate or avoid impacts listed above as applicable. 
Sec. 10-2224.3. - Review criteria for ESA and/or EIR. 
Environmental Site Analysis and/or Environmental Impact Reports shall be reviewed based upon the following: 
(1)  Whether the petition is consistent with the policies of the Comprehensive Land Use Plan; 
(2)  The detail provided for ESAs and EIRs as outlined in Sections 10-2224.1 and 10-2224.2 above. 
The Department shall review the ESAs and EIRs submitted with petitions for rezoning and/or land use petitions and make recommendations to the City Council with respect to the proposed use. The anticipated impact of the proposed use on an environmentally stressed community will be included in the Department's recommendation. 
As determined by the Director or his/her designee, Environmental Impact Reports may also be required with applications for land disturbance permits, building permits, permanent certificates of occupancy, or any other permits issued by the Department of Planning and Community Development. 
Sec. 10-2224.4. - Traffic impact study. 
A Traffic Impact Study is required when a land use petition equals or exceeds the thresholds indicated in the Department's Rezoning, Use Permit & Concurrent Variance Application Package. The study shall be prepared by a certified traffic engineer or transportation planner in accordance with professional practices and must be submitted at the time of the filing of the land use petition. 
Sec. 10-2224.5. - Development of regional impact study (DRI). 
A Development of Regional Impact Study is required when a land use petition meets or exceeds the thresholds indicated in the Department's Rezoning, Use Permit & Concurrent Variance Application Package. Form 1: Initial DRI Information must be submitted at the time of the filing of the land use petition. 
Sec. 10-2224.6. - Noise study report. 
A noise study shall be performed, by a state registered professional engineer or noise professional, if a proposed site is located within 1,000 feet of an expressway, within 3,000 feet of an active rail line. An expressway is defined as a highway facility usually having two or more lanes for the exclusive use of traffic in each direction and partial control of access (i.e. I-85, I-285 and GA-400). 
(1)  The noise study shall include an analysis of the proposed use with respect to existing ambient noise, that is, business and industry noise, aircraft noise, roadway noise, and construction noise. 
(2)  If the noise study results in a day-night average sound level greater than 65 dBA, the applicant shall provide a sound attenuation plan specifying the type of noise buffering measures/materials to be employed during construction that will reduce the interior residential noise levels to 50 dBA or less. 
(3)  The sound level readings shall be measured at a distance from the site to the noise source. The measurement should be from the source to the nearest points on the site where structures having noise sensitive uses are located. These points shall be labeled as the NAL (noise assessment locations). The measurement location for structures is a point 6.5 feet from the facade. In the event that the location of the structures has not yet been specified at the time of the noise study, then the distance used in the noise study should be measured as 6.5 feet less than the distance from the structure setback line to the major source(s) of noise. (Reference: Title 24, Housing & Urban Development, Part 51 - Environmental Criteria and Standards, Subpart B - Noise Abatement and Control, Section 51.103) Criteria and Standards (c) Exterior standards. 
Sec. 10-2224.7. - Commnuity zoning information meeting (CZIM). 
All applications regarding re-zonings, zoning modifications, variances, special use permits, subdivisions (minor and preliminary plats), and other related land use petitions must comply with the requirements of the Community Zoning Information Meeting process as set out in Article L. 
(Ord. No. 022-09, § 1, 12-21-09; Ord. No. 005-10, § 1, 3-15-10) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 022-09, § 1, adopted Dec. 21, 2009 amended former § 10-2224.7 in its entirety. Former § 10-2224.7 included subsections 10-2224.7.1—10-2224.7.4 which respectively pertained to purpose, notification, implementation and results. 
CONDITIONAL DEVELOPMENT 
Sec. 10-2225. - Designation. 
Each zoning district shall have a designation thereunder to be known as Conditional for that district. 
Sec. 10-2226. - Plans. 
Site plans for rezonings and land use petitions must be folded, drawn to scale, no larger than 30" x 42", and shall, at a minimum, include the following information: 
(1)  Key and/or legend and site location map with North arrow; 
(2)  Boundary survey of subject property which includes dimensions along property lines that match the metes and bounds of the property's written legal description and clearly indicates the point of beginning; 
(3)  Acreage of subject property; 
(4)  Location of land lot lines and identification of land lots; 
(5)  Existing, proposed new dedicated and future reserved rights-of-way of all streets, roads, and railroads adjacent to and on the subject property; 
(6)  Proposed streets on the subject site; 
(7)  Posted speed limits on all adjoining roads; 
(8)  Current zoning of the subject site and adjoining properties; 
(9)  Existing buildings with square footages and heights (stories), wells, driveways, fences, cell towers, and any other structures or improvements on the subject property; 
(10)  Existing buildings with square footages and heights (stories), wells, driveways, fences, cell towers, and any other structures or improvements on adjacent properties within 400 feet of the subject site based on the County's aerial photography or an acceptable substitute as approved by the Director; 
(11)  Location of proposed buildings (except single family residential lots) with total square footage; 
(12)  Layout and minimum lot size of proposed single family residential lots; 
(13)  Topography (surveyed or County) on subject site and adjacent property within 200 feet as required to assess runoff effects; 
(14)  Location of overhead and underground electrical and pipeline transmission/conveyance lines; 
(15)  Required and/or proposed setbacks; 
(16)  100-year flood plain horizontal limits and flood zone designations as shown on survey or FEMA FIRM maps; 
(17)  Required landscape strips, undisturbed buffers, and any other natural areas as required or proposed; 
(18)  Required and proposed parking spaces; loading and unloading facilities; 
(19)  Lakes, streams, and waters on the state and associated buffers; 
(20)  Proposed stormwater management facilities; 
(21)  Community wastewater facilities including preliminary areas reserved for septic drain fields and points of access; 
(22)  Availability of water system and sanitary sewer system; 
(23)  Tree lines, woodlands and open fields on subject site; 
(24)  Entrance site distance profile assuming the driver's eye at a height of 3.5 feet (See East Point Subdivision Regulations); 
(25)  Wetlands shown on the County's GIS maps or survey; and 
(26)  Airport noise contours on those properties within the FAR Part 150 Airport Noise Contour Map. 
A request for relief from any of the above site plan requirements may be submitted in writing to the Director for approval prior to the filing deadline. The request should clearly state the reasons for the request. Projects subject to Development of Regional Impact reviews and other large projects that will be phased shall be required to revise the site plan for each phase of the development to comply with the above standards through a zoning modification. 
Sec. 10-2227. - Zoning maps. 
The official Zoning Map will be amended to reflect the land use petition approvals. 
Sec. 10-2228. - Applicable regulations. 
Zoning regulations that applied at the time of acceptance of an application for a Land Disturbance Permit shall prevail. 
Sec. 10-2229. - Petition fees. 
Prior to accepting a petition for rezoning, Use Permit, concurrent variance, or extension of zoning and/or Use Permit, the Director shall collect nonrefundable fees as established by the City Council. 
ARTICLE K. - INTERPRETATION, CONFLICT AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 10-2230. - Interpretation. 
The Director of Planning and Zoning shall interpret the provisions to this Ordinance, and may utilize opinions of the City Attorney and others in arriving at interpretations. Appeals from an interpretation of the Director of Planning and Zoning shall be in accordance with the provisions of Article I. 
Sec. 10-2231. - Conflict. 
This Ordinance shall abrogate any other regulations previously adopted or issued that are in conflict with any of the provisions of this Ordinance relating to the use of buildings or land in conflict with this Ordinance. This Ordinance shall not annul any easements, covenants or other agreements between parties; provided, however, that whenever this Ordinance imposes a greater restriction upon the use of buildings or land than are imposed by such easements, covenants or agreements, the provisions of the Ordinance shall control. 
Sec. 10-2232. - Enforcement. 
It shall be the duty of the Director of Planning and Zoning to enforce the provisions of this Ordinance. In addition, it shall be the duty of all officers and employees of the City, especially members of the Code Enforcement Office, to assist the Director of Planning and Zoning by reporting to him/her any seeming violations — including violations in new construction, reconstruction, and/or land uses including signs. Appeals from the decision of the Director of Planning and Zoning shall be made as provided in Article I, Appeals. 
Sec. 10-2233. - Permits in effect. 
Nothing herein shall require any change in the plans, construction, size or designated use of any land, building, structure or part thereof for which a building permit or land disturbance permit was issued prior to the effective date of this Ordinance or amendment thereto. 
ARTICLE L. - COMMUNITY ZONING INFORMATION MEETING 

Sec. 10-2234. - Purpose. 
The Community Zoning Information Meeting (CZIM) is established for presentation of all applications regarding re-zonings, zoning modifications, variances, special use permits, subdivisions (minor and preliminary plats), and other related land use petitions. CZIM is further established to: 
(1)  Allow applicants an opportunity to present their applications; 
(2)  Allow the citizens of East Point opportunities to review all applications submitted and ask questions of the applicant and express any preliminary concerns; 
(3)  Provide for a standard meeting location, day and time; and 
(4))  Allow issues and concerns to be addressed in a public forum in the presence of citizens, staff and any other City staff in attendance. 
(Ord. No. 005-10, § 2, 3-15-10) 
Sec. 10-2235. - Notification. 
(a)  Once an application is placed on the CZIM agenda, the applicant shall be required to provide notification in the manner set out in subsections (1) through (6) below. 
(1)  All notices shall be postmarked the same day the application is scheduled for CZIM to allow a reasonable time for receipt of the notices prior to the meeting date. 
(2)  All written and emailed notices shall state the location of the subject property, the nature of the application and the date, time and location of the CZIM. 
(3)  All notices shall provide the anticipated dates that the application will come before the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council. 
(4)  Written notice in the form of a postcard mailer shall be mailed to all property owners within 500 feet radius of the proposed development. Applications seeking a rezoning, special use permit, or variance to or from B-P, 1-1, and I-2 notification shall be given to all property owners within 1,000 feet of the boundaries of the property owner who appear on the current tax records as retrieved by the City's Geographic Information System. A copy of the mailing list and a postmarked copy of the mailer shall be forwarded to the Planning and Zoning staff. 
(5)  All City Council members shall be given notice in the form of a postcard mailer postmarked the date the application is filed. 
(6)  All presidents of the currently listed neighborhood/community associations in the Ward of the subject site shall be notified by postcard mailer. Where there is an adjoining Ward within the 500-foot radius a postcard mailer shall also be sent to the neighborhood/community association presidents of the adjoining Ward surrounding the subject site. Subject sites zoned B-P, I-1, or I-2 where there is an adjoining Ward within the 1000-foot radius a postcard mailer shall also be sent to the neighborhood/community association presidents of the adjoining ward. 
(b)  In the event an application is not presented at CZIM as scheduled, due to the applicant's failure to attend or due to a request for rescheduling by the applicant, it shall be the applicant's duty to repeat the notification process set out above with respect to the rescheduled CZIM date. 
(c)  Notification pursuant to subsection (a) above shall be in addition to any notice required by the Zoning Procedures Law, including public hearing signs to be posted by the applicant and the formal advertising of public hearings to be arranged by staff. 
(Ord. No. 022-09, § 2, 12-21-09; Ord. No. 005-10, § 2, 3-15-10; Ord. No. 019-12, § 2, 12-17-12; Ord. No. 055-016, §§ 3, 4, 5-16-16 ) 
Sec. 10-2236. - Implementation. 
(a)  Scheduling. The filing deadline to have an application placed on the CZIM agenda shall be the first Friday of each month. The CZIM shall be held on the second Tuesday immediately following the filing deadline from 6:30 p.m. until 8:00 p.m. in a location owned and/or operated by the City of East Point. 
(b)  Meeting procedures. The CZIM shall consists of an informational presentation of each proposed project by the respective applicant and in the manner set forth in subsections (1) through (3). 
(1)  Staff representative(s) will be present to facilitate; 
(2)  Sign-in sheets and comment cards and will be provided for attendees with respect to each application; and 
(3)  Staff will furnish copies of the completed sign-in sheets and comment cards on each application to the respective applicant. 
(c)  CZIM Report. Each applicant must submit a report to the Department of Planning and Community Development seven (7) days prior to the Planning & Zoning Commission meeting. The report shall include the following: 
(1)  Date of CZIM; 
(2)  Copy of site plan; 
(3)  Proof of notification; and 
(4)  Summary of discussion items and associated results. 
(d)  Additional community meetings. Applicant's attendance at any additional neighborhood/community association meetings will be optional. Any private agreements between the applicant and the neighborhood will be considered a civil matter and will only be included in staff's recommendation if the item(s) are zoning related. 
Additionally, each applicant is required to submit a report of the meeting to the Department of Planning & Zoning ten (10) days prior to the City Council Meeting. City Council may defer an action if the report is not received. The report shall include the following: 
(1)  Date, time and location of the meeting; 
(2)  Number of people in attendance; 
(3)  Copy of the sign-in sheet; 
(4)  List of discussion items and associated results; and 
(5)  Copy of private agreements to be placed in the case file. 
(e)  Residential infill. CZIM is not required for residential infill projects. However, residential infill projects shall require a meeting in accordance with Chapter 4, Article J, Sections 10-4092 through 10-4095 with the respective neighborhood/community association before the building permit is approved. 
(Ord. No. 022-09, § 2, 12-21-09; Ord. No. 005-10, § 2, 3-15-10) 
Sec. 10-2237. - Applicant attendance required. 
Attendance at the CZIM by the applicant or by the applicant's representative is mandatory. An application cannot proceed to Planning & Zoning Commission for recommendation or to City Council for action without participation in CZIM. 
(Ord. No. 005-10, § 2, 3-15-10) 
APPENDIX A 
CUP Overlay  (Ord. No. 1084-94, 9-6-94)  (INACTIVE) 
(a)  In case of community unit development of two or more buildings to be constructed on a plat of ground at least ten acres in area not subdivided into customary lots and streets, and which will not be subdivided, or where the existing or contemplated lot and street layout make it impractical to apply the requirements of this ordinance to the individual buildings in such community unit developments, the application of the terms of this ordinance may be varied in a manner that will be in harmony with the goals of the comprehensive plan and will insure that the intent of this ordinance is not violated. 
(b)  Prior to the submittal of an application to the zoning administrator for approval of a community unit plan, the developer shall meet with the planning and zoning commission for a review of the location, scope and nature of the proposed project. The developer shall file written notice to the zoning administrator a minimum of 15 days prior to a regular scheduled planning and zoning commission meeting, stating his intentions to meet with the planning and zoning commission, including a brief description of his proposed project. 
(c)  A plan for such community unit project shall be submitted to the planning and zoning commission for a review and recommendation to the city council. After the plan is formally presented to the planning and zoning commission, the commission shall have 30 days to submit its recommendations to the city council. Each site plan shall be prepared by an architect, landscape architect, engineer, or land surveyor, whose state registration is current and valid. His seal or professional initials shall be affixed to the plans submitted. Each plan shall be drawn at an appropriate scale and show the following: 
(1)  Name: Name(s) of the proposed development. Name(s) and address(es) of the owner(s) and designer(s) of the site plan and his seal. 
(2)  Date: Date, approximate north arrow, and scale. 
(3)  Boundaries: The boundary line of the tract shall be shown on a survey plat prepared and sealed by a registered land surveyor. All site plans shall be drawn to scale on a plat accurately showing the boundary with linear and angular dimensions. 
(4)  Location map: A map to an appropriate scale showing the location of the development. 
(5)  Contours: Contours with a minimum vertical interval of five feet referred to sea level datum shall be provided for both existing and proposed topography. 
(6)  Existing property lines: The location of existing and platted property lines, streets, buildings, water courses, railroads, bridges, water mains, sewers, culverts, drain pipes, and public utility easements, both on the land to be developed and on that portion of the land immediately adjoining which abuts the land to be developed, and any other pertinent characteristics of the land; the names of adjoining subdivisions and the names of owners or record of adjoining parcels; and the zoning of the adjoining property. 
(7)  Proposed improvements: The names, where appropriate, and locations and dimensions of proposed streets, alleys, sidewalks, easements, specific use areas, parking, recreation areas and facilities, yards, and other open spaces. 
(8)  Utility and drainage plans: Utility and drainage plans shall be provided including all information as reasonably required by the city or county health, public works, water, sewer, and sanitation departments to determine that water, sewer, sanitary disposal, and storm drainage improvements will be made and located in accordance with city requirements. After the filing of an application for approval as a community unit plan, upon written notification by an appropriate department that additional information is required, the developer shall submit the required information to the department requesting such information and to the zoning administrator within ten days of such request. 
(9)  Buffer areas: Location, dimensions, and treatment of all required buffer, landscaped, or planted areas, including fences. 
(10)  Design plans: The submittal of any plans will comply with the design plan specifications as set forth in city regulations. 
(11)  Proposed protective covenants: A preliminary outline of proposed protective covenants, including provisions for the organization and financing of a home owners' association, where appropriate. 
(12)  Other information: Other information required by the zoning administrator to insure compliance with the provisions of this ordinance. 
(d)  Before taking action on the community unit plan application, the city council shall hold a public hearing, the notice of which shall conform to procedures for amendment to the zoning map. Within 60 days from the date of the public hearing, the city council shall render an official decision on the application. If approved, the community unit plan must be carried out in strict compliance with the plan submitted to and approved by the city council. 
(e)  A community unit plan shall be considered a map amendment to the official zoning map. The property shall be subject to a frequency on filing of an application for approval of a zoning amendment in accordance with section 10-2155 (Frequency of Petitions) of this ordinance. 
(f)  The community unit plan shall conform to the following restrictions: 
(1)  If construction is not started within 12 months after approval of the plan by the city council, approval for the plan is rescinded; after which all minimum dimensional requirements for the zoning district in which the parcel is located shall again apply. 
(2)  Uses and buildings are limited to those permitted within the zoning district in which the project is located; however, within any community unit development, the following uses may be permitted subject to approval by the city council. 
(a)  Single-family dwellings. 
(b)  Two-family and multifamily dwellings. 
(c)  Retail stores or shops, excluding the making of any products to be sold on or off the premises, provided that each such establishment is limited to a maximum of 3,500 square feet of retail sales area and ten employees, and further provided that the total area, including off-street parking of all such establishments shall not exceed three per cent of the total area of the community unit development. 
(d)  Personal service establishments, such as barber shops and laundromats, provided that each such establishment is limited to a maximum of 2,000 square feet of floor space and six employees, and further provided that the total area, including off-street parking, of all such establishments shall not exceed two percent of the total area of the community unit development. 
(e)  The residential density shall not excelled six units per acre. 
(f)  The maximum height of all structures shall not exceed the height limits of the zoning district in which the project is located. 
(g)  The number of parking spaces provided shall conform to the requirements specified in Article E of this ordinance. 
(h)  The existing landscaping features shall be retained, whenever possible. Included among landscaping features are ponds, streams, lakes, trees, and similar features. The plan shall designate by appropriate symbol the location of existing trees to be retained. 
Attached Dwelling Development  (Ord. No. 1084-94, 9-6-94)  (INACTIVE) 
(a)  The "attached dwelling development" standards set forth in this section are intended to provide for more flexible and creative site planning which may assist in lowering development and housing costs, expand the choice and type of dwelling units available to the public while maintaining compatibility with, and the integrity of, adjacent neighborhoods, and to allow opportunities for fee simple ownership in zero lot line developments. 
(b)  Attached dwelling development shall be allowed in the C-2 Central Business District, the CR Commercial-Redevelopment District, the R-2 Two-Family District, and R-3 Multifamily District and the R-4 Multifamily District, subject to review and recommendation by the planning and zoning commission and approval by the city council in accordance with the procedures established for a zoning map amendment and a subdivision plat approval. 
(c)  Prior to the submittal of an application to the zoning administrator for approval of an attached dwelling development plan, the developer shall meet with the planning and zoning commission for a review of the location, scope and nature of the proposed project. The developer shall file written notice to the zoning administrator a minimum of 15 days prior to a regular scheduled planning and zoning commission meeting, stating his intentions to meet with the planning and zoning commission, including a brief description of his proposed project. 
(d)  A plan for such attached dwelling development shall be submitted to the planning and zoning commission for a review and recommendation to the city council. After the plan is formally presented to the planning and zoning commission, the commission shall have 30 days to submit its recommendations to the city council. Each site plan shall be prepared by an architect, landscape architect, engineer, or land surveyor, whose state registration is current and valid. His seal or professional initials shall be affixed to the plans submitted. Each plan shall be drawn at an appropriate scale and show the following: 
(1)  Name: Name(s) of the proposed development. Name(s) and address(es) of the owner(s) and designer(s) of the site plan and his seal. 
(2)  Date: Date, approximate north arrow, and scale. 
(3)  Boundaries: The boundary line of the tract shall be shown on a survey plat prepared and sealed by a registered land surveyor. All site plans shall be drawn to scale on a plat accurately showing the boundary with linear and angular dimensions. 
(4)  Location map: A map to an appropriate scale showing the location of the development. 
(5)  Contours: Contours with a minimum vertical interval of five feet referred to sea level datum shall be provided for both existing and proposed topography. 
(6)  Existing property lines: The location of existing and platted property lines, streets, buildings, water courses, railroads, bridges, water mains, sewers, culverts, drain pipes, and public utility easements, both on the land to be developed and on that portion of the land immediately adjoining which abuts the land to be developed, and any other pertinent characteristics of the land; the names of adjoining subdivisions and the names of owners or record of adjoining parcels; and the zoning of the adjoining property. 
(7)  Proposed improvements: The names, where appropriate, and locations and dimensions of proposed streets, alleys, sidewalks, easements, specific use areas, parking, recreation areas and facilities, yards, and other open spaces. 
(8)  Utility and drainage plans: Utility and drainage plans shall be provided including all information as reasonable required by the City or County Health, Public Works, Water, Sewer, and Sanitation Departments to determine that water, sewer, sanitary disposal, and storm drainage improvements will be made and located in accordance with city requirements. After the filing of an application for approval as a community unit plan, upon written notification by an appropriate department that additional information is required, the developer shall submit the required information to the department requesting such information and to the zoning administrator within ten days of such request. 
(9)  Buffer areas: Location, dimensions, and treatment of all required buffer, landscaped, or planted areas, including fences. 
(10)  Design plans: The submittal of any plans will comply with the design plan specifications as set forth in city regulations. 
(11)  Proposed protective covenants: A preliminary outline of proposed protective covenants, including provisions for the organization and financing of a home owners' association, where appropriate. 
(12)  Other information: Other information required by the zoning administrator to insure compliance with the provisions of this ordinance. 
(e)  Before taking action on the community unit plan application, the city council shall hold a public hearing, the notice of which shall conform to procedures for amendment to the zoning map and approval of a subdivision plat. Within 60 days from the date of the public hearing, the city council shall render an official decision on the application. If approved, the attached dwelling development plan must be carried out in strict compliance with the plan submitted to and approved by the city council. 
(f)  An attached dwelling development plan shall be considered a subdivision plat and a map amendment to the official zoning map. The property shall be subject to a frequency on filing of an application for approval of a zoning amendment in accordance with section 10-2155 (Frequency of Petitions) of this ordinance. 
(g)  Design standards. 
(1)  Design. All lot layouts, circulation, and open space provided shall permit an attractive variety of orientations and groupings of dwellings and driveways, minimizing adverse effects of noise, glare, and traffic on residences. 
(2)  Variety of housing styles. The development shall be designed to encourage a variety of housing styles and floor plans, with a staggering of front yard setbacks of dwellings and garages. The dwelling units contained on each building site may be arranged in a variety of configurations, including back to back, side to side or combinations thereof. In addition, two dwelling units may be arranged on a single lot so as to be sold fee simple as a two-family dwelling. 
(3)  Facilities layout. An efficient, safe, and effective layout of circulation, drainage, and similar systems shall be provided. 
(4)  Adjacent land use. The development shall be designed in a manner to adequately protect adjacent land uses, which shall include for this purpose any landscaped buffer yard which may be required along the boundaries of the development as necessary to ensure compatibility of land uses, which shall be maintained as common or dedicated open space. 
(5)  Accessory buildings. Accessory buildings may be located within building restriction lines. Walls, fences, and swimming pools may be located on each lot. 
(h)  Development site standards and principal building setbacks. Attached dwelling development shall comply with the following standards: 
Development site standards  Min. Development Site Area None  Building Site Standards 
One Family Lots  Minimum Perimeter Setback 10 ft.  Minimum Mean lot width 20 ft.  Minimum area each lot 1600 sq. ft.  Minimum Average all lots 1800 sq. ft.  Minimum lot depth None 
Two Family Lots  Minimum Mean lot width 30 ft.  Minimum area each lot 2400 sq. ft.  Minimum Average all lots 2600 sq. ft.  Minimum lot depth None 
Principal Building Setbacks  Front Yard 20 ft.  Side Yard 10 ft. (The side yard setback shall apply to end units only.)  Street Side Yard 10 ft.  Rear Yard 0 or 20 ft. 
Traditional Residential Neighborhood District  (Ord. No. 1170-98, § 1, 9-8-98)  (INACTIVE) 
(a)  Application and intent. The provisions of this section apply to the TRN traditional residential neighborhood district. 
The purpose of this district is to establish a single-family residential zoning classification that ensures the development of land along the lines of traditional neighborhood that were typical of in the United States from Colonial times until the 1940's. The intent of this district is to provide for traditional residential neighborhood within walking distance of downtown, as there is currently no opportunity for construction of single-family residences along main street. 
Traditional Neighborhoods share the following conventions: 
(1)  The neighborhood is spatially understood and limited in size to a maximum radius of a distance approximately equal to a 10-minute walk. 
(2)  Residences, retail shops, workplaces and civic buildings are interwoven within the neighborhood and all are in close proximity. 
(3)  Residences are located in a manner that the buildings are located close to the street, spatially defining the public street and the private block interest. 
Traditional Neighborhoods pursue certain social objectives: 
(1)  By bringing most activities of daily living, including dwelling, shopping and working within walking distance, the elderly and the young gain independence of movement. 
(2)  By reducing the number and length of automobile trips, traffic congestion is minimized and necessary road construction is limited. 
(3)  By providing defined public spaces, citizens come to know each other and watch over their collective security. 
(4)  By providing a full range of housing types and workplaces, age and economic class are integrated and the bonds of an authentic community are formed. 
(5)  By integrating the various functions of daily life within neighborhoods of appropriate scale, meaningful involvement in local decision-making is facilitated. 
A TRN zoning district may only be located within the Main Street architectural overly zoning district as established in section 10-2043.1 of the Code of Ordinances, City of East Point, Georgia. 
(b)  Permitted uses. Permitted uses are indicated in this section. Any use not specifically designated as a permitted use shall be deemed to be prohibited. The following permitted uses shall be allowed for in the TRN district: 
(1)  Single-family detached dwellings; 
(2)  Parks, playgrounds and outdoor recreational facilities which may be publicly owned or privately owned by a non-profit organization; 
(3)  Accessory uses incidental to the above permitted uses; 
(4)  Home occupation, provided that those occupations meet the provisions of the City of East Point Code. 
(c)  Conditional uses. None. 
(d)  Lot restrictions. 
(1)  Lot size: 4,000 sq. ft. (minimum). 
(2)  Lot width building line: 40 feet (minimum). 
(3)  Lot width street frontage: 20 feet (minimum). 
(4)  Setbacks: 

 
*For corner lots, the front setbacks shall apply for both street frontages. 
(5)  Height restriction: 45 feet. 
(6)  Access. Private alleys may be used. Alleys shall be a minimum width of 12 feet and shall be paved with either asphalt or concrete. 
(e)  Building restrictions. 
(1)  Single-family residential buildings shall conform to the architectural standards enumerated in subsection (f) below. 
(2)  Single-family residential buildings which have a garage shall locate the garage in the rear of the building. Front garages are prohibited. 
(3)  Single-family residential buildings shall have a minimum floor area of 1,500 square feet. 
(f)  Architectural standards. 
(1)  New structures created with a TRN district shall be similar in size, scale and mass to existing structures in the closest residential neighborhood unless approved otherwise by the planning and zoning commission. 
(2)  The stylistic traditions of Colonial, Victorian, Federal period, Georgian, Colonial revival, Free Classic, English Vernacular revival and Free Classic architecture which are characteristic of the city are mandatory. 
(3)  The architectural style of a building shall be continued on all of its major features on all sides visible from a public street. 
(4)  Porches, pent roofs or hooded front doors shall define the front entrance to all residences. Porches shall be: unenclosed; constructed of wood, brick or stone; a minimum of six feet in depth; and lined across the front facade either partially or wholly. 
(5)  The front facade of the principal building shall face on a public street only. 
(6)  Roof pitch and form shall be borrowed from existing residential buildings in the community. All residential buildings and accessible structures shall have a gabled roof with a minimum pitch of 6:12. Porch roofs shall have a minimum pitch of 3:12. 
(7)  All accessory and outbuildings are to be of a similar style and materials as the principal building on the lot. 
(g)  Signage requirements. All signs with a TRN district shall conform to the requirements in this section. These requirements shall replace other signage ordinances for any development within a TRN district. 
Identification of dwellings: 
(1)  Dwellings shall be identified either by numbers or by lettered signs. 
(2)  Signs, identifying either the residence or the occupants of the dwelling, shall be made of wood, stone or metal and may be placed flat against the dwellings or gatepost. 
(3)  The maximum area of any such sign shall be three feet. 
(4)  Such signs shall not be internally illuminated. 
Temporary signs. 
(1)  Temporary signs advertising the sale of property and political campaign signs are permitted and shall conform to the City of East Point Sign Ordinance. 
(2)  Real estate signs shall not cumulatively exceed four square feet for each lot. 
Temporary On-premise signs. 
(1)  Temporary on-premise signs identifying a contractor, architect, engineer or similar professional involved in the design or construction of a project or building shall be permitted to be erected and remaining during the time of construction only. 
(2)  Such signs shall not exceed 12 square feet. 
(3)  Such signs shall be set back at least ten feet from the front property line. 
(h)  Off-street parking and loading requirements. Applicable regulations as set forth in Article E shall be met. 
POP PLANNED OFFICE PARK  (INACTIVE) 
POP District scope and intent. Regulations set forth in this Section are the POP District regulations. Article D should be consulted to determine uses and minimum standards for uses allowed by Administrative Permit or Use Permit. The POP District is to encourage the development of a quality planned office park community which will be compatible with surrounding developments. 
Use regulations. Within the POP District, land and structures shall be used in accordance with standards herein. Any use not specifically designated as a permitted use in this section or as a use allowed by Administrative Permit or Use Permit shall be prohibited. 
(a)  Permitted uses. Structures and land may be used for only the following purposes: 
(1)  Conference centers and business training centers. 
(2)  Child daycare centers (small, medium and large). 
(3)  Financial and banking facilities. 
(4)  Health clubs and physical fitness centers. 
(5)  Hospitals and clinics medical, dental, chiropractic and similar facilities for humans. 
(6)  Office uses, which may include the display and sales of scientific, electronic or medical equipment of a type not customarily retailed to the public. 
(7)  Public and private parks, recreation and assembly facilities, including but not limited to golf courses, golf driving ranges, miniature golf courses and tennis courts. 
(b)  Accessory uses. 
(1)  Accessory uses structures: 
a.  Accessory uses and structures incidental to any permitted use. 
b.  For sale, for rent, or for lease signs in accordance with the sign regulations of the city code. 
DESIGN STANDARDS 
(1)  In order to establish and maintain the POP Planned Office Park District as a quality area which will preserve the investments of all land owners and developers, as well as the tax base of the City of East Point, all construction and development within the POP District must comply with the following site development and improvement standards: 
(a)  Setbacks for front, rear and side yards: 
1.  Structures fronting on a public or private street shall be located at least 50 feet from the front property line of any tract. 
2.  Structures, except fences, shall be at least 20 feet from the side line of any tract. 
3.  Structures shall be at least 30 feet from the rear line of any tract. 
4.  Only driveways, parking spaces, permitted signs, and landscaped areas shall be allowed between a structure and the front property line. 
5.  All paved areas must have concrete curbs. 
(b)  Building exterior wall materials shall be one or more of the following: 
1.  Hard burned clay brick; 
2.  Stone with either a weathered face or a polished, fluted or broken face. No quarry faced stone shall be used except in retaining walls. 
3.  Concrete masonry. Units shall be those generally described by the National Concrete Masonry Association as "Customized Architectural Concrete Masonry Units" or shall be broken faced brick-type units with marble aggregate. There shall be no exposed concrete block on the exterior of any building, however, rear walls which do not front any street or building, may be painted concrete block. Any concrete masonry units that have a gray cement color shall be coated with a coating approved by the chief building inspector. 
4.  Concrete may be poured in-place, tilt-up or precast. Poured in-place and tilt-up walls shall have a finish of stone, a texture or a coating. Textured finishes shall be coated. Precast units which are not uniform in color shall be coated. Coating shall be an approved cementitious type. 
5.  Roof-mounted equipment. Roof-mounted equipment shall be located and/or screened behind a parapet wall to minimize visibility from streets or surrounding buildings. 
(c)  Parking and maneuvering: Parking shall not be permitted on streets. Parking spaces and loading docks shall be so located as to make maneuvering in the streets unnecessary. Ample parking spaces shall be provided as required in Article E of the zoning regulations to accommodate the parking for the subject development. All parking areas and driveways shall be paved with concrete, asphalt, their equivalent or better. 
(d)  Outside storage: No outside storage of any type shall be permitted without specific approval of the planning and zoning commission. When such approval is given, the outside storage area shall be enclosed with an approved screen so that storage is not visible from neighboring property or streets and in no event may storage exceed the height of the screen. In no event shall storage be permitted in front of any building. 
(e)  Landscaping: The entire area of any lot containing a building site, including the area between the lot line and street curb line, shall be landscaped except for areas covered by buildings and paved areas. A minimum strip of landscaping ten feet wide shall be installed and maintained along any portion of the lot bordering a public street right-of-way except for entrance driveways onto the lot. The landscaping plan submitted to the zoning administrator for approval shall identify such features as the planting of trees, shrubs and grass and the installation of screens as appropriate. The landscaping, as approved by the zoning administrator, shall be installed prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. The maintenance of the landscaping shall be the responsibility of the owner and shall include the operation and maintenance of an irrigation system. 
(f)  Exterior lighting: All exterior lighting shall be designed, erected, altered and maintained in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the zoning administrator. 
(g)  Loading areas: No materials, supplies, merchandise or equipment shall be stored in any area on a lot except inside of a closed building, or behind an approved visual barrier screening such areas so that they are not unsightly from surrounding properties or public streets. Loading doors and docks shall not be constructed facing any public street or highway without the express prior approval of the planning and zoning commission. 
(2)  Each application for a building permit within the POP District shall be accompanied by architectural design and materials information in the form of building elevations, typical sections, details, schedules and specifications as appropriate which identify the architectural treatment and exterior materials proposed for use in all structures. 
In addition, each application for a building permit shall be accompanied by a site development plan, as hereinafter described. 
The site development plan shall be prepared by a certified engineer or architect and shall be drawn at a scale no greater than one inch equals 50 feet. 
In addition to a current plat of the property prepared by a registered land surveyor, information accompanying or presented on the site development plan shall include the following, as applicable to the proposed development: 
(a)  The location, height, ground coverage, and use of all structures; 
(b)  The floor areas of all buildings and the proposed use of each; 
(c)  Calculations of building coverage, density, open space, number of parking spaces, and areas of land use; 
(d)  Location and dimensions of all adjacent roads, streets and interior roads, driveways, parking facilities, loading areas, points of access to adjacent streets, and pedestrian walks; 
(e)  A grading plan, with contours drawn at two foot intervals; 
(f)  Location of all sewer, water, and storm drainage lines, and all easements and rights-of-way, existing and proposed; 
(g)  Stormwater management drawings and calculations, and plans for siltation and erosion control, both during and after construction; 
(h)  Landscaping plan, showing all man-made features and the location, height and/or caliper of species of all plant materials; 
(i)  Exterior lighting plan, including all parking areas, driveways and pedestrian ways, and including the height, number and type of fixtures. 
(g)  Building permit. three copies of the required architectural design and materials information and site development plan shall be submitted to the Planning and Zoning Director with the application for a building permit. The Planning and Zoning Director shall transmit copies of these items to the planning and zoning commission for review. Prior to the issuance of a building permit, the planning and zoning commission shall review the submitted architectural design and materials information and site development plan, and shall approve, disapprove, or approve subject to modifications, the submitted architectural design and materials information and the site development plan. 
Development standards. 
(a)  Height Regulations - 35 feet 
(b)  Minimum front yard setback - 50 feet 
(c)  Minimum Side Yard Setback - 20 feet 
(d)  Minimum Rear Yard Setback - 30 feet 
(e)  Minimum Lot Area - 10,000 sq. ft. 
(f)  Minimum Width of Lot Frontage or Width at Building Line - 75 feet 
(g)  Minimum Heated Floor Area Per Unit - 1,000 sq. ft. 
(h)  Minimum Accessory Structure Requirements. Accessory structures may be located in the rear or side yards only but shall not be located within a minimum yard. 
Other regulations. The headings below contain provisions applicable to the POP District. 
Chapter 2 Zoning Regulations 
Chapter 3 Building Code Regulations 
Chapter 4 Subdivision Regulations 
Chapter 5 Flood Damage Prevention 
Chapter 6 Tree Protection and Landscape Ordinance 
Chapter 7 Signs 
Chapter 8 Uniform Roadway Addressing System 
Chapter 9 Condition and Use of Commercial and Industrial Buildings 
Chapter 10 Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control 
Chapter 11 Stormwater Management 
Chapter 12 Stream Buffer Protection 
Chapter 13 Enterprise Zones 
Chapter 14 Overlay Districts 
Chapter 3 - BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Construction contracts, § 5-4001 et seq.; fire code, § 6-2037; excavations, § 13-2006. 

ARTICLE A. - BUILDING CODE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— The edition of the building code, as amended by subsequent ordinances, can be found on file in city offices. 

Sec. 10-3001. - Building code; procedural amendments. 
The following are adopted amendments to the State Minimum Code: Accessibility in Georgia Code, all chapters of the International Code Council (ICC) including the following trades International Building Code (IBC), International Residential Code (IRC), International Plumbing Code (IPC), and International Property Maintenance Code (IMPC), National Electric Code (NEC), International Energy Conservation Code (IECC), International Mechanical Code (IMC) and International Fuel Gas Code (IFGC). In the event of any conflict between the foregoing and any provision of the State Minimum Code - International Code Council (ICC) and associated trades as adopted and amended by the State Department of Community Affairs, the foregoing shall control: 
(1)  All work performed under a permit issued shall conform to the approved application and plans and all codes or ordinances governing the work or equipment for which permits were issued. All work shall be performed by an individual contractor, firm, or corporation licensed to perform such work except when performed by an individual or members of his family in a single-family dwelling owned and occupied by that individual. 
(2)  Any person, firm, corporation or agent who shall violate a provision of this code, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall erect, construct, alter, demolish or move any structure, or has erected, constructed, altered, repaired, moved or demolished a building or structure in violation of a detailed statement or drawing submitted and permitted thereunder, shall be guilty of unlawful conduct and an offense. Each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this code is committed or continued. Upon conviction of any such violation such person shall be punished as provided by section 1-1006 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of East Point, Georgia. 
(3)  Permit fees: The fee schedule is developed by the Department of Planning and Zoning and adopted by the East Point City Council. Review of the fee schedule occurs on an annual basis. 
(4)  Pursuant to Georgia law O.C.G.A. 43-41, the following contractor types must obtain a license from the Georgia State Board of Residential and General Contractors by July 1, 2008: 
1.  Residential-Basic Contractor: Those who perform contract work relative to detached one-family and two-family residences and one-family townhouses not over three stories in height. 
2.  Residential-Light Commercial Contractor: Those who perform contract work or activity related to multifamily and multiuse light commercial buildings and structures. 
3.  General Contractor: Those who perform unlimited contractor services in commercial construction, including private, public, institutional and industrial contracting. 
(Ord. No. 006-12, § 1, 3-19-12) 
Sec. 10-3002. - Definitions; qualifications of building official. 
Whenever the term "building official" is used in the adopted edition of the International Building Code, it shall indicate and refer to the building official as designated by the Director of the Department of Planning and Zoning. Such designee shall meet the minimum qualification requirements as defined by the adopted edition of the International Building Code. 
Sec. 10-3003. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
(1)  Contractor shall mean any person, firm, company, entity or business that contracts for the construction of an entire building or project, rather than for a portion of the work. A contractor has the ability to hire subcontractors and is responsible for subcontractor(s) complying with the provisions required herein. Any person(s) and their relatives shall not be considered contractors when the project takes place on any property owned and occupied by that person. 
(2)  Project shall mean any construction, repair, improvement or modification to any structure. 
(3)  Performance bond shall mean a surety bond which guarantees that the contractor will fully perform the contract and guarantees against the breach of said contract. The proceeds of the bond are used to complete the contract or compensate for loss in the event of nonperformance. 
(4)  Relative shall mean any individual who is related by affinity or consanguinity within the third degree as determined by common law, or individual in a step or adoptive relationship within such third degree. 
(5)  Structure shall mean any construction, or any production or piece of work artificially built or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner. Any combination of materials that form a construction for occupancy, use or ornamentation whether installed above ground, below ground or on the surface of any parcel of land. 
(6)  Subcontractor shall mean anyone who takes a portion of a contract from a contractor, as defined by this chapter, or from another subcontractor. 
(7)  Certificate of completion (CC). A certificate of completion is issued for existing buildings which have completed permitted renovations and already have a CO on file. 
Sec. 10-3004. - Registration; bond and correction of code violations. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of every general contractor, electrical contractor, plumbing contractor, HVAC contractor, owner, individual or other entity who shall make contracts for the erection, construction or repair of buildings for which a permit is required, and every such contractor or builder making such contractor and subletting same, or any part thereof to register his name in a book provided for that purpose, with the building inspector, giving full name, residence and place of business, and in case of removal from one place to another to cause to be made a corresponding change in such register accordingly. 
It shall be the duty of every general contractor obtaining a permit for construction to give good and sufficient bond in the sum of $25,000.00, to be approved by the Chief Building Official, conditioned to conform to the building regulations provided in this chapter and other ordinances or laws of the applicable governing body in reference to buildings. 
It shall be the further duty of every electrical contractor, plumbing contractor, HVAC contractor, owner, individual or other entity obtaining a permit for construction to give good and sufficient bond in the sum of $10,000.00, to be approved by the Chief Building Official, conditioned to conform to the building regulations provided in this chapter and other ordinances or laws of the applicable governing body in reference to buildings. 
(b)  Any licensed plumbing contractor or licensed HVAC contractor shall in accordance with the dictates of O.C.GA. § 43-14-12(b) execute and deposit with the judge of the probate court in the county of his principal place of business a code compliance bond in the sum of $10,000.00. Such bond shall be a cash bond in the sum of $10,000.00 or be executed by a surety authorized and qualified to write surety bonds in the state and shall be approved by the judge of the probate court. Such bond shall comply with and conform to the requirements specified by O.C.GA § 43-14-12(b) as to form. Prior to the issuance of any building permits by the Chief Building Official or his designee, any licensed plumbing contractor or licensed HVAC contractor who chooses to execute and deposit a code compliance bond pursuant to the language of this subsection must furnish a copy of the approved code compliance bond to the Chief Building Official or his designee. 
(c)  Any licensed plumbing contractor or HVAC contractor who has not executed and deposited with the judge of the probate court in the county of his principal place of business a code compliance bond as authorized by O.C.G.A. § 43-14-12(b) shall instead be subject to the code compliance bond requirements outlined in subsection (a) of this section. 
(d)  The bond required in subsection (a) of this section from owners who obtain permits to perform work for themselves shall only be required when the cost of the work permitted in any one year exceeds $10,000.00. 
(e)  The bond required of a builder, electrical contractor, owner, individual, or other entity, or of any licensed plumbing contractor or licensed HVAC contractor who chooses not to execute and deposit a code compliance bond pursuant to subsection 10-3004(b) and who seeks to obtain a permit for construction pursuant to section 10-3004, shad be a code compliance bond in favor of the City ensuring that ail construction, installation and modifications be done in compliance with this Code with coverage extending for a period of one year from the date of the final inspection. 
(f)  The bond required of any licensed plumbing contractor or licensed HVAC contractor who chooses to execute and deposit a code compliance bond pursuant to subsection 10-3004(b) and who seeks to obtain a permit for construction pursuant to section 10-3004 shall be a code compliance bond which conforms to the requirements of subsection 10-3004(b). 
(g)  Any final inspection report and certificate of occupancy issued for any structure shall have noted thereon; "To the best of the city's knowledge and belief at the time of inspection, the structure has been erected in substantial compliance with applicable building codes. No oversight by the office of the Planning and Zoning shall excuse violation of any ordinance of East Point." 
(h)  After issuance of any final inspection report, the City reserves the right for a period of one year to reinspect a dwelling for latent code violations which existed at the time of final inspection but were not detected. Any inspection made after the issuance of the final inspection report and before the termination of the one-year requirement by the office of the Chief Building Official shall be in response to a written complaint by the owner. 
(i)  The builder, electrical contractor, plumbing contractor, HVAC contractor, owner, individual or other entity securing the permit shall be responsible for the correction of any code violations by him that are discovered during the period of construction and for a period of one year from the date of final inspection, excepting routine maintenance, abuse, modification and normal wear and tear, 
(j)  In responding to a written complaint and upon inspection of the dwelling, should the office of the Chief Building Official determine that there exists in any structure covered by a bond issued pursuant to subsections (a) or (b) of this section, any violations of this Code, the principal on any such bond, being the builder, electrical contractor, plumbing contractor, HVAC contractor, owner, individual or other entity obtaining a permit for construction, shall be notified by certified mail of the violation and shall be allowed ten working days from the receipt of the notification to respond to the charge of violation and to meet with the office of the Chief Building Official regarding a remedy for the violation. It shall be the responsibility of said principal to ensure that the office of the Chief Building Official has a current mailing address for the principal on every permit until one year has elapsed from the final inspection. Unless the principal informs otherwise in writing, the address provided on the building permit shall be deemed to be the proper mailing address for notifications under this section. The principal shall have 30 days from the date the notice of violation is received, refused, or returned to correct the violations cited in the notice. Should the principal not correct the violation in a manner satisfactory to the office of the Chief Building Official, or, in the judgment of the Chief Building Official, have not made satisfactory progress in remedying the violation within this 30-day period, then said principal shall be notified in writing of the default and the surety shall be called upon to remedy the default within 45 days of notification. 
(k)  The principal on the bond may appeal the notice of violation to the Planning and Zoning Commission provided by section 10-2180 et seq. to hear and rule on such complaints within 20 days of the receipt of the notice of violation. The appeal must be in writing and filed in the office of the Chief Building Official. The appeal will be expeditiously reviewed by the appropriate plumbing, electrical, heating and air conditioning or home builders' advisory boards established to make recommendations on such matters. Should the Planning and Zoning Commission find the principal in violation of the code and in its judgment the violation is sufficiently serious as to affect the structural integrity or the expected normal service life of the structure or installed systems, or the safety and welfare of any occupants of the structure, the principal shall have 30 days to remedy the violation to the satisfaction of the office of the Chief Building Official. Should the principal not correct the violation in a manner satisfactory to the office of the Chief Building Official, or, in the judgment of the Chief Building Official, have not made satisfactory progress in remedying the violation within this 30-day period, then he shall be notified in writing of his default and the surety shall be called upon to remedy the default within 45 days of notification. 
(l)  The surety's obligation shall be limited to an amount required to remedy the code violation, but in no event shall the obligation exceed the amount of the bond. 
(Ord. No. 009-09, § 1, 7-2-09) 
Sec. 10-3004.1. - Code compliance bond; exceptions. 
(a)  Waiver. The homeowner, property owner, individual or other entity who shall make contracts for the erection, construction or repair of buildings for which a permit is required, may present in writing, to the Chief Building Official, prior to issuance of a permit, statements indicating that he/she waives the requirement for a code compliance bond. Such written waiver shall include the following information: 
(1)  Name, address and telephone number of homeowner, individual, or other entity making the contract. 
(2)  Name, company name, address and telephone number of contractor/subcontractor performing the work. 
(3)  Description of work to be performed including estimated cost. 
(4)  Signature of homeowner, property owner, individual or other entity making the contract including date of signature. 
(5)  Waiver letter must be notarized and dated. 
(b)  Indemnification: In addition to the written waiver, the homeowner, property owner, individual or other entity who shall make contracts for the erection, construction or repair of buildings for which a permit is required, shall indemnify and hold harmless the City of East Point and the general contractor, electrical contractor, plumbing contractor or HVAC contractor against any and all liability, claims, suits, losses, costs and legal fees caused by, arising out of, or resulting from any negligent act or omission of the general contractor, electrical contractor, plumbing contractor or HVAC contractor in the performance and/or failure to perform including the negligent acts or omission of any general contractor, electrical contractor, plumbing contractor or HVAC contractor or any direct or indirect employees of the general contractor, electrical contractor, plumbing contractor or HVAC contractor. 
(Ord. No. 009-09, § 1, 7-2-09) 
Sec. 10-3005. - Penalties. 
Anyone in violation of this code or fails to comply therewith shall be guilty of unlawful conduct and an offense. Each person in violation of this code shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation is committed. Upon conviction of any said violation, said person shall be punished as provided by section 1-1006, as amended from time to time, of the Code of Ordinances of the City of East Point, Georgia. 
Sec. 10-3006. - Responsibility for compliance with city ordinance, building and construction codes, construction standards, etc. 
(a)  The responsibility for compliance with all ordinances, building and construction codes, construction standards, and other authorities shall rest with the owner, developer, contractor or other party engaging in construction or land disturbance activity. 
(b)  City inspections provide the city with a preliminary review of construction and land disturbance activity within the city. These inspections, however, are not exhaustive and the city does not make exhaustive or continuous on-site inspections of projects. 
(c)  The city does not have control over and shall not be responsible for any construction and land disturbance means, methods, techniques, sequences, procedures or safety precautions contracted with a property owner. Moreover, the city shall not be responsible for any contractor's failure to carry out work in accordance with agreements between the contractor and property owner. 
Sec. 10-3007. - Certificate of occupancy. 
(a)  Any owner, authorized agent, or contractor who desires to change the use of a building or structure shall first make application to the Chief Building Official, obtain the required permits, and obtain a certificate of occupancy prior to occupying said structure. 
(b)  A certificate of occupancy, indicating that a building, lot and use comply with the building code and this Zoning Code and Development Regulations is required. Said certificate of occupancy shall be posted on site where it is visible for inspection and said certificate is required in advance of occupancy or use of: 
(1)  A building hereafter erected; 
(2)  A building hereafter altered; 
(3)  A change of type of occupancy or use of any building or land; or 
(4)  A change in ownership of a building, land or business. 
(c)  The chief building official shall sign and issue and the fire marshall shall sign a certificate of occupancy if the proposed use of land or a building, as stated on the certificate of occupancy, is found to conform to the applicable provisions of this ordinance and if the building, as finally constructed, complies with the plan submitted for the building permit. One (1) copy of all certificates of occupancy issued which contain a statement of the intended use of the applicable property, signed by the owner or his agent, and shall be kept on file in the Department of Planning and Zoning. Copies shall be furnished on request to any person having proprietary or tenancy interest in the building or land involved, at the person's expense. 
(d)  Certificate of occupancy shall not be issued unless the proposed use of a building or land conforms to the applicable provisions of this ordinance, or unless the building or use, as finally constructed or developed, complies with the plans and information upon which the building permit was issued. 
(e)  In order to secure a certificate of occupancy, the applicant must submit a plan showing "as built" conditions of the completed project, or a certification that the plan submitted with the application for a building permit depicts exact "as built" conditions of the completed project. 
(Ord. No. 006-10, § 1, 3-15-10) 
Secs. 10-3008—10-3010. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE B. - PLUMBING CODE 

Sec. 10-3011. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1129-96, § 2, and Ord. No. 1131-96, § 2, both adopted June 3, 1996, repealed former section 10-3011 in its entirety which pertained to the adoption of the Georgia State Plumbing Code and derived from Ord. No. 676-77, § 1, adopted Dec. 19, 1977; and Ord. No. 908-86, § 1, adopted July 7, 1986. 
Sec. 10-3012. - Exemption of city from application of state statute. 
Pursuant to the authority contained in Section 3 of Act 1046 Georgia Laws, 1996, subsection (d) of Code Section 8-2-26 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, relating to self-inspection of water and sewer projects by master plumbers or utility contractors, shall not be applicable within the City of East Point. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1137-96, § 1, adopted Sept. 3, 1996, has been included herein as section 10-4012 at the discretion of the editor. 
Secs. 10-3013—10-3020. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE C. - ELECTRICAL CODE 

Sec. 10-3021. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1129, § 3, and Ord. No. 1131-96, § 2, both adopted June 3, 1996, repealed former section 10-4021 [renumbered as 10-3021] in its entirety which pertained to the adoption of the National Electrical Code and derived from Ord. No. 711-80, § 1, 3-17-80; Ord. No. 866-84, § 1, 4-2-84; Ord. No. 912-86, 7-7-86. 
Sec. 10-3021.1. - Electrical code; procedural amendments. 
(a)  This article C is adopted as amendments to the state minimum code - National Electrical Code as published by the National Fire Protection Association. In the event of any conflict between the foregoing and any provisions of the state minimum code - National Electrical Code as published by the National Fire Protection Association, as adopted and amended by the Department of Community Affairs, the foregoing provisions of this article C shall control. 
(b)  Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary or in said electric code and its appendices and attachments, no permit fee shall be charged for the installation of smoke detectors installed as an integral part of the electric system of existing multi-family residential structures. 
(c)  All work to conform. 
(1)  No equipment, appliance or system, as hereinafter specified in this code, shall be installed, constructed, erected, altered or repaired, except in conformity with the provisions of this code. 
(2)  No equipment, appliance or system, as hereinafter specified in this code, shall be altered in any manner that would be in violation of the provisions of this code or any authorized rules or approvals of the Chief Building Official made and issued thereunder. 
(3)  The provisions of this code shall not apply to the installation, alteration or repair of electrical services up to and including the meters where such work is performed by or is an integral part of the system owned or operated by a public service corporation or the water, or gas department of any city in this state, in rendering its duly authorized service as such. 
(4)  The provisions of this code shall not apply to the installation, alteration or repair of plumbing, air conditioning and heating or electrical systems, where such work is an integral part of the system owned or operated in rendering its duly authorized service as such, by a railroad company, pipeline company, public utility in the exercise of its normal functions as a public utility. 
(d)  Use and maintenance. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful to maintain, use, repair, or alter any equipment, appliance or system that has been or will be installed, constructed or erected after the adoption of this code that is in violation or will violate the provisions as hereinafter specified. 
(2)  No equipment, appliance or system, as hereinafter specified in this code, shall be used unless it is in a safe condition. 
(e)  Equipment, appliances or systems affected. The provisions of this code shall apply to any equipment, appliance or system, installed, constructed, erected, altered, repaired, maintained or used in the City of East Point, Georgia except as may be otherwise specifically provided for by statute or ordinance. 
(f)  Unsafe systems, appliances or equipment. 
(1)  Systems, appliances or equipment covered by this code that may be or shall be found upon inspection to have become dangerous or unsafe, shall, unless made safe and so certified by the Chief Building Official be removed or the use of same discontinued. 
(2)  The term dangerous or unsafe systems, appliances or equipment shall include systems, appliances or equipment structurally unsafe, unstable or unsanitary; constituting a fire hazard; unsuitable or improper for the use to which they are put; constituting a hazard to health or safety because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation or obsolescence; or otherwise dangerous to life or property. 
(g)  Notice of unsafe systems, appliances or equipment. 
(1)  Upon receipt of information that systems, appliances or pieces of equipment covered by this code are unsafe, the Chief Building Official shall make or cause to be made an inspection; and if it is found that an unsafe condition exists, he shall serve or cause to be served on the owner, or someone of the owner, executors, administrators, agents, lessees or other persons who may have a vested or contingent interest in the same, a written notice containing a description of the particulars in which the systems, appliances or equipment are unsafe, and an order requiring the same to be made safe, as may be deemed necessary by him. 
(2)  If the person to whom such notice and order is addressed cannot be found, after diligent search, then such notice and order shall be sent by registered mail to the last known address of such person; and a copy sent of such notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises to which it relates) Such mailing and posting shall be deemed adequate notice. 
(h)  Disregard of notice. If the person served with a notice or order fails to remove existing unsafe condition from systems, appliances or equipment or discontinue the use of same, within a reasonable time as set by the Chief Building Official shall institute appropriate legal action to compel compliance) In addition, the Chief Building Official is authorized to withhold issuance of any additional permits to any electrical contractor which has not complied with any notice or order to repair any defective work installed under the provisions of this code. 
Sec. 10-3021.2. - Permit fees. 
Fees for electrical permits shall be developed by the Department of Planning and Zoning and adopted by the East Point City Council. Review of the fee schedule occurs on an annual basis. Additional fees may be applied due to the following conditions: 
(1)  Work not ready when an inspection is requested 
(2)  Work found to be non-compliant with all applicable codes, regulations and standards. 
Note— See the editor's note to § 10-3021.1. 
Cross reference— Electrical code adopted, exception to permit fees, § 10-3021. 
Sec. 10-3021.3. - Remedy for violation. 
Whenever the Chief Building Official is satisfied that a system, appliance or equipment, or any work in connection therewith that is covered by this code, is being erected, installed, altered or repaired, in violation of the provisions of requirements of this code, or in violation of plans or specifications submitted and approved thereunder, or of a permit issued thereunder, he shall serve a written notice or order upon the person responsible therefore directing discontinuance of such illegal action and the remedying of the condition that is in violation of the provisions or requirements of this code. 
Note— See the editor's note to § 10-3021.1. 
Sec. 10-3021.4. - Permit provisions; submission of plans; notice for inspections; service connection; stopping work; penalties. 
(a)  When permits required. It shall be unlawful to construct, erect, install, alter or repair or to commence the construction, erection, installation or alteration of any equipment, appliances or system provided for in this code without first filing with the Chief Building Official an application in writing and obtaining a formal permit in conformity with this section. A permit shall be required for each temporary pole serving a construction site. Permits for any electrical work shall be obtained at least eight hours before beginning work on new jobs or alterations. Emergency work shall be permitted within 48 hours after beginning work. 
(b)  Application form. 
(1)  An application for a permit shall be submitted in such form as the Chief Building Official may prescribe. 
(2)  It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to see that a permit is obtained by the electrical contractor before any installation or work is started. 
(3)  Such application shall contain the full names and address of the applicant and of the owner. 
(4)  Such application shall describe briefly the proposed work and shall give such additional information as may be required by the Chief Building Official. 
(c)  Plans and specifications. When required by the Chief Building Official two or more copies of specifications, and of drawings drawn to scale with sufficient clarity and detail to indicate the nature and character of the work, shall accompany every application. Such drawings and specifications shall contain name and address of designer and information in the form of notes or otherwise, as to the quality of materials, where quality is essential to conformity with this code. Such information shall be specific, and this code shall not be cited as a whole or in part, nor shall the term "legal" or its equivalent be used, as a substitute for specific information. 
(d)  Action on application. 
(1)  Applications for permits shall be examined within a reasonable time after filing. If, after examination, no objection is found to the same and it appears that the proposed work will be in compliance with the laws and ordinances applicable thereto, the application shall be approved and a permit issued for the proposed work. If examination reveals otherwise, such application shall be rejected, and the applicant notified by a written report or otherwise. 
(2)  The issuance or granting of a permit or approval of plans and specifications shall not be construed to be a permit for, or an approval of any violation of any of the provisions of this code. No permit presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this code shall be valid, except insofar as the work or use which it authorizes is lawful. 
(3)  The issuance of a permit based on applications, plans or specifications shall not prevent the Chief Building Official from thereafter requiring the correction of errors in said applications, plans or specifications or from being carried on thereunder when in violation of this code or other ordinances of the City of East Point, Georgia. 
(e)  Conditions of permit. 
(1)  All work performed under a permit issued shall conform to the approved application and plans and all codes or ordinances governing the work or equipment for which permits were issued. All work shall be performed by an individual (contractor, firm or corporation) licensed to perform such work except when performed by an individual installing, altering or repairing electrical services in a single-family dwelling owned and occupied by him. Permits for such work in owner occupied single-family residence shall be issued only upon demonstration by the owner to the Chief Building Official that the owner is competent to perform electrical work. 
(2)  Individuals, contractors, firms or corporations licensed to perform work governed by this code shall register their license number with the Chief Building Official before obtaining permits. 
(f)  Expiration of permit. A permit under which no work is commenced within six months after issuance, or where the work commenced is suspended or abandoned for six months, shall expire by limitation, and fees paid shall be forfeited. The application, plans, and specifications shall be reviewed and a new permit required before work is started or resumed. 
(g)  Revocation of permit. The Chief Building Official may revoke a permit or approval, issued under the provisions of this code, in case there have been any false statements or misrepresentation as to a material fact in the application or plans on which the permit or approval was based. 
(h)  Notice to be given when inspections are ready. 
(1)  Rough in inspections. Notice to the Chief Building Official to be given by the electrical contractor that work is ready for inspection. 
a.  No electrical system to be installed before the building or structure is roughed in, except for the installation of conduits or other material necessary for the progress of construction. 
b.  No electrical installation to be approved before the completion of the rough in of the mechanical system in one- and two-family dwellings, multi-family dwellings and other structures of all wood interior construction not exceeding three floors above grade. 
c.  No electrical installation to be covered until inspection is made and approved in writing by the Chief Building Official. 
(2)  Final inspections. Within 24 hours after completion of an electrical contract (Saturdays, Sundays, or holidays excluded), the licensed electrician shall request a final inspection of the electrical work. If the job is approved, written approval shall be issued to the licensed electrician indicating that the work has been done in accordance with all rules of the inspection department. 
(i)  Electrical service connection. No electrical service connection shall be made to any electrical system by any person or public utility, until approval is made by the Chief Building Official. In the event the Chief Building Official condemns any electrical system or any part thereof, he shall notify the power company supplying such system. Upon such notice, said power company shall disconnect all electrical service from said electrical system and service shall not be resumed until approval is made by the Chief Building Official. 
(j)  Stopping work. Whenever, in the opinion of the Chief Building Official by reason of defective or illegal work in violation of a provision or requirement of this code exists, the Chief Building Official shall order, in writing, all further work to be stopped and may require suspension of all work until the condition in violation has been corrected. 
(k)  Penalties. 
(1)  A person who shall violate a provision of this code or fails to comply therewith or with any of the requirements thereof, upon conviction thereof in the City of East Point Municipal Court shall be fined not more than $500.00 and/or sentenced to work upon the public works not more than 30 days. Where any offense continues from day to day, each day's continuance thereof shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(2)  The owner of a building, structure, or premises where any violation of this code shall be placed or shall exist, or an architect, engineer, builder, contractor, agent, person or corporation employed in connection therewith, and who assisted in the commission of such violation, shall be guilty of a separate offense and upon conviction thereof shall be fined as herein provided. 
Note— See the editor's note to § 10-402.1. 
ARTICLE D. - ELEVATOR LAWS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— In order to facilitate inclusion of Ord. No. 910-86, adopted July 7, 1986, within the lettered sequence of articles in the chapter, said provisions have been incorporated within Art. D, and former Art. D has been redesignated as Art. E hereof. 

Sec. 10-3022. - Elevator law adopted. 
The 1986 Edition of the Georgia Elevator Laws is hereby adopted by reference in its entirety as the elevator laws of the City of East Point. 
Secs. 10-3023—10-3030. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE E. - HEATING, VENTILATING AND AIR CONDITIONING CODE 

Sec. 10-3031. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1129-96, § 5, and Ord. No. 1131-96, § 5, both adopted June 3, 1996, repealed former section 10-4031 in its entirety which pertained to the adoption of the Georgia State Heating and Air Conditioning Code and derived from Ord. No. 712-80, § 1, 317-80; Ord. No. 909-86, § 1, 7-7-86. 
ARTICLE F. - DISABILITIES ACCESSIBILITY CODE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 905-86, § 1, adopted July 7, 1986, amended the Code by the addition of § 10-3032 and Ord. No. 907-86, § 1, enacted July 7, added § 10-3033. In order to facilitate classification of these separate sections, § 10-3032 has been incorporated within Art. F., and § 10-3033 has been incorporated within Art. G. Subject to the incorporation, former Art. D-1 has been redesignated as Art. H, and former Art. E has been redesignated as Art. I. 
The disabilities accessibility code, as amended, is on file and available for inspection in the offices of the city. 

Sec. 10-3032. - Disabilities accessibility code adopted. 
The Georgia Disabilities Accessibility Code (Title 30, Chapter 3), 1984 Senate Bill 297 as amended by H.B. 506, 1985, is hereby adopted by reference in its entirety as the disabilities accessibility code of the City of East Point, Georgia. 
ARTICLE G. - ENERGY CODE 

Sec. 10-3033. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1129-96, § 6, and Ord. No. 1131-96, § 6, both adopted June 3, 1996, repealed former section 10-3033 in its entirety which pertained to the adoption of the Georgia State Energy Code and derived from Ord. No. 907-86, § 1, adopted July 7, 1986. 
Secs. 10-3034, 10-3035. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE H. - GAS CODE 

Sec. 10-3036. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1129-96, § 7, and Ord. No. 1131-96, § 7, both adopted June 3, 1996, repealed former section 10-4036 in its entirety which pertained to the adoption of the Georgia State Gas Code and derived from Ord. No. 713-80, § 1, adopted March 17, 1980; and Ord. No. 908-86, § 1, adopted June 7, 1986. 
Secs. 10-3037—10-3040. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE I. - RESERVED[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 027-00, § 1, adopted Oct. 2, 2000, repealed former Art. I, §§ 10-3041—10-3049, in its entirety which pertained to the adoption of the Georgia Housing Code and the minimum housing advisory board. Former Art. I derived from the Code of 1959; Ord. No. 1019-91, § 1, 4-15-91; Ord. No. 1125-96, § 1, 4-1-96; Ord. No. 001-00, § 1, 1-18-00. 

Secs. 10-3041—10-3060. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE J. - MOVING HOUSES AND OTHER OVERSIZE LOADS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 943A-87, adopted Nov. 2, 1987, deleted former Art. J, §§ 10-3061—10-3067, relative to moving buildings, and enacted in lieu thereof a new Art. J to read as herein set out in §§ 10-3061—10-3071. The provisions of former Article J derived from Ord. No. 902, §§ 1, 3, adopted May 19, 1986. 

Sec. 10-3061. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to establish uniform permitting regulations and procedures for the moving of houses and other oversize loads on city roads, streets, and bridges within the incorporated area of the city, thereby protecting private property and lives against loss and damage, protecting the public investment in rights-of-way, roadbeds, traffic signs, and signalizations, and other structures, controlling and regulating the flow of traffic, insuring the safety of the public, and for other purposes. 
Sec. 10-3062. - Permit requirements; administrative fee. 
(a)  All persons, firms, or corporations desiring to obtain a permit under the provisions of this article shall make application on the form prescribed by the City of East Point Chief Building Official, or designee. 
(b)  The application shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)  Name, address, and telephone number of the mover/applicant; 
(2)  Name, address, and telephone number of the owner of the structure; 
(3)  Address of the present location of the structure; 
(4)  Destination of the structure; 
(5)  Name and address of insurance company; 
(6)  Total height, outside width, and length of vehicle and load; 
(7)  Certification that the person making application on behalf of the mover has lawful authority to execute such application and that all requirements under this section, sections 10-3063 and 10-3064 have been met; 
(8)  The proposed date and time of the move; 
(9)  A statement that the mover/applicant agrees to hold the city harmless from all claims or causes of action arising out of any damage to a public road or bridge, to persons, to public or private property caused by a permitted load or vehicle, or its private escort vehicle, and to recompense the city for any expenditures made by the city to repair such damages caused by the permitted vehicle or load. 
(c)  As a condition to the issuance of a permit, the traffic division of the East Point Police Department or designee, when deemed necessary in the interest of public safety, may require the use of a front or rear escort, or both, either or both of which may be a police vehicle. 
(d)  Fees for moving a structure shall be developed by the Department of Planning and Zoning and adopted by the East Point City Council. Review of the fee schedule occurs on an annual basis. Fees must be accompanied by a permit application. 
Sec. 10-3063. - Permit limits. 
(a)  Except as authorized under section 10-3069 of this article, a permit shall not authorize the operation of a vehicle or load: 
(1)  Whose total load length exceeds 75 feet; 
(2)  Whose total load width exceeds 14 feet, including mirrors and accessories attached thereto; or 
(3)  Whose total height exceeds 13 feet, six inches. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any provision of this article to the contrary, no vehicle or load shall be operated over any bridge with a posted limit which is less than the total gross weight of the vehicle and its load or less than the total gross weight permitted under this article. 
Sec. 10-3064. - Conditions attached to permit issuance. 
In addition to compliance with other conditions imposed under the provisions of this article, any person, firm, or corporation receiving a permit thereby certifies that such person, firm, or corporation will comply or has complied (as applicable herein) with the following conditions governing the operation of the permitted vehicle or load: 
(a)  Federal and state laws and regulations; 
(b)  That the movement of the permitted vehicle or load will take place only on Monday through Thursday, and between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m.; 
(c)  That the permitted load or vehicle will not be operated over any city road other than those described or allowed in the permit; 
(d)  That the operator of a permitted vehicle and load shall maintain 50-foot intervals between each vehicle load. In addition, when the normal flow of traffic becomes impeded, such vehicle or load shall move off the traveled portion of the public road until such traffic congestion has been cleared. Normal movement may then be resumed until another traffic congestion occurs; 
(e)  The permittee shall maintain, during the existence of the permit, public liability and property damage insurance in at least the following amounts: Public liability, $300,000.00 each accident; $100,000.00 each person injured; total property damage, $50,000.00; provided that nothing herein shall prevent the Chief Building Official or designee from requiring any additional undertaking or security as may be deemed necessary to compensate the city for any injury to any public property therein, including a bridge. Proof of such liability insurance and other security shall accompany the permit application; 
(f)  Upon approval of the permit and prior to moving any structure under the authority of such permit, the permittee shall furnish a performance bond in the amount of $300,000.00 in a form acceptable to the city clerk of the City of East Point or designee with a surety company licensed to do business in the state, to enable the city to repair public and/or private property in the event the permittee's insurance company fails to pay for necessary repairs; 
(g)  The permittee shall ensure that the operator of a leased vehicle carries on such operator's person written proof of the identity of the lessee; 
(h)  The permittee shall not allow the permit to be used other than for the movement by the particular vehicle for which the permit was issued; 
(i)  The following minimum equipment shall be used for moving a house: A tandem truck, one set of tandem dollies in good condition, and one extra skidder or wrecker in good condition and capable of moving the whole load in case of a breakdown; 
(j)  The permittee shall measure the house and, prior to applying for a permit, check the route stated in the permit application to ensure obstacle clearance and necessary places periodically to pull off the road for the purpose of preventing unnecessary traffic congestion; 
(k)  Before moving a house, all masonry shall be removed from a masonry-veneered house; 
(l)  All mailboxes, highway signs, and other movable obstacles to the move of the house shall be removed as the house approaches such an obstacle and re-erected immediately after the house passes such obstacle in equal or better condition than prior to removal; 
(m)  The movement shall be confined to the route stated in the application; and 
(n)  The police department shall make all reports of damage to public or private property. The party making application for a building-house moving permit shall have two weeks to settle damages incurred while moving or enter into negotiating with affected owners of damaged property. Failure to pay such expense shall be just cause to deny future permits. 
Sec. 10-3065. - Route approval. 
Prior to the issuance of a moving permit under this article, the transport route proposed by the mover/applicant must be reviewed and approved by the chief of police and traffic division of the police department or designee. 
Sec. 10-3066. - Revocation, suspension, denial of application or permit. 
(a)  The traffic division of the East Point Police Department or designee shall be authorized to deny, suspend, or revoke a permit requested by an applicant or issued to a permittee. Permits may be denied, suspended, or revoked for cause including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Failure to comply with the provisions of this article; 
(2)  Repeated past violations by the applicants or permittee of a relatively minor nature; 
(3)  A single but aggravated violation; 
(4)  A material misrepresentation made by the applicant for a permit; or 
(5)  Any other facts indicating that the applicant or permittee is a poor risk with regard to the safety of the traveling public and/or damage to public property. 
(b)  The traffic division of the East Point Police Department or designee shall provide the applicant or permittee written notice of the decision to deny, revoke, or suspend the application or permit, which notice shall set forth in reasonable detail the reasons for such action and shall include notice of the right to appeal under the provisions of this article. 
Sec. 10-3067. - Appeals. 
An applicant or permittee shall be entitled to appeal a decision of the traffic division of the East Point Police Department or designee denying, suspending, or revoking a permit, to the Department of Planning and Zoning, by filing a notice of appeal with the Department of Planning and Zoning within ten days of the decision appealed from. The Department of Planning and Zoning shall schedule a hearing on the next applicable Planning and Zoning Commission calendar date and shall provide the appellant notice of the date of such hearing. 
Sec. 10-3068. - Applicability of other city ordinances and regulations. 
Neither the provisions of this article nor any permit issued pursuant thereto shall be construed to supercede or repeal any city ordinance or regulation in effect pertaining to the moving of houses and other oversize loads, and to the extent such ordinance or regulation is more stringent than the provisions of this article, then such ordinance or regulation shall control. 
Sec. 10-3069. - Variances. 
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall be authorized to grant a variance from the requirements of this article, but only where, by reason of the exceptional historical, architectural, or social uniqueness or significance of the structure, the strict application of the provisions of this article would work an undue hardship upon the owner of the structure, and provided that the grant of any variance shall not substantially impair the intent and purpose of this article and further provided that the provisions of this article shall be complied with to the maximum extent possible. 
ARTICLE K. - AMUSEMENT DEVICE CODE 

Sec. 10-3070. - Standard amusement device code. 
The 1991 Georgia Standard Amusement Device Code, as amended, is hereby adopted by reference in its entirety as the Standard Amusement Device Code of the City of East Point. 
ARTICLE L. - EXCAVATION AND GRADING CODE 

Sec. 10-3071. - Excavation and grading code. 
The 1991 Georgia Excavation and Grading Code, as amended, is hereby adopted by reference in its entirety as the Excavation and Grading Code of the City of East Point. 
ARTICLE M. - EXISTING BUILDINGS CODE 

Sec. 10-3072. - Standard existing buildings code. 
The 1991 Georgia Existing Buildings Code, as amended, is hereby adopted by reference in its entirety as the Standard Existing Buildings Code of the City of East Point. 
ARTICLE N. - SWIMMING POOL CODE 

Sec. 10-3073. - Standard swimming pool code. 
The 1991 Georgia Standard Swimming Pool Code, as amended, is hereby adopted by reference in its entirety as the Standard Swimming Pool Code of the City of East Point. 
ARTICLE O. - UNSAFE BUILDING ABATEMENT CODE 

Sec. 10-3074. - Standard unsafe building abatement code. 
The 1991 Georgia Standard Unsafe Building Abatement Code, as amended, is hereby adopted by reference in its entirety as the Standard Unsafe Building Abatement Code of the City of East Point. 
ARTICLE P. - MULTIFAMILY RENTAL HOUSING 

Sec. 10-3075. - Definitions. 
The following terms shall have the meaning respectively ascribed to them as follows: 
Certified building inspector shall mean any person inspecting for compliance with the various adopted codes who is a licensed design professional (architect or engineer) or holds one of the following certifications from SBCCI (ICC): Property Maintenance and Housing Inspector, Housing Rehabilitation Inspector, Building Inspector, Building Plan Examiner or Commercial Combination Inspector. 
Code of compliance certificate shall mean a certificate executed by a certified building inspector and stating compliance with those minimum standards described in an inspection report approved by the Director of Planning and Community Development. 
Inspection report shall mean the report attached to the Code Compliance Certificate describing minimum requirements for inspection of each unit. 
Lease shall mean any written or oral agreement which sets forth any and all conditions concerning the use and occupancy of multifamily rental dwellings or multifamily rental units. 
Multifamily rental dwelling shall mean any multifamily structure, multi-family building, or other facility promised and/or leased to a residential tenant or tenants for use as a home, residence, or sleeping unit. This definition includes, but is not limited to multiple family apartment units, boarding houses, rooming houses, group homes, and flats. 
Multifamily rental unit shall mean any one area, room, structure, flat, apartment, or facility of a multifamily rental dwelling that is being leased or rented to only one tenant, group of tenants, or family under one lease, or under terms joint and severable liability. 
Occupancy shall mean all tenants, lessees and persons residing within a multifamily rental dwelling or multifamily rental unit. 
Owner shall mean any person, agent, form, or corporation having legal or equitable interest in a premise. 
Owner-occupied shall mean any part of a structure used as living quarters by the owner of said structure where other parts of the structure are used as multifamily rental units. Example: Two-family dwelling, owner occupies one flat; rooming house, owner occupies one unit. 
Premises shall mean any lot or piece of land inclusive of the multifamily rental dwelling or multifamily rental unit. 
(Ord. No. 087-018 , § 1, 4-16-18) 
Sec. 10-3076. - Fee and certificate required. 
All owners of multifamily rental dwellings or multifamily rental unit(s) within the city that receive income for use of four or more such dwellings or units and meet the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5 for having a location or office within the city (a) shall be subject to an occupation tax, and (b) shall provide to the city, prior to December 31, 2018, a code compliance certificate covering 100 percent of the multi-family rental units within the 12-month period immediately preceding the date of the certification. Said code compliance certificate shall be certified by the owner that all units inspected are in compliance with those standards contained in the code compliance certificate and inspection report. For the initial year of construction, this section shall not apply to new construction or rehabilitation of a multifamily rental dwelling provided proper permits are obtained from the city. 
Upon initial inspection of such dwellings or units, should a certified building inspector determine that further work is necessary to comply with the minimum standards set forth herein, an acceptable plan shall be submitted to the Chief Building Official outlining the time and scope of work necessary to bring the units into compliance. If such plan is accepted by the Chief Building Official as reasonable and justified, an extension may be granted for up to one year for completion of repairs and compliance with this section. No extension shall be granted if life safety issues are involved and any such units shall not be leased until brought into compliance. 
After submission of the initial code compliance certificate, each owner shall submit a code compliance certificate annually, commencing on January 1, 2020 with their business license renewal. Such subsequent code compliance certificate shall cover at least 20 percent of the units, provided all units shall be inspected, at a minimum, every five years. All units inspected shall be listed individually and submitted to the city by the certified building inspector. 
Furthermore, each owner and certified building inspector shall keep written record of all inspections for each unit including the date of the inspection, items inspected and all violations, if any, observed. Such records shall be presented to the city within ten business days after such request is made in writing to the inspector. Failure to provide such records shall nullify the code compliance certificate for those units. 
(Ord. No. 087-018 , § 2, 4-16-18; Ord. No. 087-018 , § 2, 4-16-18) 
Sec. 10-3077. - Failure to provide code compliance certificate. 
Failure to provide the Code Compliance Certificate as provided herein shall be a violation of this ordinance and is subject to those penalties contained herein and in Chapter II, Article F Violation and Penalty of the East Point Code of Ordinances. Further, said failure, upon a judicial determination, shall be a condition constituting probable cause, and may subject said multifamily rental dwelling or multifamily rental unit(s) to inspection by the City, if required, shall be at a sole cost of the owner and failure to pay said cost shall result in a lien being placed on the premises as provided for collection of taxes. Failure to pay the occupational tax as provided herein shall be a violation of this ordinance and is subject to those penalties set forth in this article. Nothing contained in this section shall prevent the City from enforcement of the State Minimum Standards Codes as provided in Chapter 3 of this Code of Ordinances of the City of East Point, Georgia. 
Sec. 10-3078. - Penalty for false certification and false inspection. 
An owner, who knowingly participates in furnishing a Code Compliance Certificate to the City which contains a false certification that all multifamily rental dwellings or multifamily rental units inspected are in compliance with those standards contained in the Code Compliance Certificate shall be guilty of a misdemeanor for each multifamily rental dwelling or multifamily rental unit for which the certification is shown to be false and can be fined up to $1,000.00, or imprisoned for up to one year, or any combination of these, by the Court for each violation. 
A Certified Building Inspector who furnishes an Inspection Report which knowingly contains fraudulent information that a multifamily rental dwelling or multifamily rental unit meets the minimum housing standards of the City as shown by the Inspection Report contained in Exhibit "A" of this Ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and can be fined up to $1,000.00, or imprisoned for up to one year, or any combination of these, by the Court for each violation. In addition, the Building Inspectors right to submit Inspection Reports to the City may be suspended for a stated period of time, up to five years, by resolution of the City Council. 
Sec. 10-3079. - Repeal of conflicting provisions. 
It is the intention of the Mayor and Council, and it is hereby ordained, that the provisions of this Ordinance shall become and be made a part of the City of East Point Code of Ordinances, and the sections of this Ordinance may be renumbered to accomplish such intention. All Ordinances or parts of Ordinances in conflict herewith are repealed. 
(Ord. No. 087-018 , § 3, 4-16-18; Ord. No. 087-018 , § 3, 4-16-18) 
Chapter 4 - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 
ARTICLE A. - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 

Sec. 10-4001. - Title and purpose. 
The title of these regulations shall be known as "The Subdivision Regulations of East Point, Georgia." 
These rules and regulations are intended to serve the following purposes, among others: 
(1)  To protect and promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the residents of East Point. 
(2)  To encourage economically sound and stable land developments. 
(3)  To assure the adequate provision of streets, access, utilities, and other facilities and services to new land developments in conformance with public improvement standards and regulations of East Point, Georgia. 
(4)  To assure the adequate provision of safe and convenient traffic access, connectivity to other developments or facilities, and efficient circulation (both vehicular and pedestrian) in new land developments. 
(5)  To assure the provision of needed open space and building sites in new land developments through dedication or reservation of land for recreational, educational, environmental, green space, bikeways and pedestrian trails, and other public purposes. 
(6)  To assure equitable handling of all requests for the development of land by providing uniform procedures and standards for the subdivider. 
(7)  To establish minimum standards of development, however the use of LEED (Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design) certified materials and methods are not prohibited but encouraged. 
Sec. 10-4002. - Authority and application. 
The development rules and regulations are adopted under the authority of Article IX, Section II, Paragraph IV and Article IX, Section II, Paragraph I of the 1983 Constitution of the State of Georgia. 
Any subdivider of land within East Point shall submit to the Director of Planning and Zoning a preliminary plat of the proposed development conforming to all requirements set forth in these regulations and any other applicable City, state and federal regulations. Once the preliminary plat is approved, a final plat must be filed which conforms to all requirements set forth in these regulations. 
No person, firm, corporation, owner, agent or subdivider shall sell, transfer or agree to sell any subdivided land without the preliminary or final plat of that development having been approved by the Director of Planning and Zoning. 
No subdivider shall proceed with any construction work on the proposed development, including clearing, grading or grubbing, before obtaining the appropriate approvals and permits. 
No land shall be dedicated, opened, extended or accepted as a public street or for any other public purpose before obtaining final approval from the Director of Public Works and accepted by City Council under a separate action. The approval shall be entered in writing on the final plat by the Director of Public Works. Any subdivider of development for public purpose (other than streets) shall be transferred by deed. 
No building permit shall be issued within the area of East Point unless legal access is provided to a public street or a private street approved under the terms of these rules and regulations. 
In residential developments, building permits may be issued on the basis of any approved minor plat, preliminary or final plat only after the approval of the Director of Planning and Zoning. 
The divisions of development by court order, including but not limited to judgments of foreclosure or consolidation and disbursement of existing lots by deed or other recorded instruments, shall not be considered a development for purposes of, and shall not obviate the necessity for compliance with, these regulations. 
The subdivider shall be allowed one building permit for a model home for each 15 lots located in the proposed development, provided the subdivider provides an Agreement to Install Improvements Form and a cash surety equal to 12 perecent of the cost for the remaining infrastructure improvements, based on written estimates by the design professional for the project.;p0; The following shall apply for lots where model homes are allowed: 
(1)  The lots shall be located within 300 feet of an active fire hydrant; 
(2)  Main sewer and water lines for these lots shall be installed by the developer and be subject to review and approval by East Point, installation of these lines shall take place prior to issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy; and 
(3)  The lots shall have a minimum of 20-foot wide fire access road extending from a paved public street to within 100 feet of the proposed structure. 
( Ord. No. 024-015, § 1, 1-20-2015 ) 
Sec. 10-4003. - Purpose. 
Words not defined herein shall be construed to have the meaning given by Webster's New Collegiate Dictionary, eleventh edition. 
Sec. 10-4004. - Definitions. 
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall have the meaning herein indicated. 
Alley or service drive: A minor, permanent vehicular service access to the back or the side of properties otherwise abutting a street. 
Bike paths: These paths serve to separate bicycle riders from vehicle and pedestrian traffic. Bike paths can meander through wooded areas, traverse the edge of open areas, and may (in many instances) parallel existing roadways or walks. 
Block: A parcel of land or lots entirely surrounded by public or private streets, other than alleys. 
City Council: The City Council of East Point, Georgia. 
Buildable area: That portion of a lot where buildings and specified structures may be located after all minimum yards, buffers, landscape strips, and other setbacks have been met. 
Building setback line: A graphic representation of the required minimum horizontal distance between a building and the related front, side, or rear development lines which establish the minimum space to be provided between the building and development line(s). 
Comprehensive plan: A set of documents approved by the East Point City Council which sets forth desired long range development patterns for East Point. 
Crosswalk: A right-of-way dedicated to public use, four feet or more in width, that crosses a street and furnishes a specific area for pedestrian movements at an intersection. 
Cul-de-sac: A street having only one connection to another street and being permanently terminated by a vehicular turnaround. 
Cul-de-sac, temporary: A street having one end open to traffic and being temporarily terminated by a vehicular turn-around. This temporary termination is to provide connectivity to future developments. 
Department: Planning and Zoning Department, East Point, Georgia. 
Director: The Director of the East Point Planning and Zoning Department, or his/her designee. 
Driveway, access or shared: A paved area used for ingress or egress of vehicles, and allowing access from a street to a building, other structure or facility. 
Driveway, single-family residential, access or shared (private drive): A paved or unpaved area used for ingress or egress of vehicles which allows access from a street to a building, other structure, or facility for no more than three single-family residential lots. 
Easement: A grant by the development owner for use by the grantee of a portion of land for specified purposes. 
Land disturbance permit: An official authorization issued by the Department, allowing defoliation or alteration of a site or the commencement of any construction activities, including, but not limited to, clearing, grubbing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land, but not including agricultural practices as defined in the Official Code of Georgia Annotated 1-3-3 (O.C.G.A.). 
Lot: The basic lawful unit of land, identifiable by a single deed established by plat, development, or as otherwise permitted by law, to be separately owned, used, developed, or built upon. In determining the area and dimension of a lot, no part of right-of-way of a road or crosswalk may be included. 
Lot, minimum lot size: The smallest permissible lot area established by the Zoning Ordinance or conditions of zoning. 
Lot, corner: A lot abutting two or more streets at their intersection. 
Lot, double/multiple frontage: A lot other than a corner lot abutting two or more streets that may or may not intersect at that lot. 
Plat: A map indicating the development or re-development of land, intended to be filed for recording. 
Plat, final: A finished drawing of a development that provides a complete and accurate depiction of all legal and engineering information required by the Subdivision Regulations. Certification of recording and ratification of the final plat is required by the Director of Planning and Zoning, the Director of Public Works and City Council by consent. 
Plat, minor: A finished drawing of a development of no more than three lots that, at the time of development, does not necessarily, but may involve a land disturbance permit, new streets, the extension of a utility or other municipal facilities and depicts all legal and engineering information required by these Subdivision Regulations. 
Plat, Preliminary: A finished drawing of a development of four or more lots that, at the time of development, does not necessarily, but may involve a land disturbance permit, new streets, the extension of a utility or other municipal facilities and depicts all legal and engineering information required by these Subdivision Regulations. 
Right of way dedication and reservation plan: An element of the East Point Comprehensive Plan maintained by the Department of Public Works which includes guidelines and/or procedures for the dedication and reservation of rights-of-way along public roadways. 
Standard details: Illustrative minimum standards for land development activities authorized under the land development regulations of the City. These standards shall not supercede more restrictive prudent design requirements or good engineering practices as applied to specific situations on a case-by-case basis. All construction shall meet or exceed the East Point minimum standards established by the Georgia Department of Transportation. 
Street, private: A street that has not been dedicated to the municipality or other government entity. 
Street, public: A dedicated and accepted right-of-way for vehicular traffic. 
Street classifications: The classification of streets based on functions, from high-traffic arterial roads to low traffic residential streets. The following are definitions intended to distinguish between different street classifications. All Roadways are classified per the Georgia Department of Transportation: 
Freeway: A multi-lane roadway that has full access control and separation of directional traffic. Freeways accommodate large volumes of high speed traffic and provide efficient movement of vehicular traffic for interstate and major through travel. 
Principal arterial: A roadway that has partial or no access control, and is primarily used for fast or large volumes of traffic. Emphasis is placed on mobility rather than access to adjacent land. 
Minor arterial: A roadway that has partial or no access control and is primarily used for inter- connectivity of principal arterials and placing more emphasis on access to adjacent land over mobility. 
Collector: A roadway that has partial or no access control and has more emphasis on access to adjacent land over mobility than arterials. The primary purpose is to distribute trips to and from the arterial system and allow access to the local roads. 
Local: Any roadway that has no access control, and places strong emphasis on access to adjacent land over mobility while service to through traffic is discouraged. 
Full access control: Preference is given to through traffic by providing access connections only with selected public roads and by prohibiting crossings at grade and direct private connections. 
No access control: Preference is generally given to access to adjacent land rather than mobility. 
Partial access control: Preference is given to through traffic to a degree that, in addition to connection with selected public roads, there may be some crossing at grades, but private connections shall be prohibited. 
Frontage street: A road that typically runs parallel to a partial access controlled roadway, a full access controlled facility, or a railroad. Frontage roads provide public access to the adjacent parcels, help control access to the major facility, and/or maintain circulation of traffic on each side of the major facility. 
Street, residential: The following definitions are intended to distinguish between different categories of streets internal to residential developments: 
Major development street: A local road internal to a development which serves 50 or more housing units. These units do not have to be directly served by the major development street. Major development streets are roads that serve as collectors for the development traffic. Any residential street which accesses a collector or arterial road as set forth in 3.2.30 shall be considered a major development street for the first 300 feet regardless of housing unit service. 
Minor development street: A local road internal to a development which serves fewer than 50 housing units and does not access a collector or arterial road as set forth in 3.2.30. 
Housing unit service: The number of housing units served by a street or collection of streets shall be the aggregate number of housing units provided, or potentially to be provided, with driveway access directly from the street(s) plus the number of units utilizing or potentially utilizing the street(s) for through traffic movements. Such calculations shall be made beginning and ending at the same street intersection. 
Stub-out street: A street having one end open to traffic and being temporarily terminated at the other. Stub-outs generally do not have a temporary vehicular turn-around. This temporary termination is to provide connectivity to future developments and may be constructed without curb and gutter provided such stub-out street meets the standards of the East Point Fire Department. 
Subdivider: Any development owner, person, individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, estate, trust, agent of development owner, or any other group or combination acting as a unit dividing or proposing to divide land so as to constitute a development as herein defined. 
Development, residential and non-residential: Any division of a lot, tract or parcel, regardless of its existing or future use, into two or more lots, tracts or parcels. The term "development" may mean the act or process of dividing development, except that, where appropriate to the context, the term "development" may be used in reference to the aggregate of all lots held in common ownership at the time of development. 
Traffic mitigation action plan: A plan that studies and addresses the number of trips a development will produce when such development results in the reduction of the level of service on any roadway currently functioning at "D" or worse in accordance with the City Transportation Standards. This plan shall include, but is not limited to, roadway improvements and other proposals such as providing transit access, transit use incentives, car/van pooling, bicycle path construction, off-site and internal sidewalk construction, and lunch trip reduction. Such plan shall mitigate the traffic impact in a manner that will show no negative impact on roads with level of service of "D" or worse. 
Trails, pedestrian or others: Extended and usually continuous strips of land established independently of other routes of travel and dedicated, through ownership or easement, to recreational travel including hiking, horseback riding, etc. 
Utility accommodations - Guidelines and Procedures: A City program maintained by the Department of Public Works which includes installing, maintaining, repairing, operating, or using a pole line, buried cable, pipeline, or miscellaneous utility facility, and performing miscellaneous operations authorized by a utility permit. 
Utility permit: An official authorization issued by the Department of Public Works, allowing alteration of land within the right-of-way for the commencement of any construction activities pertaining to utility installation or relocation. 
Zoning ordinance: The Zoning Ordinance of East Point, Georgia. 
( Ord. No. 024-015, § 2, 1-20-2015 ) 
Sec. 10-4005. - Requirements. 
All proposals to subdivide combine or recombine parcels of land under the provision of these regulations shall be in compliance with the East Point Standard Procedures and Guidelines for Subdividing Development. 
Proposals for the development, combination or recombination of lawful previously platted lots or parcels, or portions thereof, shall be in compliance with the Zoning Ordinance, as amended. 
If construction activity contemplated results in the disturbance of an area of 5,000 square feet or more, a land disturbance permit must be approved along with any building permit prior to construction. 
Where a proposed lot fronts an existing public street, the subdivider shall improve the street along the lot's frontage to the applicable standards of these regulations and any Standard Details as determined by the Director of Public Works. 
All slope, drainage and utility easements, as well as necessary right-of-way widths (as determined by the Director of Public Works) on an existing public street, paved or unpaved, shall be provided by the subdivider at no cost to East Point. 
Each proposed lot shall comply with the requirements of the Fulton County Department of Health, whose certification of approval shall accompany the submission of the final plat to the Director of Planning and Zoning. 
Each lot created under the provisions of a minor plat shall not subsequently be re-subdivided pursuant to the provisions of a minor plat. 
For the division of land in O-I-T, C-1, C-2, MIX, and I-1 and I-2 Zoning Districts, after initial development of the development, the following standards shall also apply: 
(a)  A proposed lot fronting an existing public street shall contain the necessary frontage required by the East Point Zoning Ordinance. 
(b)  The subdivider shall submit documentation of the necessary easements providing for access to a public street for proposed lots that front only on an existing, documented, paved private street or driveway. 
(c)  All slope, drainage and utility easements, as well as necessary street rights-of-way (as determined by the Director of Public Works) shall be provided by the subdivider at no cost to East Point. 
( Ord. No. 024-015, § 3, 1-20-2015 ) 
PROCESS 
Sec. 10-4006. - Minor plat. 
Pursuant to these regulations, application for Minor Plat approval shall be submitted to the Department of Planning and Zoning and reviewed by staff in departmental plan review. If found compliant a permit shall be issued which shall continue in effect for a period of one year or for as long as construction activity is continuous. Accordingly, if the certificate of Minor Plat expires, a new application shall be submitted and shall be subject to the regulations in effect at the time of such submission. 
The minor plat shall be recorded with the Fulton County Clerk of Superior Court in accordance with the department's plat submittal guidelines before any building permits will be issued. 
( Ord. No. 024-015, § 4, 1-20-2015 ) 
Sec. 10-4007. - Preliminary plat. 
Pursuant to these regulations, application for Preliminary Plat approval shall be submitted to the Department of Planning and Zoning and reviewed by staff in departmental plan review. If found compliant a permit shall be issued which shall continue in effect for a period of one year or for as long as construction activity is continuous and at least 25 percent of the land area within the plan has received Final Plat approval. Accordingly, if the certificate of Preliminary Plat expires, a new application shall be submitted and shall be subject to the regulations in effect at the time of such submission. 
The preliminary plat shall be recorded with the Fulton County Clerk of Superior Court in accordance with the department's plat submittal guidelines before any land disturbance and/or building permits will be issued. 
( Ord. No. 024-015, § 4, 1-20-2015 ) 
Sec. 10-4008. - Land disturbance permit. 
Following the approval of the Preliminary Plat, site development plans shall be submitted for approval prior to any defoliation or the commencement of development activities on the subject development. Approval of such plans shall result in the issuance of a duly authorized Land Disturbance Permit, which, along with the approved plans, must be maintained on the site until all site work as proposed and approved is completed. 
An application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned 180 days after the date of filing, unless such application has been pursued in good faith or a permit has been issued, except that the Director of Public Works is authorized to grant a maximum of two extensions of time not exceeding 90 days each. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. 
Prior to the issuance of a Land Disturbance Permit, an Indemnity Agreement Form must be filed by the subdivider protecting East Point against damage, repair and/or maintenance claims and liability arising out of drainage problems. The Director of Public Works, or his/her designee, is hereby authorized to execute such agreements on the behalf of the City. 
Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work on the site authorized by such permit is commenced within 180 days after its issuance, or if the work authorized on the site by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days after the time the work is commenced. The Director is authorized to grant, in writing, a maximum of two extensions of time, for periods not more than 180 days each. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. 
Sec. 10-4009. - Final plat. 
(a)  Whenever the provisions of these rules and regulations have been complied with and while the Preliminary Plat approval is in effect, the subdivider may submit to the Director of Public Works an application for Final Plat review and approval pursuant to these regulations. All required infrastructure shall be completed and approved, or performance bonds for a portion of such improvements shall be filed in accordance with section 10-4009(c) of this regulation. 
(b)  The Final Plat shall be submitted and drawn to the specifications of the Georgia Plat Act and standards of East Point. 
(c)  Prior to approval or recording of a final plat, the following must be provided by the subdivider, or the designee thereof: 
(1)  Cash assurance in an amount equal to 125 percent of the cost of infrastructure improvements not yet in compliance. Said cash bond shall be maintained until the improvements have been approved by the City; 
(2)  Maintenance bond to ensure the viability of infrastructure improvements; 
(3)  Drawings demonstrating the "as-built" conditions of the site 
(4)  An electronic format acceptable to the Public Works Department containing data about the sanitary sewer and water systems where available; 
(5)  Signed release of the project by the City Engineer; 
(6)  Recorded deed to City Engineer for any dedicated space; 
(7)  Sufficient data to determine readily and reproduce on the ground the location, bearing and length of every street line, lot line, boundary line and building line whether curved or straight. This shall include but not be limited to the radius, length of arc, internal angles and tangent distance for the center line of curved streets and curved property lines that are not the boundary of curved streets; 
(8)  Tract boundary lines, right-of-way lines of streets, easements and other rights-of-way, and property lines of residential lots and other sites; 
(9)  All dimensions shall be accurate to the nearest one-tenth of a foot and all angles accurate to the nearest minute; 
(10)  Name and right-of-way width of each street or other right-of-way; 
(11)  House numbers; 
(12)  Title, name and location of subdivision, north arrow, date, scale and land lot and district numbers; 
(13)  Location, dimensions and purposes of any easements and any areas to be dedicated to public use or sites for other than residential use with notes state their purposes and limitations; 
(14)  Lots or sites numbered in numerical order and blocks lettered alphabetically; 
(15)  Accurate location, material and description of monuments and markers; 
(16)  Certification showing that applicant is the landowner and dedicates streets, rights-of-way and any sites for public use; 
(17)  Certification by the department of public works, water system and the city engineer that the subdivider has complied with one of the following alternates: 
1.  All improvements have been installed in accordance with the requirements; 
2.  A performance bond has been posted in sufficient amount to assure completion of all required improvements; 
3.  Any other guarantees of satisfactory completion of required improvements acceptable to the various departments. 
(18)  Certification of the city engineer of acceptance of street design and improvements; 
(19)  Engineer's or surveyor's acknowledgement: It is hereby certified that this plat is true and correct and was prepared from an actual survey of the property made under my supervision on the ground. 

 
(20)  Owner's acknowledgment: 
STATE OF GEORGIA, COUNTY OF FULTON. 
The owner of the land shown on this plat and whose name is subscribed hereto, and in person or through a duly authorized agent, acknowledges that this plat was made from an actual survey and dedicates to the use of the public forever all streets, alleys, parks, watercourses, drains, easements and public places thereon shown for the purposes and considerations therein expressed. 
_________________________ Owner 
(21)  Approval of the City Council evidenced by signature of the City Clerk: 
This plat has been reviewed and considered by the City's service delivery departments of East Point, and is approved by consent of City Council subject to the protective covenants shown hereon. 
Dated this _________ day of________________ 
By: ____________________ City Clerk, City of East Point 
(22)  Reserved. 
(23)  Protective covenants, if any, shall be shown on the final plat. 
(24)  If public water and sewer connections are not available, the city engineer shall require certification by the director of the division of public health engineering of the county health department that septic tanks and drain fields will be approved. 
(25)  After approval of a preliminary plat the subdivider shall prepare a final plat and submit 12 copies of same to the city engineer. 
(26)  The final plat shall be considered by the city engineer, and if found to be in order and in compliance with the provisions of this chapter and other city ordinance requirements, final approval shall be given by the city engineer. 
(27)  No final plat shall be approved unless it has: 
(a)  The certification of a registered engineer or land surveyor that the details of the plat are correct; 
(b)  Space for approval, date and signature of the city engineer; 
(c)  Space for approval by city council evidenced by the signature of the city clerk as set forth in section 10-4009(21). 
(28)  Satisfactory evidence that all taxes and encumbrances of the land to be dedicated as streets or alleys or for the other public purposes have been satisfied of record; and 
(29)  Upon satisfactory completion of all required subdivision improvements, the developer shall submit warranty deeds and/or other conveyances satisfactory to the City Attorney for easements, streets, alleys, parks, rights-of-way or other open space conveyed to the city. Upon favorable recommendation of the City Engineer and the City Attorney, the City Council will take appropriate action to accept such dedications. 
(d)  Having been certified by the City Engineer as compliant to these and other applicable regulations, the final plat shall be recorded with the Clerk of the Superior Court of Fulton City. 
Should the Director not approve any development plat, the basis for the denial shall be stated in writing to the applicant. The subdivider may file an appeal in accordance with Article I of these regulations. 
( Ord. No. 024-015, § 1, 1-20-2015 ) 
Sec. 10-4010. - General principles of the land. 
Sec. 10-4011. - Suitability of the land. 
Land subject to flooding, improper drainage, erosion, and deemed unsuitable for development in accordance with East Point standards shall not be platted for any use that may continue such conditions or increase danger to health, safety, life, or development unless steps are taken to eliminate the above-mentioned hazards. 
Sec. 10-4012. - Access. 
Unless otherwise herein noted, every development shall be served by publicly dedicated streets or private streets in accordance with the following: 
(a)  The proposed streets shall meet East Point standards and regulations. 
(b)  No road intended to be private is to be extended to serve development outside that development unless approved by the Department of Public Works. 
(c)  In residential developments, the private roads shall be maintained by a mandatory homeowners' association and documents of incorporation shall be submitted to the Director for review and approval prior to the recording of the final plat. 
(d)  The subdivider shall provide all necessary easements for ingress and egress for police, fire, emergency vehicles and all operating utilities. 
(e)  The final plat of any development that contains private streets shall clearly state that such streets are private streets. 
When land is subdivided, created parcels shall be arranged and designed so as to allow for the opening of future streets and provide access to those areas not presently served by streets. 
No development shall be designed so as to completely eliminate street access to adjoining parcels of land without current street access. 
Lots may share access as stipulated herein. Lot frontage and access do not necessarily have to be along or front the same public street, if approved by the Director of Public Works. 
The Director of Public Works shall have the right to encourage design of the development in a manner that will: 
(a)  enhance traffic circulation and other community needs; 
(b)  encourage pedestrian traffic to schools, parks, existing and planned greenspace corridors, and neighborhood shopping centers; 
(c)  reduce impacts on streams and lakes; 
(d)  reduce unwanted noise, lights on neighboring lots; and 
(e)  discourage vehicular speeding on local streets. 
Sec. 10-4013. - Conformance to the city comprehensive plan. 
All proposed developments shall conform to the City Comprehensive Plan and development policies in effect at the time of submission. 
The Director of Planning and Zoning shall not approve plats when such planned features, as specified by the Comprehensive Plan, are not incorporated into the plat. 
Whenever the plat proposes the dedication of land for public use and the Director of Planning and Zoning or the appropriate agency finds that such land is not required consistent with appropriate agency plans, policies, or priorities, the Director of Planning and Zoning may either refuse to approve the plat, or require the rearrangement of lots to include such land. 
If a development is proposed within one mile of any roadway operating at a Level of Service D or worse, in accordance with the City Transportation Standards, a Traffic Mitigation Action Plan must be submitted and approved by the Director of Public Works prior to issuance of a Land Disturbance Permit. 
Greenspace, when referred to in this Ordinance, shall mean a permanently protected land including agricultural and/or forestry land that is in its undeveloped, natural state or that has been developed only to the extent consistent with, or is restored to be consistent with, one or more of the following purposes: 
(a)  Water quality protection for rivers, streams, and lakes; 
(b)  Flood protection; 
(c)  Wetlands protection; 
(d)  Reduction of erosion through protection of steep slopes, areas with erodible soils, and stream banks; 
(e)  Protection of riparian buffers and other areas that serve as natural habitat and corridors for native plant and animal species; 
(f)  Scenic protection; 
(g)  Protection of archaeological and historic resources; 
(h)  Provision of recreation in the form of boating, hiking, camping, fishing, hunting, running, jogging, biking, walking, and similar outdoor activities; and 
(i)  Connection of existing or planned areas contributing to the purposes set out in this section. 
Sec. 10-4014. - Zoning and other regulations. 
No development shall be created or recorded that does not comply with the standards of the East Point Zoning Ordinance and/or the approved conditions of zoning for the development. 
Whenever there is a discrepancy between minimum standards or dimensions noted herein and those contained in zoning regulations, building codes, or other official regulations or ordinances, the most restrictive shall apply unless set forth in the conditions of zoning. 
All proposed developments shall comply with the City Storm Water Design Manual. 
Sec. 10-4015. - Modification. 
Modifications of the provisions set forth in these regulations may be approved by the Director of Planning and Zoning when granting of such modification will not adversely affect the general public or nullify the intent of these regulations. 
Should the Director of Planning and Zoning deny a request to modify in accordance with Section 10-2192 the applicant may appeal the Director's decision in accordance with Article I of these regulations. 
Sec. 10-4016. - Administrative variance. 
The Director of Planning and Zoning is authorized by this Ordinance to consider an Administrative Variance whenever a property owner maintains that a provision contained in the East Point Development Regulations , as applied to a specific situation, is not in the best interest of the public health, safety and welfare; whenever there is a request for the alteration of the ten foot improvement setback required along all buffers as required in the conditions of zoning and/or in CHAPTER 6, TREE PROTECTION AND LANDSCAPE ORDINANCE; and whenever there is a request up to a 10 percent reduction in the number of required parking spaces per Article E, ADMINISTRATIVE REDUCTION OF SPACES CONSTRUCTED. 
ARTICLE B. - CONSERVATION DEVELOPMENT 

Sec. 10-4017. - Purposes. 
(a)  To provide for the preservation of greenspace as a nonstructural stormwater runoff and watershed protection measure. 
(b)  To provide a residential zoning district that permits flexibility of design in order to promote environmentally sensitive and efficient uses of the land. 
(c)  To preserve in perpetuity unique or sensitive natural resources such as groundwater, floodplains, wetlands, streams, steep slopes, woodlands and wildlife habitat. 
(d)  To permit clustering of houses and structures on less environmentally sensitive soils which will reduce the amount of infrastructure, including paved surfaces and utility easements, necessary for residential development. 
(e)  To reduce erosion and sedimentation by minimizing land disturbance and removal of vegetation in residential development. 
(f)  To promote interconnected greenways and corridors throughout the community. 
(g)  To promote contiguous greenspace with adjacent jurisdictions. 
(h)  To encourage interaction in the community by clustering houses and orienting them closer to the street, providing public gathering places and encouraging use of parks and community facilities as focal points in the neighborhood. 
(i)  To encourage street designs that reduce traffic speeds and reliance on main arteries. 
(j)  To promote construction of convenient landscaped walking trails and bike paths both within the subdivision and connected to neighboring communities, businesses, and facilities to reduce reliance on automobiles. 
(k)  To conserve scenic views and reduce perceived density by maximizing the number of houses with direct access to and views of open space. 
(l)  To preserve important historic and archaeological sites. 
Sec. 10-4018. - general regulations. 
(a)  Applicability of regulations. This conservation subdivision option is available in the following residential zoning districts: AG-1, R-1, R1-A, R-L, CUP and MIX as a use by right for projects ten acres or more in size. Applicants shall comply with this ordinance as well as all other provisions of the zoning code and all other applicable laws, except those that are incompatible with the provisions contained herein. 
(b)  Ownership of development site. The tract of land to be subdivided may be held in single and separate ownership or in multiple ownership. If held in multiple ownership, however, the site shall be developed according to a single plan with common authority and common responsibility. 
(c)  Housing density determination. The maximum number of lots in the conservation subdivision shall be determined by either of the following two methods, at the discretion of the local jurisdiction: 
(1)  Calculation: The maximum number of lots is determined by dividing the area of the tract of land by the minimum lot size specified in the underlying zoning. In making this calculation, the following shall not be included in the total area of the parcel: 
a.  Slopes over 25 percent of at least 5,000 square feet contiguous area; 
b.  The 100-year floodplain; 
c.  Bodies of open water over 5,000 square feet contiguous area; 
d.  Wetlands that meet the definition of the Army Corps of Engineers pursuant to the Clean Water Act; or 
e.  Anticipated right-of-way needs for roads and utilities. 
(2)  Yield plan: The maximum number of lots is based on a conventional subdivision design plan, prepared by the applicant, in which the tract of land is subdivided in a manner intended to yield the highest number of lots possible. The plan does not have to meet formal requirements for a site design plan, but the design must be capable of being constructed given site features and all applicable regulations. 
Sec. 10-4019. - Application requirements. 
(a)  Site analysis map required. Concurrent with the submission of a site concept plan, applicant shall prepare and submit a site analysis map. The purpose of the site analysis map is to ensure that the important site features have been adequately identified prior to the creation of the site design, and that the proposed open space will meet the requirements of this article. The preliminary site plan shall include the following features: 
(1)  Property boundaries; 
(2)  All streams, rivers, lakes, wetlands and other hydrologic features; 
(3)  Topographic contours of no less than ten-foot intervals; 
(4)  All primary and secondary conservation areas labeled by type, as described in section 10-4020; 
(5)  General vegetation characteristics; 
(6)  General soil types; 
(7)  The planned location of protected open space; 
(8)  Existing roads and structures; and 
(9)  Potential connections with existing greenspace and trails. 
(b)  Open space management plan required. An open space management plan, as described in section 10-4020, shall be prepared and submitted prior to the issuance of a land disturbance permit. 
(c)  Instrument of permanent protection required. An instrument of permanent protection, such as a conservation easement or permanent restrictive covenant and as described in section 10-4020, shall be placed on the open space concurrent with the issuance of a land disturbance permit. 
(d)  Other requirements. The applicant shall adhere to all other applicable requirements of the city's underlying zoning and subdivision regulations. 
Sec. 10-4020. - Open space. 
(a)  Definition. "Open space" is the portion of the conservation subdivision that has been set aside for permanent protection. Activities within the open space are restricted in perpetuity through the use of an approved legal instrument. 
(b)  Standards to determine open space. 
(1)  The minimum restricted open space shall comprise at least 40 percent of the gross tract area. 
(2)  The following are considered primary conservation areas and are required to be included within the open space, unless the applicant demonstrates that this provision would constitute an unusual hardship and be counter to the purposes of this article: 
a.  The regulatory 100-year floodplain; 
b.  Buffer zones of at least seventy-five (75) feet in width along all perennial and intermittent streams; 
c.  Slopes above 25 percent of at least 5,000 square feet contiguous area; 
d.  Wetlands that meet the definition used by the Army Corps of Engineers pursuant to the Clean Water Act; 
e.  Populations of endangered or threatened species, or habitat for such species; and 
f.  Archaeological sites, cemeteries and burial grounds. 
(3)  The following are considered secondary conservation areas and should be included within the open space to the maximum extent feasible. 
a.  Important historic sites; 
b.  Existing healthy, native forests of at least one acre contiguous area; 
c.  Individual existing healthy trees greater than eight inches caliper, as measured from their outermost drip line; 
d.  Other significant natural features and scenic view sheds such as ridge lines, peaks and rock outcroppings, particularly those that can be seen from public roads; 
e.  Prime agricultural lands of at least five acres contiguous area; and 
f.  Existing trails that connect the tract to neighboring areas. 
(4)  Above-ground utility rights-of-way and small areas of impervious surface may be included within the protected Open Space but cannot be counted towards the 40 percent minimum area requirement (exception: historic structures and existing trails may be counted). Large areas of impervious surface shall be excluded from the open space. 
(5)  At least 75 percent of the open space shall be in a contiguous tract. The open space should adjoin any neighboring areas of open space, other protected areas, and non-protected natural areas that would be candidates for inclusion as part of a future area of protected open space. 
(6)  The open space shall be directly accessible to the largest practicable number of lots within the subdivision. Non-adjoining lots shall be provided with safe, convenient access to the open space. 
(c)  Permitted uses of open space. Uses of open space may include the following: 
(1)  Conservation of natural, archeological or historical resources; 
(2)  Meadows, woodlands, wetlands, wildlife corridors, game preserves, or similar conservation-oriented areas; 
(3)  Walking or bicycle trails, provided they are constructed of porous paving materials; 
(4)  Passive recreation areas; 
(5)  Active recreation areas, provided that they are limited to no more than ten percent of the total open space and are not located within primary conservation areas. Active recreation areas may include impervious surfaces. Active recreation areas in excess of this limit must be located outside of the protected open space; 
(6)  Agriculture, horticulture, silviculture or pasture uses, provided that all applicable best management practices are used to minimize environmental impacts, and such activities are not conducted within primary conservation areas; 
(7)  Nonstructural stormwater management practices; 
(8)  Easements for drainage, access, and underground utility lines; or 
(9)  Other conservation-oriented uses compatible with the purposes of this ordinance. 
(d)  Prohibited uses of open space. 
(1)  Golf courses; 
(2)  Roads, parking lots and impervious surfaces, except as specifically authorized in the previous sections; 
(3)  Agricultural and forestry activities not conducted according to accepted Best Management Practices; and 
(4)  Other activities as determined by the applicant and recorded on the legal instrument providing for permanent protection. 
(e)  Ownership and management of open space. 
(1)  Ownership of open space. The applicant must identify the owner of the open space who is responsible for maintaining the open space and facilities located thereon. If a homeowners association is the owner, membership in the association shall be mandatory and automatic for all homeowners of the subdivision and their successors. Also, the homeowners association shall have lien authority to ensure the collection of dues from all members. The responsibility for maintaining the open space and any facilities located thereon shall be borne by the owner. 
(2)  Management plan. Applicant shall submit a plan for management of open space and common facilities ("plan") that: 
a.  Allocates responsibility and guidelines for the maintenance and operation of the open space and any facilities located thereon, including provisions for ongoing maintenance and for long-term capital improvements; 
b.  Estimates the costs and staffing requirements needed for maintenance and operation of, and insurance for, the open space and outlines the means by which such funding will be obtained or provided; 
c.  Provides that any changes to the plan be approved by the City Council; and 
d.  Provides for enforcement of the plan. 
(3)  In the event the party responsible for maintenance of the open space fails to maintain all or any portion in reasonable order and condition, the city may assume responsibility for its maintenance and may enter the premises and take corrective action, including the provision of extended maintenance. The costs of such maintenance may be charged to the owner, homeowners association, or to the individual property owners that make up the homeowners association, and may include administrative costs and penalties. Such costs shall become a lien on all subdivision properties. 
(f)  Legal instrument for permanent protection. 
(1)  The open space shall be protected in perpetuity by a binding legal instrument that is recorded with the deed. The instrument shall be one of the following: 
a.  A permanent conservation easement in favor of either: 
(i)  A land trust or similar conservation-oriented non-profit organization with legal authority to accept such easements. The organization shall be bona fide and in perpetual existence and the conveyance instruments shall contain an appropriate provision for retransfer in the event the organization becomes unable to carry out its functions; or 
(ii)  A governmental entity with an interest in pursuing goals compatible with the purposes of this article. 
If the entity accepting the easement is not the City of East Point, then a third right of enforcement favoring the City of East Point shall be included in the easement; 
b.  A permanent restrictive covenant for conservation purposes in favor of a governmental entity; or 
c.  An equivalent legal tool that provides permanent protection, if approved by the city. 
(2)  The instrument for permanent protection shall include clear restrictions on the use of the open space. These restrictions shall include all restrictions contained in this article, as well as any further restrictions the applicant chooses to place on the use of the open space. 
ARTICLE C. - DESIGN STANDARDS FOR STREETS 
All applicable design standards as set forth in this article and the Standard Details shall be observed in all plats as approved by the Director. 

Sec. 10-4021. - Streets. 
All streets, public or private, shall be constructed to the construction standards of the East Point Department of Public Works. 
The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade, and location of all streets shall conform to requirements as stipulated by the Department of Public Works and shall consider their relation to existing and planned streets, topographical conditions, and appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the land to be served by such streets. 
Streets serving residential developments shall be arranged and designed such that their use for through traffic will be discouraged. 
Where a development contains a dead-end street or stub- street other than a cul-de-sac, the subdivider shall provide a temporary cul-de-sac within the right-of-way. Where a temporary cul-de-sac is required, the subdivider shall be responsible for maintaining and for the construction of the final street connection or turn-around as required. 
Where a development abuts or contains an existing or proposed street classified as a collector street or higher, the Director of Public Works may require frontage streets. Double frontage lots may be required to have screening and no access easements along lot lines fronting on arterials or collector streets. Deep lots with rear service drives, or other treatment as may be necessary for adequate protection of residential properties, may be required to afford separation of through and local traffic. 
Where a development borders on or contains a railroad right- of-way, or a full or partial access control facility right-of-way, the Director of Public Works may require a street approximately parallel to and on each side of the right-of-way. 
Street right-of-way widths for major streets shall be dedicated as specified by the Director of Public Works and the Right-of-Way Dedication and Reservation Plan. 
Where a development abuts an existing street, the subdivider shall dedicate additional right-of-way on the existing streets to meet the requirements as set forth in the Right-of-Way Dedication and Reservation Plan. 
New road grades should be as follows: 

 
Interparcel access shall be provided to adjacent properties upon determination by the Director of Planning and Zoning that such access is in the best interest of the public health, safety, or welfare. In residential developments, where private streets are proposed, the Director of Public Works may require a public street for interparcel connection purposes; the Director of Public Works may also require a shared access. 
Sec. 10-4022. - Alignment. 
(a)  Minimum vertical: All local roads with 25 m.p.h. designs shall be connected by vertical crest curves of a minimum length not less than 12 times the algebraic difference between the rates of grade, expressed in feet per hundred. All local roads with a 25 m.p.h. design speed shall be connected by vertical sag curves of minimum length not less than 26 times the algebraic difference between the rates of grade, expressed in feet per hundred. In any case, the sight distance shall meet the minimum requirements of this article. 
(1)  In proposed approaches of new streets to intersections with existing streets, there shall be a suitable leveling of the street at a grade not exceeding three percent and for a distance of not less than 50 feet as measured from the back of the curb of the intersecting street. 
(2)  In approaches to intersections internal to residential developments, there shall be a suitable leveling of the street at a grade not exceeding five percent and for a distance of not less than 50 feet as measured from the center point of the intersection. 
(b)  Minimum horizontal - radii of centerline curvature: 
(1)  Major Development Street designed for 35 MPH       200 Feet 
(2)  Other Major Development Streets       100 Feet 
(3)  Minor Development Streets       100 Feet 
(c)  Tangents: Between reverse curves, there shall be not less than the following minimum tangents: 
(1)  Major Development Street designed for 35 MPH       100 Feet 
(2)  Other Major Development Streets       50 Feet 
(3)  Minor Development Streets       50 Feet 
(d)  Intersection visibility requirements. Roadways and their intersections shall be designed such that proper sight distance is maintained. Minimum sight distance shall be determined by the operating speed of the road as determined by the Department of Public Works. Intersection sight distance shall be no less than the following: 
280 feet for 25 m.p.h 
335 feet for 30 m.p.h. 
390 feet for 35 m.p.h 
445 feet for 40 m.p.h. 
500 feet for 45 m.p.h 
610 feet for 55 m.p.h. 
(1)  Minimum horizontal visibility shall be measured on centerline. 
(2)  When a proposed curb cut intersects an existing roadway, the minimum visibility shall be provided as follows: 
a.  When measuring in the horizontal plane, intersection sight distance is determined with the following assumptions. The driver's eye location is to be assumed at the center line of the exiting lane of the proposed curb cut behind the stop bar. The object location is to be assumed at the centerline of the closest oncoming lane for each direction. 
b.  When measuring in the vertical plane, intersection sight distance is determined with an assumed height of driver's eye and an assumed height of object of 3.5 feet. 
c.  When measuring in either plane, the line of sight must remain in the proposed dedicated right-of-way, unless sufficient easements, maintenance agreements, indemnifications agreements are provided, or additional right-of-way is dedicated. 
(e)  Stopping sight distance visibility requirements. Roadways and their intersections shall be designed such that proper stopping sight distance is maintained. Minimum sight distance shall be determined by the design speed of the proposed road as determined by the Department of Public Works. Stopping sight distance along a roadway shall be no less than the following: 
155 feet for 25 m.p.h. 
200 feet for 30 m.p.h. 
250 feet for 35 m.p.h. 
(1)  Minimum vertical visibility for stopping sight distance along the roadway shall be determined by measuring between two points of which the height of the driver's eye shall be assumed at 3.5 feet to an assumed object which is 2.0 feet in height) The line of sight must remain within the proposed dedicated right-of-way, unless sufficient easements, maintenance agreements, and indemnification agreements are provided, or additional right-of-way is dedicated. 
(2)  Minimum horizontal visibility for stopping sight distance shall be measured on centerline. 
Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as possible, and no intersection shall be at an angle less than 80 degrees. Detailed designs of intersections shall be required to include all striping and pedestrian crosswalks. Pedestrian crossing signs and signals may be required. 
The curb line radius at street intersections shall parallel the right-of-way radius. 
Right-of-way radius: The right-of-way radius at street intersections shall be at least 20 feet, and where the angle of intersection is less than 90 degrees, the Department of Public Works may require a greater radius. 
The centerline offsets on streets internal to a residential development shall not be less than 200 feet. The centerline offsets for all other streets and curb cuts providing access to developments shall not be less than 300 feet, except greater centerline offsets may be required by the Director. 
Cul-de-sac streets shall be designed so that the maximum desirable length shall be 600 feet. 
Sec. 10-4023. - Blocks. 
The lengths, widths, and shapes of blocks shall be determined with due regard to: 
(a)  Provisions of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of the type of use contemplated; 
(b)  Zoning requirements as to lot sizes and dimensions unless a planned unit development is contemplated; 
(c)  Needs for convenient access, circulation, control and safety of street traffic; and 
(d)  Limitations and opportunities of topography. 
Residential blocks shall be wide enough to provide two tiers of lots, except where fronting on streets classified as a collector street or higher or prevented by topographical conditions or size of the development. The Director may require and/or approve a single tier of lots of minimum depth. 
Sec. 10-4024. - Lots. 
The size, shape, arrangement, orientation of every lot shall be subject to approval of the Director for the type of development and use contemplated. Proposed internal lot lines (not on the street side) shall not be curved. 
Every lot shall conform to the dimension, area, and size requirements of the Zoning Ordinance and/or conditions of zoning. 
Lots not served by a public sewer or community sanitary sewage system and/or public water shall meet the dimension and area requirements of the Department of Health. 
Double frontage lots shall be prohibited, except as approved by the Director provided that such lots are essential to provide separation of residential development from traffic arteries or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography, orientation, and development size. A planted screen may be required along lot lines abutting a traffic artery or other use that would have potential negative impact. 
The creation of remnant lots that are below minimum standards shall be prohibited unless such lots are designated as common area on the final plat and maintained by the Homeowners' Association or some other entity approved by East Point. 
Each lot shall have direct access to an abutting, existing public street or to a street contained within the proposed development. A connection through an approved private drive may be permitted by the Director. 
The subdividing of land adjacent to or surrounding an existing or proposed lake where lots abutting the lake shall be drawn to the centerlines of the lake or identified a common area, maintained by the homeowner's association. 
Sec. 10-4025. - Development streets. 
The minimum requirements for major development streets shall be as follows: 

 
For streets other than mentioned in Sections 10-4021, the Director shall determine the required cross section. 
All residential development streets shall be designed for a maximum of 25 m.p.h. The Director may require that development streets that will not provide direct residential access be designed for up to 35 m.p.h. 
Where streets are longer than 600 feet, traffic calming devices shall be incorporated to include green space, islands, residential roundabouts, and/or other traffic calming devices as approved by the Director. Where traffic calming devices such as speed bumps are used, they shall not exceed six inches in height. The minimum distance between individual devices shall not be less than 500 feet. 
Sec. 10-4026. - Gated communities. 
Gates installed in developments with more than one lot shall comply with the following: 
(a)  Plan approval and a permit shall be obtained prior to installing of any gates. The permit fee shall be calculated in accordance with applicable building permit fees. Gates shall not prohibit public access to dedicated areas as defined within the regulations. 
(b)  No gate shall be installed within the City's right-of-way. 
(c)  The gate shall not create a dead end street without first installing a cul-de-sac conforming to the City's standards on a dead end street exceeding 250 feet in length. 
(d)  Gates shall provide for stacking distance, turnaround and emergency vehicle access as required by the City. 
(e)  Gate permits may be denied based on traffic conditions, interconnectivity needs, and when not in compliance with adopted guidelines. 
Sec. 10-4027. - Required improvements. 
Every subdivider shall be required to install or have installed the appropriate public utility and improvements referred to in this article and found in the following documents: 
•  DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS - STANDARD PLANS 
•  EAST POINT COMPREHENSIVE STORM DRAINAGE DESIGN AND CRITERIA MANUAL 
•  SEWER REGULATIONS OF EAST POINT 
•  EAST POINT TREE PRESERVATION ORDINANCE 
•  UTILITY ACCOMMODATION - GUIDELINES AND PROCEDURES 
Sec. 10-4028. - Streets. 
Sec. 10-4029. - Street grading. 
(a)  All street rights-of-way shall be cleared and graded to standards of the Public Works Department. 
(b)  Finished grades shall be at levels approved in accordance with the Standard Plans. 
(c)  When development adjacent to the street is not owned by the subdivider, he/she shall obtain the necessary easements of sloping banks before submitting for a Land Disturbance Permit (LDP). 
Sec. 10-4030. - Street paving/striping. 
(a)  Street pavement shall be installed according to standards adopted by the City Council. 
(b)  Striping shall be installed according to standards adopted by the City Council. 
(c)  On all roads adjacent to a development, the adjacent lane of the road must be widened to provide 12-foot lanes. The road must be repaved throughout the development frontage and along the roadway improvements, whichever is greater. The road must either be resurfaced from edge to edge, or it must be milled and repaved to the centerline. No more than one inch vertical drop may be allowed at the pavement/gutter joint and a maximum of six inches of exposed curb must be retained. 
(d)  No striping should be provided on development streets designed for 25 m.p.h., except for stop bars and 50 feet of double yellow centerlines, to be located at each entrance to the development. 
Sec. 10-4031. - Curbs and gutters. 
(a)  Curbs and gutters shall be installed on all streets except noted herein. Installations shall be in accordance with standards adopted by the City Council. 
(b)  Curbs and gutters shall be of a straight or standard construction on one or both sides where sidewalks are required. 
(c)  Curbs and gutters may be waived by the Director if the sidewalk along the same portion of the roadway is set back a minimum of 12 feet from the edge of pavement and drainage is adequately addressed. Setbacks greater than 12 feet may be required by the Director. 
Sec. 10-4032. - Sidewalks. 
(a)  Introduction. 
(1)  Purpose: The objective of this subsection is to provide facilities that ensure safe pedestrian movement in the City of East Point. 
(2)  Intent: Sidewalks are intended to provide a safe pedestrian connection between the subdivision/development and nearby destinations. Pedestrians consist of children walking to and from school and neighborhood activities, as well as adults walking to and from neighborhood shopping and transit stops. In addition to the need for sidewalks for circulation and safety, sidewalks can be important elements in the recreational system of this community. They can also serve as walking and hiking trails. 
(b)  Performance approach. 
(1)  Performance factors: The performance approach shall be applied in determining the need for sidewalks. In this case, the decision to require a development to provide sidewalks shall be made on a case-by-case basis. 
(2)  Several basic factors shall be used in applying the performance approach: These are street classification and current/potential future volume of pedestrian traffic; residential land use/development density; relation to residential areas; proximity of schools, school bus stops, shopping areas; and proximity of parks, libraries, bike paths/pedestrian trails, greenspace corridors, and other land uses. 
a.  Street classification and volume of pedestrian traffic: As traffic volume and road speeds increase, there is more need for separate pedestrian ways to ascertain safety. Sidewalks shall be provided along local streets, collectors, arterials, and private roads. 
b.  Residential land use and development density: 
(i)  Sidewalks shall be provided along both sides of all local streets and street frontages where the residential land use designation in the comprehensive plan is eight units/acre or higher density. 
(ii)  Sidewalks shall be provided along at least one side of all local streets when the residential land use designation in the comprehensive plan is less than eight units/acre. 
c.  Relation to residential areas: In general, sidewalks are intended to be within the street right-of-way. This traditional location of sidewalks may be replaced in mixed-use developments by a flexible pedestrian circulation system. Such a system would connect individual dwelling units with other units, off-street parking, open space system, and recreational facilities. Also, this system may be permitted to meander through the development within prescribed sidewalk easements. If the sidewalk leaves the right-of-way, an easement and indemnification agreement must be provided for public access and maintenance. 
d.  Proximity of schools and shopping areas: 
(i)  Sidewalks shall be required in subdivisions located within one mile from an existing or proposed school on both sides of any street that provides access to such school. Subdivisions at each side of the street shall provide sidewalks at the corresponding frontage. 
(ii)  Sidewalks shall be provided within a distance of up to one mile along both sides of streets leading to or going through shopping areas. 
e.  Proximity of parks, libraries, bike paths/pedestrian trails, greenspace corridors, and other land uses: Sidewalks are needed in areas where the following nonresidential land use designations exist: 
(i)  Sidewalks shall be required along both sides of all streets and street frontages in commercial, living-working, and business park land use designation areas. 
(ii)  Sidewalks may be required in industrial subdivisions. 
(iii)  Sidewalks may be required within a distance of up to one mile along both sides of streets leading to or going through places of public assembly/transit facilities/other congested areas and other similar places deemed proper by the Director of Public Works for public necessity and safety. 
f.  Relation to established pattern of sidewalks: Future location of sidewalks should follow the already established pattern of existing sidewalks (on one side of the street, on both sides, width, etc.). 
(c)  General specifications. 
(1)  Sidewalks shall be provided by the subdivider at no cost to the city. 
(2)  Sidewalks shall have a minimum width of five feet indicated by a note on the conceptual plan. 
(3)  For non-residential developments, sidewalks shall be a minimum of six feet wide. 
(4)  Sidewalks must be provided on or adjacent to an individual lot prior to the issuance of certificate of occupancy. 
(5)  Prior to the recording of the final plat, 125 percent of the cost of the internal sidewalks for any residential subdivision must be performance bonded. This bond will be released when all sidewalks internal to the development have been constructed and approved. All required sidewalks must be provided internal to any residential subdivision within two years of the recording of the final plat, otherwise, the bond is forfeited and the city will use the funds to complete the sidewalk construction. 
(d)  Review guidelines. The Director of Public Works may issue guidelines to facilitate the application of the performance-based approach including, but is not limited to, a point system. The intent is to ascertain fairness and consistency in the application of this section. 
(e)  Exception. When the developer requests to install (within a development) sidewalks that are not required by the subdivision regulations and at no cost to the city, the Director of Public Works may approve a reduction in width to a minimum width of four feet. 
(f)  Sidewalk Bank. 
(1)  There is hereby established an East Point Sidewalk Bank for the maintenance and disbursement of funds required to be paid pursuant to the terms of this ordinance. 
(2)  Where it is determined by the Director of Public Works that construction of sidewalks adjacent to the applicant's property is implausible contribution in lieu of sidewalk construction shall be made to the East Point Sidewalk Bank. The fee shall be set annually by the Director of Public Works and shall be assessed per linear foot of sidewalk constructed. 
(3)  Funds maintained in the East Point Sidewalk Bank shall be administered by the Finance Department pursuant to rules and regulations regarding said funds. 
Sec. 10-4033. - Street trees. 
(a)  Street trees and other shrubbery that may be retained or planted shall not obstruct sight distances and shall be subject to the approval of the Director. 
(b)  Street trees that may be required by the Director along the street(s) shall be of species approved as street trees in the Tree Protection and Landscaping Ordinance. 
ARTICLE D. - WATER, WASTEWATER AND STORMWATER 

Sec. 10-4034. - Water supply. 
Where a public water supply is within 300 feet, the subdivider shall install or have installed a system of water mains and connect to such supply. The installation of mains and connections to each lot shall be installed prior to the paving of the street, if possible. The installation shall include services and meter boxes if it is connected to the City of East Point Water System. 
Where a public water supply is not available, each lot in a development shall be furnished with a water supply system approved by the Fulton County Health Department. 
A separate water service connection shall be provided for each residential unit. Meters shall be located as specified by the utility company. 
Fire hydrants shall be located and set in accordance with City of East Point Public Utilities Specifications and the East Point Standard Plans where applicable. In addition, the fire hydrant shall be serviced by the following: 
(a)  Not less than a eight-inch diameter main if the system is looped. 
(b)  Not less than an eight-inch diameter main if the system is not looped or the fire hydrant is installed on a dead end main exceeding 300 feet in length. 
(c)  In no case shall dead end main(s) exceed 600 feet in length for main sizes less than ten inch. 
When required by the Public Works Department, a reuse water irrigation distribution system to each lot shall be installed. This system shall consist of an eight-inch diameter ductile iron pipe identified an "non-potable water," painted purple in accordance with standard pipe identification schedules, and installed on the south or east shoulder of the right or way limit. All pipes and appurtenances must be in accordance with the East Point Water Reuse Standards. Each development owner requesting an irrigation meter shall connect to the reuse water main, if activated. 
If a development is re-platted and the originally platted lots configuration is changed after the water service lines have been installed, the water system shall be modified to properly serve each lot in accordance with East Point water specifications. 
Sec. 10-4035. - Sanitary sewer management. 
When public sanitary sewers are within 300 feet of the development, the subdivider shall provide sanitary sewer services to each lot within the bounds of the development. All street sewers serving lots in the development shall be installed by the subdivider. A formula may be developed by the Department of Public Works to provide for a sharing of the costs of sewer facilities needed to serve the development and other developments in the same drainage basin. 
When the operation of a temporary sanitary sewer system requires land to be set aside for a disposal plant, the development owner shall give the City title to the development for as long as the plant is in operation. The title may carry a reversionary clause returning the development to the owner when the site is no longer necessary for the operation of the plant. 
In a drainage basin, which at time of plat application is scheduled for a public sewerage system, all developments shall be provided with a temporary community sewerage disposal system as approved by the Department of Public Works. The system shall include permanent sewerage outfall lines plus a temporary treatment plant to be installed by the subdivider. 
Whenever the installation of a sanitary sewer is required, as provided by these rules and regulations, no new street shall be paved without the sewer being first installed in accordance with the requirements of the sewer specifications of the Department of Public Works and the East Point Sewer Regulations. 
If a development is re-platted and the originally platted lots configuration is changed after the sewer service lines have been installed, the sewer system shall be modified to properly serve each lot in accordance with East Point sewer specifications. 
Sec. 10-4036. - Storm water provisions. 
See Chapter 11. Storm Water Management 
Sec. 10-4037. - Detention/retention design. 
(a)  General provisions: 
(1)  Installation of properly functioning detention facilities, including outflow control devices, shall be the responsibility of the owner. If any control devices are damaged or destroyed during grading or construction, all processes shall cease until such devices are restored to their functioning capability. The owner, through application for grading or construction permits, accepts the responsibility of maintenance of the control devices. 
(2)  When serving more than three lots, detention ponds, retention ponds, and water quality features (including all required access easements, landscape strips, and fences) shall be located on a separate parcel where no home can be constructed. This parcel shall be owned and maintained by the homeowners' association or the owners of the lots being served by this pond. The parcel shall have a minimum of 20' wide continuous access to a public or private road in a manner that allows access and maintenance of this parcel. In addition, this parcel will not be required to meet the normal lot standard. 
(b)  Layout design standards: The ponds layout shall provide for the following minimums: 
(1)  Twenty-foot graded access easement; 
(2)  Twenty-foot landscape strip for screening purposes; 
(3)  Ten-foot access easement for maintenance; and 
(4)  Fences of decorative wrought iron, aluminum or green vinyl clad chain link with a planted landscape strip around the fencing. Fence height shall not exceed six feet in height. 
(c)  Alternative design standards: Applicants are encouraged to carry out innovative detention/retention layout that is intended to make such facilities an attractive amenity or focal point to the development. 
To achieve that, the Director may approve the following alternative design standards in lieu of those in sections 10-4037(a) and 10-4037(b). 
(1)  Such alternative design should provide for attractive layout and means for detaining/ retaining/moving water. 
(2)  The design should follow the natural land forms around the perimeter of the basin. The basin should be shaped to emulate a naturally formed depression. 
(3)  Redistributing soils from basin construction to create natural landforms around the perimeter of the basin is encouraged. These forms should be located strategically to filter views or redirect and soften the views from residential areas. 
(4)  Side slopes of basins must not exceed one-foot vertical for every four-foot horizontal. Where possible, side slopes should be varied to imitate natural conditions. Associated natural landforms should have side slopes no greater than one-foot vertical for every three-foot horizontal to accommodate lawn maintenance equipment. Varied slopes will be encouraged. 
(5)  The applicant should consider the use of plant materials that naturally grow in the area. Trees and shrubs should be grouped in informal patterns to emulate the natural environment. The intent is to soften the views of these basins. 
(d)  Design guidelines: The Director may issue design guidelines illustrating details of the standards in Section 10.4009(c). 
(Ord. No. 024-11, § 1, 9-19-11) 
Sec. 10-4038. - Storm drain system stenciling/identification. 
All residential development and commercial entity storm drainage structures or facilities (catch basins, storm sewer inlets, culverts, impoundment facilities, man holes, and other facilities that convey storm water run-offs) shall be properly identified. Each drainage structure shall be identified with the use of durable and reusable Mylar stencils (stencils will not be provided by the City) that measure 20" x 30" with two-inch lettering and an environmentally formulated, water base, but soluble striping paint (Color: blue). The message on the stencil shall read: 
"DUMP NO WASTE"  (Picture of a trout)  "DRAINS TO STREAM" 
Sec. 10-4039. - Sanitary and storm sewer easement. 
(a)  All permanent easements shall be 20 feet in width. When access for maintenance purposes is required, the maximum longitudinal slope along the easement shall be 30 percent at grade in steepest direction. 
(b)  No fill shall be placed on a sanitary or storm sewer easement without approval by the Director of Public Works. All sanitary manholes must extend to the ground surface. All easements terminating on a parcel shall extend to the development line. 
(c)  No retaining wall, building, pole, sign or other vertical structure shall be constructed in sanitary and storm sewer easements, including vehicular access easements around structures, without approval from the Director of Public Works. No fence shall be placed across sanitary or storm sewer easements without gates to which the Department of Public Works has full access. No planting shall take place in a sanitary or storm sewer easement that will impede vehicular access along the easement or endanger the pipeline. No surface water shall be impounded on a sanitary sewer easement. No other pipeline or utility shall be placed in a sanitary or storm sewer easement without approval by the Director of Public Works. 
(d)  Each lot or parcel of land in a development shall have a separate sewer connection terminating at the easement limit or right-of-way limit with a vertical clean-out pipe. No connection of the public sewer system shall be made except at a sewer connection approved by the Director of Public Works. 
(e)  No surface water, ground water, storm drain, gutter, downspout, or other conveyance of surface water or ground water shall be discharged into the sanitary sewer. 
Sec. 10-4040. - Plans and construction. 
No sanitary sewer or water line shall be accepted by the City without an as-built drawing showing the horizontal and vertical alignment of the sewer system, the locations of all manholes, sewer connections, piping materials, required easement limits and junctions, and development lines. This should be provided in the form of plans, profiles, and plats; when possible, an electronic copy of the required data (compatible with the East Point Geographical Information System) should be submitted. 
No storm sewer shall be accepted by the City without an as-built drawing showing the horizontal and vertical alignment of the sewer system; the locations of all manholes, junctions, detention ponds, retention ponds, and sewer system outfalls discharging into ditches or creeks; sewer connections, piping materials, required easement limits; and development lines. This information shall be provided in the form of plans, profiles, details, sections and plats and when possible in an electronic form compatible with the East Point Geographical Information System and the applicable Department of Public Works data base. 
In the case of single family residential developments, by written application, the owner may request that East Point assume partial maintenance responsibility of drainage facilities, effective after the expiration of the initial 45 month maintenance period. Within 60 days after receipt of such application, the Director shall respond in writing to the owner/applicant. Such response shall set forth additional terms and conditions for acceptance. However, maintenance by East Point shall be limited to ensuring the functional adequacy of such drainage structures. Maintenance responsibility shall remain partially with the homeowners' association unless and until, and only to the extent that, the homeowners' association is expressly relieved of such responsibility pursuant to and in accordance with a written instrument signed by the Director. Appropriate easements shall be executed and recorded pursuant to this paragraph. For all other types of development, responsibility for maintenance of storm sewer system and detention ponds, including but not limited to, periodic silt removal to maintain functional integrity, will remain the responsibility of the Owner. Maintenance responsibility shall constitute an obligation running with the land and shall be binding upon the owner's executors, administrators, heirs, successors, and successors-in-title. The owner/developer shall provide stabilization, including vegetation, and installation of security fences for safety purposes at detention facilities, as prescribed, prior to approval of the Final Plat by the Director. 
Any single-family detached home which involves less than 10,000 square feet of cleared area or all impervious surface areas combined and is in excess of 2,000 feet from the Chattahoochee River, shall be exempted from the provisions of a hydrology study. In no such case, however, shall grading involve over 25 percent of the total land area. Sites within 2,000 feet of the Chattahoochee River shall be developed in accordance with the Atlanta Regional Commission's vulnerability analysis, as determined by the Director. 
All engineering and construction, regardless of whether such engineering or construction is being accomplished on public land or on public easements, shall meet the minimum requirements of these regulations. 
ARTICLE E. - MONUMENTS AND IRON PIPES 
Permanent monuments shall be accurately set and established to tie with the City GIS monuments or as required by the Director. 
The monuments shall consist of two two-inch iron pipes, 16 inches in length, or T bars, 24 inches in length, or other approved materials. The monuments shall be set so that the top of pipe shall be six inches above the ground level, unless otherwise approved by the Department of Public Works. 
The accurate location, material, and size of all existing monuments shall be shown, on the final plat, as well as the future location of monuments to be placed after street improvements have been completed. 
Iron pipes at least one-half inch by 16 inches shall be used and shall be set two inches above the finished grade. 
ARTICLE F. - UNDERGROUND UTILITIES 
All existing and proposed utilities, including all electrical, telephone, television and other communication lines, both main and service connections, serving or having capacity of 69 KV or less, abutting or located within a requested land disturbance area shall be installed underground in a manner approved by the applicable utility provider and in compliance with East Point's right-of-way and erosion control regulations, if applicable. 
Lots that abut existing easements or public rights-of-way where overhead electrical or telephone distribution supply lines and service connection have previously been installed may be supplied with electric and telephone service from those overhead lines, but the service connections from the utilities' overhead lines shall be installed underground. Should a road widening or an extension of service, or other such conditions occur as a result of the development and necessitate the replacement or relocation of such utilities, such replacement or relocation shall be underground. 
Contractors or developers of developments shall: 
(a)  Submit drawings of the development layout showing locations of underground electrical cable, transformers, and other related fixtures, in accordance with the standard plans. These drawings must be approved by the City before installation of the underground utility and before a building permit can be issued. 
(b)  Pay all cost for poles, fixtures, or any related items of materials necessary for the installation to the utility company. 
(c)  Submit proof of payment for complete installation. 
(d)  Have an agreement with the appropriate power company for complete maintenance of all installations and provide proof of payment. 
ARTICLE G. - STREET LIGHTS AND PEDESTRIAN LIGHTING 
(a)  Street lights and pedestrian lights shall be provided by the developers of all new developments. 
(b)  At the time of and as a requirement of submission of a Final Plat, the developer shall: 
(1)  Submit a drawing(s) of the development's layout showing locations of street lights and required pedestrian lights. This drawing must be approved by the Director prior to obtaining any building permit within the development. The layout shall be shown on the Land Disturbance Permit. Fixtures and standards/poles installed or used shall be approved by the City and by the utility company which shall be responsible for the maintenance of the facilities. 
Street light fixtures shall be mounted 30 feet above the ground and shall have appropriate arm length to place the light over the street. No arm shall be less than five feet long. Post top luminaries may be permitted when approved by East Point providing same are in compliance with the requirements of the East Point Zoning Ordinance. Fixtures shall be located no more than 300 feet apart and at least one light shall be located at each street intersection within the development. When a development is located in a zoning overlay district, light standards shall comply with requirements of the overlay district. 
Pedestrian lights shall be installed as required by the overlay district or the specific zoning case. 
(2)  Pay all costs for standards/poles, fixtures and any other related items or material necessary for installation. 
(3)  Submit proof of payment for complete installation to the Director. 
(4)  Submit a copy of an executed agreement with the utility company for complete maintenance of all installations. 
(c)  When street lighting is requested by existing residents, these residents shall: 
(1)  Submit a petition to the East Point Department of Public Works from the residents affected showing a 90 percent support for the request. The affected residents shall be all residents whose properties are located, in whole or in part, within 150 feet of a proposed street light. 
(2)  The request to the City for street lights shall include a sketch indicating the individual location of lights within the development, along with the residential location of each signatory to the petition. 
(3)  If standards/poles within the development for the placement of these lights do not exist, or do not meet utility company requirements, it shall be the petitioner's responsibility to have these standards/poles placed prior to installation of the street lights, at their cost. Installation of poles within the City's right-of-way shall be subject to the approval of the Public Works Director. The street light fixtures are to be installed at the expense of the petitioners. 
(d)  When each of the applicable items in Section C above has been completed, East Point shall: 
(1)  Assume maintenance responsibility and make the monthly payments to the utility company for electrical energy for each street light when at least 50 percent of the dwelling units in the development have been occupied. 
(2)  Pay only the current monthly negotiated amount for electrical energy for each street light. 
ARTICLE H. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 10-4041. - Fees. 
Every application for a Minor Plat, Conceptual Plat, Final Plat, or other plat submitted pursuant to these regulations shall be submitted to the Director along with such fees as may be established by the City Council. Failure to pay such fees as required shall cause the plat to be returned to the applicant without acceptance for review or consideration by East Point. 
Following the approval of a Conceptual Plan and prior to authorization to begin construction, the developer shall pay the required Inspection, water and sewer connections, curb cut, and street sign fees as may be established by the City Council. 
Prior to approval of a Final Plat and as a prerequisite for acceptance of any such Final Plat, the developer shall provide such performance bonds, maintenance bonds, and/or cash assurances as required by these regulations and established by the City Council. 
Sec. 10-4042. - Enforcement. 
These Subdivision Regulations shall be administered and enforced by the Director. 
Should the Director deny any such plat (minor or final), a written explanation shall be provided stating the basis for the denial. Within 30 days of the date of said written explanation, the owner of record and/or subdivider may file with the Department of Planning and Zoning a letter appealing the decision, which, together with a report from the Director, shall be forwarded to the Planning and Zoning Commission for consideration pursuant to Article I, Appeals, of the East Point Zoning Ordinance. 
Should an applicant disagree with the review comments of the Director concluding factual or interpretive errors have been made, the following appeal procedure is intended to resolve the issues. 
(a)  Submit to the Director within 30 days of the comments at issue, a letter clearly defining the nature of the disagreement, the specific reference to the Article of these regulations at issue, and the applicant's opinion. 
(b)  The Director shall submit the request to the Technical Staff Review Committee. The Technical Staff Review Committee shall be selected by the Director and formed from appropriate departments' staff relative to the subject appeal. 
(c)  The Technical Staff Review Committee shall provide comments and a written recommendation to the Director within ten working days. 
(d)  Should the Director, after review of the applicant's statement and the recommendation of the Technical Staff Review Committee, conclude that these regulations would not be violated, the Director shall modify his/her comments accordingly. 
(e)  Should the Director conclude that these regulations would be violated, the Director shall provide the applicant with a written letter of denial and advise the applicant of the appeal process to the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
(f)  The Planning and Zoning Commission shall, after receiving a report from the Director, decide the issue. The decision shall constitute the final administrative appeal. 
Should the Director not approve a request to vary any Article of these regulations within 30 days, the applicant may appeal in writing, stating the Article to be varied and the reason the variance should be granted. 
The applicant shall file a variance application to these regulations with the Planning and Zoning Commission, which shall have the authority, after hearing from the applicant and the Director, grant, modify and/or deny the variance. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall base its decision on hardships as described in the East Point Zoning Ordinance. 
Sec. 10-4043. - Violation and penalty. 
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this Ordinance, shall be deemed liable for civil penalties not less than $1,000.00 and not to exceed $2,500.00 and/or imprisonment for 60 days, or as amended by applicable statutes. Each day's continuance of a violation shall be considered a separate offense. The owner of any lands or parts thereof, where anything in violation of this ordinance shall be placed, or shall exist, and any person who may assist in the separate offense, the Municipal Court of East Point, or any court of competent jurisdiction, shall have jurisdiction of any offense charged under this paragraph. 
In any case in which any land is, or is proposed to be, used in violation of these regulations or any amendment thereto adopted by the City Council, may, in addition to other remedies provided by law, institute injunction, abatement or any appropriate action or actions, or proceeding to prevent, enjoin or abate such unlawful use. 
Sec. 10-4044. - Conflict. 
Where conflicts exist between these regulations and other City regulations and policies, either the most restrictive or the City's written interpretation shall prevail. 
Sec. 10-4045. - Adoption. 
These regulations shall be in full force and effective 30 days following adoption by the City Council of East Point. 
Sec. 10-4046. - Severability. 
If any Article, sub-article, sentence, clause or phrase of these regulations is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or void, the validity of the remaining portions of these regulations shall not be affected, it being the intent of the City Council in adopting these regulations that no portion hereof shall become inoperative or fail by reason of the unconstitutionality or invalidity of any Article, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or provision of these regulations. 
ARTICLE I. - DRIVEWAY REGULATIONS 

Sec. 10-4047. - Purpose. 
This document is intended to clearly define the process of constructing a legal access point or any other work in the right of way of City Roads in East Point. To accomplish this we are modifying sections three through five of the Georgia Department of Transportation document "Regulations for Driveway and Encroachment Control" and adopting this modified version. Any variance to the standards set forth in this manual must be in the form of a written appeal to the Director of Public Works, along with the appropriate studies to support the variance request. 
Sec. 10-4048. - Driveway spacing. 
As drivers approach each intersection along a roadway, they are often presented with decisions and may be required to stop or make various maneuvers. When exiting the roadway, it is necessary to decelerate and in some cases, to change lanes. It may also be necessary to adjust speeds in reaction to other vehicles entering into the arterial traffic stream. Driveways should be spaced so that drivers can perceive and react to the conditions at each intersection in succession. 
Spacing between driveways should be at least equal to the distance traveled, at the posted speed limit, during the normal perception and reaction time plus the distance traveled as the vehicle decelerates to a stop. Each intersection also requires a certain amount of storage space for vehicles waiting to enter. The distance between intersections should be great enough to provide this storage, allowing each intersection to have its functional boundary separated from those of the next intersection. Crash data also indicates that as the number of driveways along a roadway increases so do accident rates. Meeting the spacing criteria is not, in itself an indication that driveways will be allowed. 
Guidelines for driveway spacing, associated with the construction of new driveways, are provided in Table 3-1. Driveways should be separated from any other facility, which accesses a City roadway, whether it is another driveway or a public street. Minimum spacing requirements also apply to driveways on the opposite side of undivided roadways. 
Requirements for the length of right and left turn lanes, as shown in Table 11 and Table 13, may increase the minimum allowable spacing shown in Table 1. 


 
Table 1: Driveway Spacing Criteria 
Sec. 10-4049. - Spacing of one-way driveways. 
Figure 1 shows a typical layout of one-way driveways. The spacing criteria presented in Table 1 does not apply to the distance between the two one-way driveways (driveway pair). 
A driveway pair must be separated from another driveway pair by the distance as shown in Table 
(1)  A driveway pair must also be separated from an adjacent two-way driveway in accordance with the spacing criteria in Table 1. 

Figure 1: Spacing Criteria for One-Way Driveways 
Sec. 10-4050. - Placement of driveways. 
Not only must driveways be spaced from other driveways as provided above, they must also be located a minimum distance from the property line. The radius return must be a minimum of 5' from the property line. 
When driveways are to be jointly used by two or more property owners, the property line separation requirements given in the above paragraph can be waived. However, a joint use agreement signed by the affected property owners must be provided to the Access Management Engineer. Either property owner may apply for the driveway permit. 
Sec. 10-4051. - Driveway spacing. 
Driveways should align with other driveways located on the opposite side of the roadway. If offset driveways cannot be avoided, the same driveway spacing criteria as given in Table 1 should be provided, to provide space for left turns. Figure 2 shows how the spacing is measured for locating offset driveways on undivided roadways. Spacing is from Center to Center. 

Figure 2: Spacing of Offset Driveways 
If the City roadway involved is a divided facility and the driveways do not align with a median crossover, the driveway spacing would only apply to the adjacent driveway located on the same side of the roadway as shown above in Figure 2. 
Sec. 10-4052. - Residential driveways. 
Driveways serving single family residential homes or townhouses do not have to adhere to the standards set forth in the previous sections, as they have a less significant impact than a new street or commercial driveway. Not more than two private curb cuts may be located on any one street frontage for any one dwelling. When there are two curb cuts on any one street frontage, there shall be a safety zone between the cuts not less than ten feet, as measured along the curbline. In no case shall the curb cut be less than five feet from the side property line as measured along the right-of-way line. The curb cut shall not encroach upon the radius of the curb at a street corner. 
Not more than one private curb cut may be located on any one street frontage for any one dwelling where the street is classified as a Collector or higher order street. If a lot has access to more than one frontage, it may not have any private curb cuts on a street that is classified as a Collector or higher order street. If both frontages are classified as Collector or higher order streets, then the curb cut may be on the frontage with the lowest classification, or as designated by the Public Works Department. 
Sec. 10-4053. - Spacing of median crossovers. 
When the applicant is requesting a median crossover on a divided roadway, the spacing standards shown in Table 2 apply. 


 
Table 2: Spacing of Median Crossovers 
Other factors will also be considered, such as distance to other median openings, adjacent land use, expected traffic volumes, and the resulting volume of U-turns that are likely to occur without the median opening. Meeting the spacing criteria is not, in itself, an indication that median openings will be allowed. 
Sec. 10-4054. - Spacing of signalized intersections. 
This section is provided to assist the applicant's engineer in designing sites that may need signalized points of access to the City roadway. Table 3 contains guidelines for the spacing that should be provided between signalized intersections. 


 
Table 3: Spacing of Signalized Intersections 
The spacing guidelines provided above are indicative of conditions that normally offer better signal progression for arterial traffic flow. It is recognized that under certain conditions, better operation may result from the introduction of signals with less spacing if the alternative forces high volumes of traffic to an adjacent intersection. 
When the applicant can show, through an alternatives analysis, that better operations can be achieved with less spacing, the Department of Public Works will consider an exception to the provisions of Table 3. 
Sec. 10-4055. - Design criteria. 
The design of driveways shall comply with the guidelines of AASHTO's A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Bridges, current edition. This manual provides a summary of the minimum design constraints that will be checked during the plan review process. 
The geometric design of an intersection is a collection of various elements such as radius, width, grade, angle of intersection, etc. that, in combination, provide for satisfactory operation of the vehicles that will use the intersection. Since the operating characteristics vary dramatically for different types of vehicles, the designer must first establish the design vehicle on which to base the driveway design. The designer should also check the final design to ensure the design vehicles can operate satisfactorily. 
Sec. 10-4056. - Design for trucks. 
The design criteria given in this chapter has more stringent requirements for trucks. Even though the general use of such guidance would result in more desirable operations for all vehicles, it is neither practical nor necessary to design all facilities to accommodate trucks. The designer must use judgment in selecting the proper design vehicle. 
When semi trailer combination trucks are expected to use the intersection on a regular basis and in numbers more than just an occasional vehicle, then the intersection should be designed to accommodate the truck movements. This includes most driveways designed for industrial use and many commercial driveways. 
For commercial uses such as shopping centers, the preliminary site plan should indicate where heavy duty pavement would be provided to accommodate truck access to loading docks. Any driveway associated with access/egress for the loading docks should use the truck radii. Minor movement driveways, particularly those that allow only right turns will generally only be used by passenger cars. 
Sec. 10-4057. - Driveway width. 
When traffic impact studies are required, the driveway shall be designed to provide the number of lanes recommended in the study. The findings within the study supersede the standards set forth in Table 4. Standard lane widths are 12'. 
When the need for multiple lanes is not established from a traffic impact study, the minimum and maximum driveway widths are as set forth in Table 4. 

 
Table 4: Driveway Widths 
Sec. 10-4058. - Corner radii. 
Corner radii are generally established by the minimum path of the inside wheels of the design vehicle when making a right turn. The minimum corner radii to be used for driveways are given in Table 5. 

 
Table 5: Minimum Corner Radii 
Sec. 10-4059. - Left turning control radii. 
The path of the inside wheels during left turns is also important for the design of median openings and intersections with dual left turn lanes. Table 6 contains guidelines for minimum left turning radii. 


 
Table 6: Left Turning Control Radius 
Sec. 10-4060. - Median crossover design. 
Driveways onto divided City roadways where full access is to be provided shall be designed in accordance with Georgia DOT Construction Details for Median Crossovers. The detail has two types of designs (See Figure 3) that are applicable in different situations in East Point. Type A median crossovers will not be permitted. 
Sec. 10-4061. - Type B median crossover. 
Type B median crossovers are required when the projected volume of the left turn movement exceeds 50 vehicles per hour per direction and/or when the median width is sufficient to offset the left turn lane from the adjacent through lane. This design provides better sight distance for vehicles in the left turn lane. This is important for unsignalized intersections and when unprotected turns are allowed at signalized intersections. 
Sec. 10-4062. - Type C median crossover. 
Type C median crossovers are typically used in urban areas where the median width is limited to approximately 24 feet or less. With this type of crossover, it may be necessary to add pavement to the opposite edge in order to accommodate U-turns. 
Table 7 illustrates the minimum pavement width that is required for vehicles to make U-turns. The required width is given for passenger cars and for WB-50 trucks. However, provisions for U-turns at median openings are normally based on passenger cars. 

Figure 3: Median Crossover Design 


 
Table 7: Minimum Road Width for U-Turns 
Sec. 10-4063. - Sight distance. 
Driveways should be located to provide adequate sight distance. Minimum intersection sight distance criteria are provided in Table 8. The line of sight establishes the boundary of a sight triangle, within which there should be no sight obstruction. Any location where the sight line leaves the right-of-way, a permanent maintenance easement must be filed, and the area must be graded and landscaped such that sight distance is not compromised. 


 
Table 8: Intersection Sight Distance Requirements 
The sight distance criteria are based on the time required for a vehicle to make a left turn from a stop-controlled approach to the City roadway (AASHTO Case B1). The time to execute the maneuver is based on recommendations contained in NCHRP Report 383, Intersection Sight Distance. The sight distances, for a two-lane road, are the distances traveled at the arterial speed during 7.5 seconds. The time is increased by 0.5 seconds for each additional lane to be crossed. 
The sight distances given in Table 8 are for undivided roadways. If the roadway is divided, the effect of the median should be considered in determining the required sight distance. Based on the conditions, it may be feasible for the crossing maneuver to be done in two stages with a stop in the median. However, the intersection should only be treated in this manner if the signing and marking is accordingly provided. Otherwise, the sight distance requirements should be increased to account for the additional width that must be crossed. See AASHTO Green Book, Chapter 9 Intersections, for adjustments due to grades greater than three percent and design vehicles other than passenger cars. 
Sec. 10-4064. - Horizontal alignment. 
In general, the horizontal alignment of driveways should be designed using a tangent section from the centerline of the City roadway and extending to the property line. Horizontal curves should be sufficient to provide safe operations at speeds that would normally occur in the areas where they are constructed. 
Sec. 10-4065. - Angle of intersection. 
Intersecting driveways and roads should generally meet at or nearly at right angles. Driveways and roads intersecting at acute angles create sight limitations that should be avoided. 
In some cases, a more suitable overall design can be achieved by allowing intersecting angles other than 90 degrees. Table 9 gives the minimum angle of intersection that will generally be allowed for driveways designed to accommodate two-way traffic flow. 


 
Table 9: Minimum Angle of Intersection for Two-Way Driveways 
Sec. 10-4066. - Alignment of approach and departure lanes. 
Driveways should be designed and constructed so as to align with driveways or streets on the opposite side of the roadway. The alignment of through movements crossing the roadway should be such that abrupt shifts in the travel pattern are not required. 
Sec. 10-4067. - Auxiliary turn lanes. 
When any auxiliary turn lane that extends beyond the applicant property frontage, the applicant will be responsible for acquiring the necessary rights of way and easements in order to accomplish the necessary frontage improvements. 
Sec. 10-4068. - Minimum requirements for deceleration lanes. 
The provisions of this section shall generally apply to auxiliary lanes installed on the approach to an intersection that provide for deceleration and storage of vehicles waiting to turn right or left. Such lanes are always beneficial and will be required in conjunction with commercial driveway permits when projected traffic volumes exceed minimum levels as provided in the sections below. 
Right turn deceleration lanes must be constructed at no cost to the City if either the Average Daily Traffic (ADT) or right turning volumes shown in Table 10 are met. Passing lane sections fall under the criteria for two or more lanes. 

 
Table 10: Minimum Volumes Requiring Deceleration Lanes 
In the event the Director of Public Works feels that field conditions or other factors indicate that it would be in the best interest of the City to waive the decel lane requirement, the Director of Public Works must document the recommendations. The recommendations shall be approved by the Director of Public Works and be attached to the Permit. The Director of Public Works may also require the addition of a right turn lane, even when the conditions in Table 10 are not met, if roadway geometry or field conditions indicate that the safety of the traveling public would be improved. The recommendation must be documented and approved by the Director of Public Works for inclusion with the Permit. 
The right of way for deceleration lanes may be dedicated in fee simple to the City for the City to maintain or the applicant must sign an agreement with the City to maintain the lane to the City's standards and to hold harmless the City in the event that section of roadway is identified in any liability action. A Limited Warranty Deed is not acceptable when right of way is donated to the City. 
The pavement specifications for deceleration lanes must be Georgia DOT Standard Specifications for Construction of Roads and Bridges, except as approved by the Director of Public Works in cases where a lesser design may be acceptable or where a proposed project is expected to tie in. 
Sec. 10-4069. - Deceleration lane design. 
This section provides the design guidelines that should be used to establish the lengths of turn lanes if they are required. Turn lanes should provide a full-width lane that is long enough to allow for vehicles to decelerate from the operating speed to a full stop in addition to the length of full-width lane that is needed to store vehicles waiting to turn. Table 11 contains guidelines for lengths of tapers and full-width turn lanes for deceleration right turn lanes. 

 
Table 11: Minimum Deceleration Lane Lengths 
When traffic studies are conducted, the length of full-width lane needed for storage should be determined. If the length of full-width storage is greater than the length of full-width storage shown in Table 11, the longer length should be provided. 
At signalized intersections, the amount of storage for both right and left turns can be based on the number of vehicles arriving during 1.5 signal cycles. 
For unsignalized intersections, a commonly used rule of thumb is that left turn storage should accommodate vehicles arriving during a two-minute period. Minimal storage is required for right turn lanes at unsignalized intersections. 
Sec. 10-4070. - Minimum requirements for left turn lanes. 
Left turn lanes must be constructed at no cost to the City if either the ADT or left turning volumes shown in Table 12 are met. Passing lane sections fall under the criteria for two or more lanes. 

 
Table 12: Minimum Volumes Requiring Left Turn Lanes 
In the event the East Point Traffic Engineer feels that field conditions or other factors indicate that it would be in the best interest of the City to waive the left turn lane requirement, the Director of Public Works must document the recommendations. The recommendations shall be approved by the Director of Public Works and be attached to the Permit. The Director of Public Works may also require the addition of a right turn lane, even when the conditions in Table 12 are not met, if roadway geometry or field conditions indicate that the safety of the traveling public would be improved. The recommendation must be documented and approved by the Director of Public Works for inclusion with the Permit. 
Sec. 10-4071. - Left turn lane design. 
The design of left turn lanes should consider the intended function and the characteristics of the roadway. In many cases, it is necessary to widen the existing roadway to introduce the left turn lane. All vehicles approaching the turn lane are shifted to the right. The left turning traffic is then shifted back into the lane. Through traffic is returned to its original lane beyond the intersection. When the roadway has a median that is at least 20 feet wide, the left turn lane can be developed out of the median, avoiding the need for transitions. If a proposed driveway aligns across the main street with another driveway, and the proposed driveway must provide a left turn lane and left turn storage, then adequate storage and tapers must also be provided for the driveway across the main street. 
The basic design elements of left turn lanes are illustrated in Table 13. This example shows symmetrical widening, which basically requires the through traffic on each side to shift by one half of the lane width. Some circumstances may dictate that all widening be achieved on one side, which requires a full lane shift for through traffic on the side where the additional width is developed. Table 13 provides guidelines for selecting the proper length of approach taper. 


 
Table 13: Minimum Design Elements of Left Turn Lanes 
The example shown in Table 13 has straight-line tapers. These are acceptable but other designs may also be used, including the following: partial tangent tapers, symmetrical reverse curve, and asymmetrical reverse curve. See latest edition of AASHTO green book for details. 
The required length of full-width storage is based on the peak hour traffic volumes. This should be determined in the traffic study. The amount of storage is dependent on the type of traffic control in effect. For signalized intersections, the storage should be sufficient to accommodate the 95th percentile peak hour queue. At yield-controlled intersections, the storage is based on the number of vehicles as designated in Table 14. 

 
Table 14: Left Turn Storage Requirements 
Sec. 10-4072. - Raised islands. 
Islands are an important form of intersection channelization that is often needed to prohibit undesirable movements, define the paths of allowed movements, and provide a refuge area for pedestrians. Any location where two outbound lanes are proposed for a driveway at an unsignalized location, the right line must be for right-out only movement, and separated from the other lane by a raised island. 
Painted lines are an effective means to direct the paths of vehicular movement. However, raised islands are more effective during times when visibility is reduced. When islands are to serve as pedestrian refuge areas, they should be constructed as raised islands. All sign posts to be placed within concrete area must have hole through pavement structure. The hole may be either formed, drilled or sawed. 
Raised islands should be large enough to command attention and accommodate wheelchairs. The smallest raised island should have an area of 50 square feet in urban areas and 75 square feet in rural areas. However, 100 square feet is desirable in both cases. (Refer to revised ADA standards) 
When multiple crosswalks are required to pass through islands, the required size may exceed the (100 square feet mentioned above) The additional area may be required to install wheelchair ramps. As an alternate to ramps, the pedestrian travel way can be "slotted" through the island, remaining on the grade of the roadway. 
Figure 4 shows a typical design for a raised corner island at a two-lane driveway. This design uses a radius of 65 feet and provides an island of sufficient size for wheelchair ramps and level landings. 
Figure 4 also contains a median island along the driveway. This drawing does not imply that median islands or corner islands are required for all driveways. However, large painted islands may not serve the intended channelization purpose and the type island to be used should be based on the actual circumstances of the site. 
Raised islands should be offset from the edge of the adjacent travel lane on all sides. The amount of offset shall be a minimum of 18 inches as measured from the edge of the travel lane to the face of the curb. When raised islands are adjacent to roadways with posted speed limits of 50 MPH or greater, the island shall be offset from the edge of the roadway by a minimum distance of ten feet. 

Figure 4: Design of Raised Islands 
Sec. 10-4073. - Right-in, right-out driveways. 
Raised islands are also typically used to channelize the movements at a driveway where only right turns are allowed. The raised island is an effective means of preventing left turns. All right-in, right-out islands must have a radius that is 70 feet or a compound curve that approximates 70 feet. Right-in, right-out driveways are not intended for truck traffic, so the exit and entrance lanes must be 12' in width as measured from face of curb to face of curb. The island must be constructed from mountable curb (three inches vertical, 45 degree face, three inches flat) to accommodate emergency vehicles. The edge of the island should be offset 18 inches to 24 inches from the edge of the travel lane. 
Sec. 10-4074. - Pavement design. 
All construction, within the right of way, of surfaces intended for travel by motorized vehicles shall be paved. The pavement specification of auxiliary lanes on City roadways shall be the Georgia DOT Standard Specifications for Construction of Roads and Bridges, or as designated in East Point Standards, whichever is more restrictive. 
New developments are required to widen the road along their frontage to a uniform lane width of 12 feet. If the widened area is two feet or less in width, a concrete sub-base should be provided per the current standards. The developer must then either pave the entire width of the road, or mill to the centerline and pave to match the existing road. Any deviation from this standard requires a waiver from the Director of Public Works or his designee. 
Sec. 10-4075. - Pedestrian considerations. 
When driveways are constructed in areas where pedestrian activity is not prohibited, the design should adequately provide for pedestrian movement and interaction with vehicular traffic. Pedestrian features that should be considered include sidewalks, crosswalks, traffic control features, and curb ramps are required. The Americans with Disabilities Act Accessibility Guidelines must be utilized where pedestrian traffic is expected. 
Figure 5 contains typical locations for curb cut ramps. Ramps are required at all pedestrian crosswalks where curb is constructed or replaced. The required crosswalk detail is also shown in Figure 5. See current GDOT Construction Details for the appropriate treatment. 

Figure 5: Typical Crosswalk Details 
Sec. 10-4076. - Clear zone requirements. 
Experience has shown that motorists occasionally run off the roadway and providing a traversable recovery area can lesson serious injury. AASHTO publishes a Roadside Design Guide that should be used as a reference when designing driveways. 
Table 15 provides the clear zone distances as contained in the Roadside Design Guide. Driveways must be designed so that all areas within the roadway right of way have clear zones as defined in Table 15. 
(from AASHTO 2002 Roadside Design Guide) 

 
Table 15: Clear Zone Distances (in Feet from Edge of Traveled Way) 
Notes: 
* Clear zones may be limited to 30' 
** Fixed objects should not be present in the vicinity of the toe of these slopes. The width of the recovery zones should consider a number of factors including right of way availability, economic factors, safety needs, and accident history. 
All areas located within the clear zones should remain clear of obstructions such as bridge abutments, poles, trees, etc. If obstructions are unavoidable, the design should include appropriate protection such as break-away design, guardrail installation, safety end treatments on culverts, etc. The Roadway Design Guide includes a table for horizontal curve adjustments, where the clear zone correction factor is applied to the outside of curves only. Curves flatter than a 2860 foot radius do not require an adjusted clear zone. 
Sec. 10-4077. - Right of way requirements. 
In order to construct driveways, it is often necessary to construct improvements to the City roadway. These improvements typically include the addition of lanes along the City roadway such as a deceleration lane. 
If sufficient right of way exists, improvements to the City roadway may be permitted without the requirement of additional right of way. In urban sections, the right of way should be no closer than 14 feet from the face of curb along State Routes and 11' from the face of curb along all City roads. In rural sections, the point located one-half way up the back slope should be on or within the right of way line. Sufficient right of way should be donated to the City for the deceleration lane/commercial driveway. Paving specifications to match existing pavement or better should be full-depth to the right of way line. Depths may be reduced, if field conditions warrant, as approved by the Director of Public Works. 
If additional right of way is required in order to construct the required improvements, the applicant must dedicate the right of way. The applicant must follow the procedures established in the Department of Planning and Zoning. 
Sec. 10-4078. - Signing and marking. 
All signing and pavement marking must be designed and installed in conformance with the latest edition of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
Sec. 10-4079. - Signing. 
All sign posts to be placed within concrete area must have six-inch wide diameter space through substructure. 
The traffic control signs must be installed per the most recent edition of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD) with relation to the installation height, size, distance from curb, etc. In general, signs should be installed at least seven feet but no more than ten feet from the ground to the bottom of the sign, and at least two feet from the face of curb to the closest edge of the sign, or as required by the MUTCD. 
The signs shall be new die cut anodized aluminum (at least .080 inches thick) and installed on a single square post with standard hardware. This post should be installed to break-away standards with a slip base. The back of the installation bolts should be bent to discourage theft. The face of the sign shall be Type III (High-Intensity) sheeting or better. If the road intersects a state route, all warning signs, red series regulatory signs, including Stop, Yield, and Do Not Enter signs shall be fabricated from Type VI (Wide Angle Prismatic) reflective sheeting. No two signs shall be mounted on the same post. Should the applicant wish to use decorative poles, a custom sign permit will need to be applied for in the Department of Public Works. 
As part of the Land Disturbance Permit Process, the Department of Planning and Zoning will identify the number and location of signs. The minimum sign installation shall conform to the standards established below. 
The applicant will be responsible for maintaining the signs from installation to final inspection. The City reserves the right to replace stop or yield signs if they have been down for more than 12 hours, to replace any regulatory signs if they have been down for more than seven days, and to replace any other signs if they have been down for more than 14 days. This will be done at the cost to the applicant of $250.00 per sign. 
The sign inspection shall be done by the Planning and Zoning Department prior to acceptance of the final plat or as established by the Director of Planning and Zoning. The signs should be performance bonded at the same time as the pavement at a cost of $100.00 per sign or as established by the Director of Planning and Zoning. If the City needs to replace any signs at the time of the final inspection, the value would be forfeited. 
The following signs shall be installed in all new subdivisions as applicable: 
Sec. 10-4080. - Stop signs (R1-1). 
The STOP sign shall be installed on the right side of the approach to which it applies. Stop lines, when used to supplement a STOP sign, should be located at the point where the road user should stop. Where there is a marked crosswalk at the intersection, the STOP sign should be installed in advance of the crosswalk line nearest to the approaching traffic. 
STOP signs should be installed in a manner that minimizes the numbers of vehicles having to stop. In most cases, the street carrying the lowest volume of traffic should be stopped. A STOP sign should not be installed on the major street unless justified by a traffic engineering study as recommended by the MUTCD. If two streets with relatively equal volumes and/or characteristics intersect, typically the direction that conflicts the most with established pedestrian crossing activity or school walking routes or the direction that has the longest distance of uninterrupted flow approaching the intersection should be stopped. 
No all-way stops may be installed in a new subdivision without the permission of the Director of Public Works. 
Sec. 10-4081. - Yield sign (R1-2). 
Yield signs shall be installed when there are right turns at an intersection that are channelized apart from the through and/or left turn movements with a striped or raised island. In addition, yield signs should be installed on each approach of a roundabout. 
Sec. 10-4082. - Right lane must turn right sign (R3-7R). 
Right Lane Must Turn Right signs shall be installed 25 feet from the back of the full width storage in the deceleration lane for the development, if applicable. 
Sec. 10-4083. - Speed limit sign (R2-1). 
Speed Limit signs shall indicate a 25 mph speed limit for streets internal to residential subdivisions, unless it is a local collector road for the development, and then it should be no higher than 35 mph. For neighborhood settings, only one speed limit sign shall be installed at each project entrance or at the points of change from one speed limit to another. This sign should be installed no less than 100 feet from the entrance of the subdivision, but no greater than 500 feet from the entrance. 
Sec. 10-4084. - Street name sign (D3-1). 
Ground-mounted street name signs shall be installed at every intersection and shall conform to City of East Point Department of Public Works requirements. Instead of ground-mounted signs, however, overhead street name signs shall be installed where a subdivision street intersects at any traffic signal. Overhead street name signs shall include the City of East Point logo. 
Street name signs for public roads shall be green and street name signs for private roads shall be blue. The letter height must have at least seven-inch upper-case letters and at least five-inch lower-case letters. The Letters should be in "Avantage Medium" font or as approved by the Department of Public Works. The street name sign shall be a combination of lower-case letters with initial uppercase letters. If the street has no outlet, a "No Outlet" legend should be put on the end of the street name sign blade closest to the main road. The "No Outlet" legend should have at least three inch high all-capital black letters on a yellow field that is no more than eight inches wide. 
The street name sign should be constructed on flat blades and not extruded blades. They may be either riveted back-to-back or two-sided at the applicant's preference. The street name sign cannot be posted on the same post as the stop sign. 
Sec. 10-4085. - Roundabout sign. 
Roundabouts must be signed and marked per East Point standards. This includes yield signs for every approach, as well as an advance roundabout sign as established by the Department of Public Works. The pavement marking shall include yield lines and channelization islands for each approach. 
Sec. 10-4086. - Stop ahead sign (W3-1) and yield ahead sign (W3-2). 
The Stop Ahead and Yield Ahead signs shall be installed on an approach to a primary traffic control device that is not visible for at least 250 feet. Please refer to Section Tables 2C.29 in the MUTCD for additional information. 
Sec. 10-4087. - Playground sign (W15-1). 
Playground signs shall be installed on any vehicular approach to an amenities area. 
Sec. 10-4088. - Additional signs. 
Additional signs may be required as appropriate by the Department of Public Works or the field inspector. 
Sec. 10-4089. - Sign information and sizes. 
All signs shall be of the sizes as designated in Table 16. This table also included the appropriate reference sections of the MUTCD which explain the proper use and installation of each of the signs previously designated. 

 
Table 16: Sign Information and Sizes 
Sec. 10-4090. - Pavement marking. 
Pavement markings are required to separate lanes of travel and should be used along all edges of pavement. The following guidelines are provided for designing and installing pavement markings for driveways: 
•  All pavement markings installed within the public right-of-way shall be thermoplastic material 
•  Lane lines are generally 5" (white); lane lines are not required where curb and gutter has been provided 
•  Stop lines should be 24" (white) 
•  Center lines should be 5" double yellow 
•  Deceleration and left turn lanes should have turn arrows (Type 2) spaced every 100' and 
"ONLY" legends between every pair of Type 2 Arrows 
•  Crosswalks should use the current Georgia DOT standard (see Figure 5) 
ARTICLE J. - INFILL 

Sec. 10-4091. - Definitions. 
(1)  For the purposes of this section, the term "Infill" shall apply to all residential zoning categories excluding Townhomes (TH) and Apartments. 
(2)  For the purposes of this section, Accessory Structure shall mean- detached garages, carports, storage sheds, etc. and shall meet the minimum setback requirements prescribed by the applicable zoning district. Said structures shall be constructed of similar building materials and orientation of the principal structure. 
(3)  For the purposes of this section, the term "Infill Development" shall mean the construction and/or reconstruction of at least 25 percent of the exterior of a residential structure. Infill Development shall be required if a developer is building five or less homes. A single-family detached structure constructed on three acres or more is exempt from this ordinance. 
(4)  For purposes of this section, the term "Survey Area" shall mean: 
(a)  The three nearest homes on both sides of the lot to be developed; 
(b)  Any home directly to the rear of the lot to be developed; and 
(c)  The six homes directly across the public right-of-way to the front of the lot to be developed. 
In the event that topography, zoning district boundaries, city limits, or other logistical matters render strict compliance with a. and/or b. above impossible, the Director of Planning and Zoning shall determine the Survey Area as strictly as possible in compliance with 4a. and 4b. as stated above. 
(i)  In order to establish and maintain compatibility among residential developments and to preserve the aesthetic qualities of neighborhoods, which serves to preserve the property values of all residential land owners and developers, promote the health, welfare and safety of neighborhoods, and preserve the tax base of the City of East Point, the following design requirements are hereby mandated for all residential infill developments, in addition to all other construction standards contained in this Code. 
(ii)  The developer of a proposed Infill Development shall submit to the Planning and Zoning Department, an Infill Compatibility Survey, on the form provided by the Planning and Zoning Department that illustrates the size, scale, and overall visual character of the structure including setbacks, height and basic architectural features of homes in the survey area. The applicant shall also submit labeled pictures of the survey area. 
(5)  The minimum requirements for residential Infill Development, to be shown on the Infill Compatibility Survey, shall be as follows: 
(a)  Height. The maximum height is measured between the highest point along a roof or highest ridge line of a proposed home, and the slab or crawl space on grade. The height shall comply with the requirements of the applicable zoning district. For purposes of building height, chimneys, as well as flues, vents, pipes, antennae, and other small projections less than 24 inches in width/diameter (measured at the widest point) shall not be included in the above measurement. 
(b)  Number of stories. The number of stores shall comply with the height requirements of the applicable zoning district. 
(c)  Orientation of the front door. The home shall have its front entrance facing the street (if the lot faces more than one street, then facing the street that existing homes in the survey area face), and shall have no less than 25 square feet of framed window facing said street, or no less than 85 percent of the average square footage of framed window facing said street for homes within the survey area, whichever is less. 
(d)  Orientation of the house. The Infill home shall have the same orientation to the streets as the majority (51 percent) of the existing homes within the survey area. Where the dimensions of the lot, or other site-specific obstacles, do not permit the same orientation as a majority of existing structures in the survey area, the property owner, or his or her representatives, may file for a variance with the Planning and Zoning Commission, which variance shall be considered in conformance with the procedures and standards contained in City Code Part 10, Planning and Development, Chapter 1, Planning and Zoning Commission Powers and Duties in Administration of Zoning Regulations. 
(e)  Garages and carports. Where a majority (51 percent) of existing homes have garages or carports within the survey area, the Infill home shall include a garage or carport. The garage or carport frontage shall meet all setback requirements of the applicable zoning district. The orientation of garages and carports shall be consistent with the majority (51 percent) of such structures within the survey area. Where possible, garages and carports shall be oriented and entered from the side or rear of the Infill home, and out of view of the public way. A detached garage within an Infill Development is considered an accessory structure and must comply with the Infill standards and applicable zoning district. 
(f)  Exterior materials. The exterior materials of an Infill Development, including garages, carports and other accessory structures, shall conform to the following requirements: 
(i)  All exterior finishes shall be either brick, stone, masonry, wood, masonry composite, or such other similar exterior finish as may be approved by the Director of Planning and Zoning. 
(ii)  Where either brick, stone, masonry, wood, or masonry composite is used on a majority (51 percent) of existing homes in the survey area, the Infill Development shall include and reflect the majority (51 percent) of the homes' building materials on the front, sides and rear of the structure as demonstrated in the community and if visible from a public right-of-way. 
(g)  Square footage requirements. The footprint for Infill homes shall be no greater than 50 percent larger than the average footprint for all homes within the survey area, and shall be no smaller than ten percent of the average footprint for all homes within the survey area. The total heated floor area of an Infill home shall be equal to or greater than a majority (51 percent) of the existing homes in the survey area. 
(h)  Foundations. Foundations shall reflect the character and style of homes in the survey area. However, no foundation shall have exposed concrete. Concrete foundations, where exposed, must be covered in stucco, brick or other approved masonry material used in the majority of the homes in the survey area. 
(i)  Fireplaces and chimneys. Where the majority (51 percent) of existing homes in the survey area have fireplaces and chimneys, the Infill home shall include fireplaces and chimneys to reflect the character and style of homes in the survey area. Chimneys shall be covered in stucco, brick or other approved masonry material, unless a different material is used in the majority (51 percent) of the existing homes in the survey area and shall terminate at finished grade. 
(j)  Front porch or stoops. Where the majority (51 percent) of existing homes in the survey area have a functional front porch or stoop, or similar front entry feature, the Infill home shall have such a feature. The inclusion of these features shall be consistent with the setbacks of the applicable zoning district. Architectural features and dimensions shall conform to those of the majority (51 percent) of homes in the survey area. 
(k)  Overhangs. The roofs of all Infill homes shall be constructed in such a manner as to provide soffits (i.e. the horizontal underside of the eaves) that extend a maximum horizontal distance of one foot beyond the face of the exterior walls. 
(l)  Lot frontage. Lot frontage for Infill homes shall not vary more than ten percent from the average lot frontage of existing homes in the survey area. 
(5)  Relief. To apply for relief from any of these requirements, the property owner, or his or her representatives, may file for a variance with the Planning and Zoning Commission. That variance shall be considered in conformance with the procedures and standards contained in City Code Part 10, Planning and Development, Chapter 1, Planning and Zoning Commission. 
Sec. 10-4092. - Public participation program. 
The public participation program is in place to ensure that applicants pursue early effective public involvement in conjunction with their petitions, ensure that the citizens of East Point have an adequate opportunity to learn about petitions that may affect them, and to ensure ongoing communication between applicants, adjoining property owners, neighborhood groups, community associations and other organizations, elected officials and city staff. A minimum target area for public participation shall be a 500-foot radius from the affected property. At the Director of Planning and Zoning's discretion, a greater distance may be required. Applicants are required to submit a public participation plan for meeting with interested citizens to advise residents of residential infill applications and to allow citizens the opportunity to discuss concerns and provide input about project design or development. An applicant's responsibilities are to inform the public, solicit input, and provide a summary of these activities in the form of a written report. 
The requirement for a public participation plan does not give communities decision making powers. Applicants are encouraged to listen to the concerns of the community and seek to reach a consensus on the outstanding issues. A refusal by the community to meet with applicants or to return the completed and signed Departmental documents does not mean that the applicants fail to meet the requirements of the public participation program. 
Public participation plans are required with all residential infill applications and must be filed simultaneously with the application. An application for building permit may be denied by the Department of Planning and Zoning if the report is not submitted as required. 
Sec. 10-4093. - Public participation plan. 
Every application for residential infill shall include a public participation plan. 
Minimum Standards: 
(1)  Identification of all property owners within 500-foot radius of the site, area neighborhood groups, community associations, other organizations and any political subdivision of the state (elected council ward representatives) which may be affected by an application. 
(2)  Detailed explanation of how interested parties will be informed of a residential infill. 
(3)  Methods for providing opportunities for discussion with interested parties before meetings are held. Applicants are required to schedule at least one meeting at a convenient location and time and notify all interested parties of the purpose, place and time of meeting. 
(4)  Applicant's schedule for completion of the public participation plan. 
(5)  Site plan and sketches, including at least the building footprint and front and side elevations, of any structure to be built. 
Sec. 10-4094. - Public participation plan report. 
Every application for residential infill is required to provide a public participation report which shall include the items listed below: 
(1)  Provide a list of all parties that were contacted, the methods of notification that were used, and copies of all notification letters. 
(2)  Provide a copy of letter of notification to impacted adjacent property owner. 
(3)  Provide dates and locations of all community and/or other meetings that were attended by the applicant to discuss an application (Attach meeting notices, letters, etc.) 
(4)  Provide the number of people who participated in meetings held to discuss an application. (Attach sign-in sheets) 
(5)  A summary of concerns and issues expressed by interested parties. 
(6)  A summary of the applicant's response to concerns and issues. 
(7)  A signed copy of the Notification form, signed by both the applicant and a representative of the community presented to. 
(8)  Applicant shall attach a copy of the development plan presented to the community representative. 
(9)  Applicant shall bring to the community meeting copies of the plan which can be distributed and kept by the community. (Size not to exceed 11 × 17 inches) 
(10)  Applicant shall conduct an additional community meeting if any modifications are made to the application after it has been reviewed by the appropriate property owners, neighborhood groups, community associations other organizations and any political subdivision of the state (elected council ward representatives) affected by the application. 
Sec. 10-4095. - Community responsibility. 
The affected community shall also fax, mail, e-mail or hand deliver to the Department of Planning and Zoning a copy of the signed form by both parties in order to insure that the information submitted by the applicant reflects what was presented to the community. The form must be submitted within five days after the scheduled community meeting. 
ARTICLE K. - DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS 

Sec. 10-4096. - Scope and intent. 
This article includes a variety of development related regulations which are designed to insure that development, and infrastructure additions and improvements are provided in the best interest of the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of East Point, and to assure that development regulations and review procedures are standardized and equitably applied. 
Sec. 10-4097. - Compliance. 
Any land disturbance activity or any development activity must comply with the development standards of East Point along with any other applicable local or state regulations. Compliance with the provisions of this article, and actions to bring about compliance with this article shall be in accordance with administrative guidelines of the Planning and Zoning Department. 
Sec. 10-4098. - Appeals. 
The Director of Planning and Zoning shall administratively consider variance appeals to Development Regulations in accordance with Article I, Appeals. 
Sec. 10-4099. - Permit and sign-off requirements. 
These standards acknowledge or establish East Point requirements for permits for development of properties within the incorporated area of East Point. All development shall comply with these and other requirements including, but not limited to, the East Point Stream Buffer Protection Ordinance, the East Point Tree Protection and Landscaping Ordinance, the East Point Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Ordinance, and the Georgia Metropolitan Area River Protection Act. 
Sec. 10-4100. - Land disturbance permit prerequisites. 
Prior to the issuance of a Land Disturbance Permit or the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for each phase of development, the following documents shall be submitted to the Director of Planning and Zoning for approval. 
(a)  Site plan. A site plan which meets or exceeds the requirements contained herein and the Planning and Zoning Department administrative guidelines, and incorporates the following therein: 
(1)  A certified boundary description based on a survey of the entire property. 
(2)  A graphic representation of those conditions of zoning which can be graphically represented. This is not intended to require that conditions of zoning be written-out on a site plan. 
(3)  Zoning case number and other relevant file numbers. 
(b)  Grading plan with phasing. 
(c)  Erosion and sediment control plan. A separate sheet depicting erosion and sediment control measures as required by the State of Georgia. 
(d)  Landscape/tree protection plan. A detailed landscape or tree protection plan for all required buffers, landscape strips, tree protection zones, and screened areas. If project completion does not coincide with an appropriate planting season, or if water prohibitions are in effect, a performance bond may be posted to delay planting until an appropriate time approved by the Planning and Zoning Director. 
(e)  Storm Water Management Plan 
(1)  Evaluate the downstream ditch stability and bank erosion protection potential of existing downstream conveyance system. Provide all necessary documentation to the Department of Public Works, Storm Water Management Section at construction drawing phase. 
(2)  Contact the Department of Public Works, Storm Water Management Section to arrange an on-site evaluation as to the location of storm water facility, discharge path of detention/retention pond and other downstream constraints. 
(3)  The design discharge at the outlet of drainage system shall not result in velocities that equal/exceed the erosive velocity or the existing receiving channel/draw, unless dissipation and erosion protection measures are placed at the outlet. Said documentation shall be provided to the Department of Public Works, Storm Water Management Section. 
(4)  Provide downstream analysis of the flood discharge timing effect on the existing conveyance systems due to each storm frequency. 
(5)  All natural streams within the limit of the project must be stable and be expected to remain stable under ultimate development or provide appropriate erosion protection for the streams subject to the approval of the Department of Public Works, Storm Water Management Section. 
(6)  Evaluate the downstream effect from storm water management structures and the development, hydrologic-hydraulic engineering studies shall extend downstream to a point where the proposed development represents less than ten percent of the total watershed to this point. 
(7)  The result of the extended downstream point analysis (10 percent point) shall be included in the hydrologic study submitted with the storm water management plan. Said documentation is subject to approval by the Department of Public Works, Storm Water Management Section. 
(8)  Provide Detention/Retention as maybe required by East Point subject to the approval of the Department of Public Works. 
(9)  The development site shall be graded in such a manner that the surface runoff does not affect downstream lots, flow through lots shall be collected and conveyed in appropriate storm drainage system. Documentation shall be provided at construction drawing phase. 
(f)  Other plans, as applicable. 
(1)  Water and waste water plans 
a.  Water and waste water systems constructed under the jurisdiction of East Point Government shall abide by the Department of Public Works. 
b.  East Point Public Works does not guarantee the availability of water or waste water capacity. 
c.  Matters pertaining to septic systems shall be determined by the Fulton County Health Department. 
d.  The project being proposed shall utilize one Geographical Information System (GIS) monument as the development's benchmark. Furthermore, the developer shall abide by all provisions of the East Point "Monument Resolution", as established by the Department of Public Works. 
e.  Matters pertaining to pump stations shall be pre-reviewed by the Department of Public Works, Engineering Support Services Division, with regards to current policy, prior to the submittal of project design drawings. 
f.  All appropriate fees shall be paid by the developer prior to the issuance of any Land Disturbance Permits. 
g.  The developer is required to extend the water pipe line system across the entire length of road frontage, within the right-of-way. 
h.  At the time of design review, the Department of Public Works, Engineering Support Services Division may require the developer to connect (loop) the project to the adjoining property, for flow enhancement of the public water system. 
i.  Rerouting of existing water pipe lines and/or waste water pipe lines shall be pre-approved by the Department of Public Works, Engineering Support Services Division, prior to the submittal of project design drawings. 
j.  As part of the project, the developer is required to network the waste water pipe line system to all upstream properties. 
k.  Easements dedicated to East Point Government shall abide by all established standards. All easements shall be obtained and approved by the Department of Public Works, Engineering Support Services Division. 
(l)  Conflicts, with other review disciplines of East Point Government shall be submitted to and resolved by the Department of Public Works, Engineering Support Services Division. 
(2)  Profiles of roads and sewers. 
(3)  Traffic signs and striping. 
(4)  Standard Construction Details. 
(5)  Proposed Permanent Stormwater Management Plan. 
(6)  A traffic impact mitigation plan which details an owner's or developer's plan to address the number of trips that their development will produce when such development is within one mile of a roadway operating at a level of service D or lower as established by the Department of Public Works. This plan shall include, but is not limited to roadway improvements including costs and other proposals such as providing transit access, transit use incentives, car/van pooling, bicycle path construction, internal sidewalk construction, and lunch trip reduction, which when combined mitigate the traffic impact of the proposed development and shall also include a time table for the construction/implementation of improvements and who will be financially responsible for them. 
(g)  Permits, agreements, studies as applicable. 
(1)  An approved curb cut permit from the Georgia Department of Transportation or the East Point Planning and Zoning Department. 
(2)  Health Department approvals. 
(3)  Right-of-way dedication. 
a.  Property Owners be required to dedicate at no cost to East Point, along the entire frontage, sufficient right-of-way to provide a minimum 10.5 foot shoulder behind any required project improvement subject to the approval of the Director of Public Works. 
(4)  Off-site transportation improvement funds and agreements. 
(5)  Fire Department approval. 
(6)  Sanitary sewer pre-treatment approval. 
(7)  Siltation Study. 
a.  At the discretion of the Director of Planning and Zoning, submit prior to the issuance of a Land Disturbance Permit and prior to recording of the final plat for each phase of development, base siltation studies of any water bodies located on the development site and on adjacent properties. Said studies shall identify, for removal by the applicant, prior to recording of the final plat for each phase of development, all siltation resulting from the development. 
b.  At the discretion of the Director of Planning and Zoning, prior to the recording of the final plat for the final phase of development, submit a performance bond for the removal of any siltation resulting from the development. The performance bond shall remain on file in the Planning and Zoning Department until release of the occupancy certificates for a minimum of 90 percent of all residences permitted pursuant to the development or three years from the date of the first certificate of occupancy, whichever is earlier. 
Sec. 10-4101. - Prerequisite to occupancy permit inspection. 
The Public Works Department shall notify in writing the Planning and Zoning Department of holds on the issuance of a certificate of occupancy on a project. 
(a)  Single-family residential. Before a certificate of occupancy may be considered by the Planning and Zoning Department for any dwelling located in a subdivision, the items listed under "B"., below, must have been signed-off on by the Department of Inspections and Zoning Enforcement as complete for that phase of the subdivision in which a dwelling is located. 
(b)  All structures except single-family residential. Before a certificate of occupancy may be considered for a structure, including the first of several structures within a development, the following must have been signed-off on as complete by the Planning and Zoning Department: 
(1)  Required Landscaping 
(2)  Required Buffers 
(3)  Required Tree Protection Measures 
(4)  Required Walls and Fences 
(c)  Exceptions. The Planning and Zoning Department shall insure that security has been accepted in accordance with City regulations for all required but incomplete improvements. A certificate of occupancy shall not be withheld whenever deficiencies have been secured. 
Sec. 10-4102. - Site improvement standards. 
These standards shall regulate site improvement, and the provision of amenities related to site improvement. 
Sec. 10-4103. - Off-street parking. 
Property owners shall provide and maintain off-street parking throughout construction. Parking on any lot other than the lot for which a building permit is issued must be approved for a temporary parking lot by the Planning and Zoning Department. 
Sec. 10-4104. - Interparcel access. 
Interparcel access shall be provided to adjacent properties upon determination by the Director of the Planning and Zoning Department that such access is in the best interest of the public health, safety or welfare. 
Sec. 10-4105. - Sidewalks, curb and gutter. 
Sidewalk, curb and gutter shall be provided for all development projects except as determined by the Department of Public Works. 
Sec. 10-4106. - Detention/retention. 
On-site storm water detention facilities shall not be located within any required buffer or landscape strip. Detention facilities shall not be located within parking or loading areas unless approved by the Department of Public Works. A 20-foot wide landscape strip planted to buffer standards shall be provided around the exterior of the detention area outside of the access easement or as may be approved by the East Point Planning and Zoning Director. 
Sec. 10-4107. - Compliance with tree protection and landscape ordinance. 
Prior to applying for a Land Disturbance Permit, the owner shall arrange with an arborist, for an on-site evaluation of existing specimen trees and stands of trees, and an evaluation of buffers and tree protection zones. At a minimum, the tree density requirements prescribed by the East Point Tree Protection and Landscaping Ordinance shall be provided and permanently maintained. 
Sec. 10-4108. - Subdivision access. 
Any subdivision of land for single family that has new roads providing direct access to the lots within the subdivision shall be limited to newly constructed internal roads. 
Sec. 10-4109. - Minimum setback for new street. 
The right-of-way for new streets must be located a minimum of 50 feet from any peripheral property line adjoining AG-1 and residentially zoned property unless interparcel access is required. 
Sec. 10-4110. - Dams. 
All dams within the jurisdiction of East Point shall comply with the provisions of the Safe Dam Act and Rules of Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
Sec. 10-4111. - Building setback from pipeline easement. 
(a)  Setback requirements. No buildings used for human occupancy shall be permitted within 40 feet of any easement containing a gathering or transmission line as defined in this ordinance. 
(b)  Land use restrictions. No building or structure or part thereof, which is used for the manufacturing, processing, generation or storage of any material in the following listing shall be constructed within 125 feet of any gathering, or transmission line easement: 
(1)  corrosive materials 
(2)  highly toxic materials 
(3)  oxidizing materials 
(4)  pyrophoric materials 
(5)  water reactive materials 
(6)  highly combustible materials 
(7)  flammable materials 
(8)  explosive materials 
(9)  materials that pose a hazard to human health 
(10)  loose or combustible materials 
(c)  Exceptions and exemptions. This Ordinance shall not apply to: 
(1)  Any land disturbance or construction necessary to provide access to a property, when no other reasonable access is permitted, or any building, land disturbance or construction necessary to provide utility service to a parcel of land; 
(2)  Any land disturbance or construction on a gathering or transmission line by or on behalf of the owner or operator of the gathering or transmission line; 
(3)  Any driveway, street, parking lot, tennis court, volleyball court, play area, recreational area, deck, patio, or any other impervious surfaces. 
(d)  Variance criteria. The reconstruction of any structure existing at the time of this Section's adoption that does not comply with the terms of this Section 10-2185 may be considered for an Administrative Variance in accordance with Article I and special consideration be given for reconstruction on same foot print when safety permits. 
Any other deviation to the requirements of this Section shall be considered as a Primary Variance or Concurrent Variance in accordance with Article I Appeals, and shall comply with Section 10-2184 Variance Considerations. 
(e)  Land disturbance permit requirements. In addition to any other requirements contained herein, all land disturbance permit applications shall provide the following: 
(1)  A survey by a professional engineer or land surveyor licensed in the State of Georgia indicating the location of all gathering or transmission line easements and rights-of way indicating: 
a.  gathering or transmission line plan location and depth; 
b.  gathering or transmission line size; 
c.  the location of all off-site gathering or transmission line easements and rights-of-way within 40 feet of the boundaries of the subject property. 
Sec. 10-4112. - Burying of construction material. 
No person shall bury unused, scrap, waste, excess or discarded construction material without the approval of a use permit for an inert waste landfill in accordance with Article D. Any person who violates this provision shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to the provisions of Article F, Violation and Penalty. 
Sec. 10-4113. - Wastewater pump and lift stations. 
A minimum 50-foot buffer and ten-foot improvement setback shall be provided along all property lines adjacent to residentially and/or agriculturally zoned properties used for residential or public recreational purposes. 
Chapter 5 - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 005-13, adopted March 18, 2013, amended and restated former Ch. 5, Arts. A—E, in its entirety which pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 003-09, Exh. A, adopted March 2, 2009. 

ARTICLE A. - GENERAL 

Sec. 10-5001. - Findings. 
It is hereby determined that: 
(1)  The flood hazard areas of the City of East Point are subject to periodic inundation that may result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(2)  A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity of flood waters, debris or erosion potential. Floodways must remain free of encroachment to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. 
(3)  Flood hazard areas can serve important stormwater management, water quality, streambank protection, stream corridor protection, wetland preservation and ecological purposes when permanently protected as undisturbed or minimally disturbed areas. 
(4)  Effective floodplain management and flood hazard protection activities can: (1) protect human life and health; (2) minimize damage to private property; (3) minimize damage to public facilities and infrastructure such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; and (4) minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public. 
(5)  Article IX, Section II of the Constitution of the State of Georgia and Section 36-1-20(a) of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated have delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the City of East Point, Georgia, does ordain this chapter and establishes this set of floodplain management and flood hazard reduction policies for the purpose of regulating the use of flood hazard areas. It is determined that the regulation of flood hazard areas and the prevention of flood damage are in the public interest and will minimize threats to public health and safety, as well as to private and public property. 
(Ord. No. 005-13, 3-18-13) 
Sec. 10-5002. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this chapter is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety, environment and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in flood hazard areas, as well as to protect the beneficial uses of floodplain areas for water quality protection, streambank and stream corridor protection, wetlands preservation and ecological and environmental protection by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to flooding or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
(3)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; 
(4)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; 
(5)  Limit the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers involved in the accommodation of flood waters; and 
(6)  Protect the stormwater management, water quality, streambank protection, stream corridor protection, wetland preservation and ecological functions of natural floodplain areas. 
(Ord. No. 005-13, 3-18-13) 
Sec. 10-5003. - Applicability. 
This article shall be applicable to all areas of special flood hazard within the City of East Point. 
(Ord. No. 005-13, 3-18-13) 
Sec. 10-5004. - Designation of chapter administrator. 
The City of East Point Public Works Department is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 005-13, 3-18-13) 
Sec. 10-5005. - Basis for area of special flood hazard—Flood area maps and studies. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following are adopted by reference: 
(1)  The existing Flood Insurance Study (FIS), dated May 7, 2001, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto are hereby adopted by reference. 
(2)  Other studies which may be relied upon for the establishment of the base flood elevation or delineation of the 100-year floodplain and flood-prone areas include: 
a.  Any flood or flood-related study conducted by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the United States Geological Survey or any other local, State or Federal agency applicable to the City of East Point; or 
b.  Any base flood study authored by a registered Professional Engineer in the State of Georgia which has been prepared by FEMA approved methodology and approved by the City. 
(3)  Other studies which may be relied upon for the establishment of the future-conditions base flood elevation or delineation of the future-conditions base floodplain and flood-prone areas include: 
a.  Any flood or flood-related study conducted by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the United States Geological Survey, or any other local, State or Federal agency applicable to the City of East Point; or 
b.  Any future-conditions base flood study authored by a registered professional engineer in the State of Georgia which has been prepared by FEMA approved methodology approved by the City of East Point. 
(4)  The repository for public inspection of the FIS, accompanying maps and other supporting data are located at the City of East Point Public Works Department. 
(Ord. No. 005-13, 3-18-13) 
Sec. 10-5006. - Compatibility with other regulations. 
The requirements of this chapter are in addition to the requirements of any other resolution, ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, and where any provision of this chapter imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other resolution, ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
(Ord. No. 005-13, 3-18-13) 
Sec. 10-5007. - Severability. 
If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this chapter shall be adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 005-13, 3-18-13) 
Sec. 10-5008. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the Areas of Special Flood Hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the City of East Point or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made there under. 
(Ord. No. 005-13, 3-18-13) 
Sec. 10-5009. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the following meanings, except where the context indicates a different meaning is intended: 
Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a fire wall. Any walled and roofed addition which is connected by a fire wall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall shall be considered new construction. 
Appeal means a request for a review of the City of East Point Director of the Public Works Department interpretation of any provision of this chapter. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH Zone on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of special flood hazard is the land subject to a one percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in any given year. This includes all floodplain and flood prone areas at or below the base flood elevation (including A, AE, AO, AH, AR, and A99 on the FIRM), all floodplain and flood prone areas at or below the future-conditions base flood elevation, and all other flood prone areas as referenced in section 10-5005. This also includes any areas designated as one percent annual chance floodplain by FEMA on the community's FIRM or any additional areas identified as special flood hazard areas by the City of East Point. All streams or portions of a stream with a drainage area of 100 acres or greater shall have the area of special flood hazard delineated. 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, also known as the 100-hundred year. 
Base flood elevation means the highest water surface elevation anticipated at any given point during the base flood. 
Basement means that portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Building means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. 
Critical facilities mean any property that if flooded, would result in severe consequences to public health and safety. This includes, but is not limited to, hospitals, nursing homes, orphanages, schools, places of public assembly, and housing likely to contain occupants who may not be sufficiently mobile to avoid death or injury during a flood; governmental buildings, police stations, fire stations, penal institutions, emergency aviation facilities, vehicle, transportation and equipment storage and maintenance facilities, communication centers, and emergency operations centers that are needed for flood response activities before, during and after a flood; public and private utility facilities that are vital to maintaining or restoring normal services to flooded areas before, during and after a flood, including, but not limited to, water and sewer pumping and/or treatment facilities; and structures or facilities that produce, use or store highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic and/or water-reactive materials. 
Development means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, clearing, grubbing, grading, paving, any other installation of impervious cover, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
Elevated building means a non-basement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
Existing construction means any structure for which the "start of construction" commenced before June 30, 1988. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before June 30, 1988. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
Erosion-producing velocities means the velocity of flowing water which has the potential to erode channel banks, culvert headwalls, roadway embankments, or other areas within the channel and floodplain, based on accepted engineering standards for various soil coverings and stabilization measures. 
FEMA means the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
Five-hundred year flood means the flood having a 0.2 percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, also known as the 0.2 percent annual chance flood. 
Five-hundred year flood elevation means the highest water surface elevation anticipated at any given point during the 500-year flood. 
Five-hundred year floodplain means the land subject to a 0.2 percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. This includes all floodplain and flood prone areas at or below the 500-year flood elevation (including Shaded Zone X on the FIRM). The 500-year floodplain automatically includes all areas of special flood hazard as defined in this section. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood insurance rate map or FIRM means an official map of a community, issued by FEMA, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study or FIS means the official report by FEMA evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
Floodproofing means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures that reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway or regulatory floodway means the channel of a stream or other watercourse and the adjacent areas of the floodplain that must be reserved to contain and discharge the base flood flow without cumulatively increasing the base flood elevation more than one foot. 
Functionally dependent use means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. 
Future-conditions base flood means the flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year based on future-conditions hydrology. Also known as the 100-year future-conditions flood. 
Future-conditions base flood elevation means the flood standard equal to or higher than the base flood elevation. The future-conditions base flood elevation is defined as the highest water surface anticipated at any given point during the future-conditions base flood. 
Future-conditions base floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding by the future-conditions base flood. 
Future-conditions hydrology means the flood discharges associated with projected land-use conditions based on a community's zoning map, comprehensive land-use plans, and/or watershed study projections, and without consideration of projected future construction of flood detention structures or projected future hydraulic modifications within a stream or other waterway, such as bridge and culvert construction, fill, and excavation. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed foundation of a building. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Lowest adjacent grade means the lowest elevation of the ground surface, after construction, adjacent to the foundation of a proposed or existing building. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement or attached garage. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this chapter. 
Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term includes any structure commonly referred to as a "mobile home" regardless of the date of manufacture. The term also includes parked trailers, travel trailers and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide, and was used as a reference datum for establishing various elevations within the United States. The term was renamed the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 (NGVD29) and is no longer commonly used by the National Geodetic Survey. 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 (NGVD29) is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations, including those within the floodplain. 
New construction means any structure (see definition) for which the "start of construction" commenced after June 30, 1988. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after June 30, 1988. 
North American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD88) is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations, including those within the floodplain. For the purposes of this chapter, NAVD88 shall be the standard vertical datum. 
Owner means the legal or beneficial owner of a site, including but not limited to, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of the site. 
Permit means the permit issued by the City of East Point to the applicant, which is required prior to undertaking any development activity. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by light duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Registered architect, for the purpose of this section, means an Architect who is licensed to practice architecture in the State of Georgia. 
Registered land surveyor, for the purpose of this section, means a Land Surveyor who is licensed to practice land surveying in the State of Georgia. 
Registered professional engineer, for the purpose of this section, means a Professional Engineer who is licensed to practice engineering in the State of Georgia. 
Site means the parcel of land being developed, or the portion thereof on which the development project is located. 
Special flood hazard area (SFHA) —see "area of special flood hazard." 
Start of construction means the date the permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. (NOTE: accessory structures are not exempt from any ordinance requirements). For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank. 
Subdivision means the division of a tract or parcel of land resulting in one or more new lots or building sites for the purpose, whether immediately or in the future, of sale, other transfer of ownership or land development, and includes divisions of land resulting from or made in connection with the layout or development of a new street or roadway or a change in an existing street or roadway. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. For this purpose, the market value does not include the cost of the land on which the structure resides. 
Substantial improvement means any combination of repairs, reconstruction, alteration, or improvements to a building, taking place during a ten-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure prior to the improvement. The market value of the building means (1) the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement; or (2) in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. This term includes structures that have incurred "substantial damage" regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term does not, however, include those improvements of a building required to comply with existing health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions, which have been pre-identified by the Code Enforcement Official, and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project. 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Variance means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this chapter. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without a completed FEMA Elevation Certificate, other certificates, or other evidence of compliance required in this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Ord. No. 005-13, 3-18-13) 
Secs. 10-5010—10-5020. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE B. - PERMIT PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 10-5021. - Permit application requirements. 
(1)  No owner or developer shall perform any development activities on a site where an area of special flood hazard is located without first meeting the requirements of this chapter and obtaining a floodplain development permit prior to commencing the proposed activity. 
(2)  Unless specifically excluded by this chapter, any landowner or developer desiring a permit for a development activity shall submit to the City of East Point Public Works Department a permit application on a form provided by the Public Works Department for that purpose. 
(3)  No permit will be approved for any development activities that do not meet the requirements, restrictions and criteria of this chapter. 
(4)  To obtain a floodplain development permit, the applicant shall first file an application in writing on a form furnished for that purpose. Every floodplain development permit application shall: 
(a)  Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done by lot, block and tract, house and street address, or similar description that will readily identify and specifically locate the proposed structure or work; 
(b)  Identify and describe the work to be covered by the floodplain development permit; 
(c)  Indicate the use or occupancy for which the proposed work is intended; 
(d)  Indicate the assessed value of the structure and the fair market value of the improvement; 
(e)  Specify whether development is located in designated area of special flood hazard and/or floodway; 
(f)  Identify the base flood elevation and the revised base flood elevation, which reflects the proposed development; 
(g)  Identify the future-conditions base flood elevation and the revised future-conditions base flood elevation, which reflects the proposed development; 
(h)  Give such other information as reasonably may be required by the Public Works Department; 
(i)  Be accompanied by plans and specifications for proposed construction; and 
(j)  Be signed by the permittee or his authorized agent who may be required to submit evidence to indicate such authority. 
(Ord. No. 005-13, 3-18-13) 
Sec. 10-5022. - Floodplain management plan requirements. 
(1)  An application for a development project with any area of special flood hazard located on the site will be required to include a floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan. This plan shall include the following items: 
(a)  Site plan drawn to scale, which includes but is not limited to: 
(i)  Existing and proposed ground elevations of the area in question and the nature, location and dimensions of existing and/or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, amount and location of excavation material, and storage of materials or equipment; 
(ii)  For all proposed structures, spot ground elevations at building corners and 20-foot or smaller intervals along the foundation footprint, or one-foot contour elevations throughout the building site; 
(iii)  Proposed locations of water supply, sanitary sewer, and utilities; 
(iv)  Proposed locations of drainage and stormwater management facilities; 
(v)  Proposed grading plan; 
(vi)  Base flood elevations and future-conditions base flood elevations; 
(vii)  Boundaries of the base flood floodplain and future-conditions base floodplain; 
(viii)  If applicable, the location of the floodway; and 
(ix)  Certification of the above by a registered professional engineer or surveyor. 
(b)  Building and foundation design detail, including but not limited to: 
(i)  Elevation in relation to NAVD88 of the lowest floor, including basement, lowest adjacent grade, and highest adjacent grade, of all proposed structures; 
(ii)  Elevation in relation to NAVD88 to which any non-residential structure will be flood proofed; 
(iii)  Certification that any proposed non-residential flood proofed structure meets the criteria in subsection 10-5042(2); 
(iv)  Certification that there will be no enclosures below the base flood elevation, as required in subsection 10-5041(5); 
(v)  Design plans certified by a registered Professional Engineer or Architect for all proposed structure(s). 
(c)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development; 
(d)  Hard copies and electronic files of computer models, if any, copies of work maps, comparison of pre-and post development conditions base flood elevations, future-conditions base flood elevations, flood protection elevations, special flood hazard areas and regulatory floodway widths, flood profiles and all other computations and other information similar to that presented in the FIS; 
(e)  Copies of all applicable State and Federal permits necessary for proposed development; and 
(f)  All appropriate certifications required under this chapter. 
(2)  The approved floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan shall contain certification by the applicant that all development activities will be done according to the plan or previously approved revisions. Any and all development permits and/or use and occupancy certificates or permits may be revoked at any time if the construction and development activities are not in strict accordance with approved plans. 
(Ord. No. 005-13, 3-18-13) 
Sec. 10-5023. - Construction stage submittal requirements. 
(1)  For all new construction and substantial improvements on sites with a floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan, the permit holder shall provide to the City of East Point Public Works Department a certified, accurately completed as-built FEMA Elevation Certificate including the lowest floor elevation immediately after the lowest floor is constructed. An updated final Elevation Certificate shall be provided after completion of construction including final grading of the site. Lowest floor certification shall be made relative to NAVD88, prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or Professional Engineer, and certified by same. 
(2)  For all new construction and substantial improvements involving flood proofing on sites with a floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan, the permit holder shall provide to the City of East Point Public Works Department a certified accurately completed as-built FEMA Floodproofing Certificate for Non-Residential Structures, including the flood-proofing level relative to NAVD88, immediately after the flood-proofing is completed. When flood-proofing is utilized for non-residential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a Professional Engineer or Architect and certified by same. 
(3)  Any work undertaken prior to approval of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. The City of East Point Public Works Department shall review the above referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make the corrections required hereby shall be cause to issue a stop work order for the project. 
(Ord. No. 005-13, 3-18-13) 
Sec. 10-5024. - Duties and responsibilities of the administrator. 
The director of the public works department is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter. 
Duties of the Public Works Department shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)  Review all development applications, plans and permits to assure that the requirements of this chapter have been satisfied and to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
(2)  Require that copies of all necessary permits from governmental agencies from which approval is required by Federal or State law, including but not limited to Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. § 1334, be provided and maintained on file; 
(3)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided, then the Public Works Department shall require the applicant to obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from Federal, state or other sources in order to meet the provisions of Articles C and D; 
(4)  Review and record the actual elevation in relation to NAVD88 of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures; 
(5)  Review and record the actual elevation in relation to NAVD88 to which any substantially improved structures have been flood-proofed; 
(6)  When flood-proofing is utilized for a non-residential structure, the Public Works Department shall obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect; 
(7)  Notify affected adjacent communities and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA); 
(8)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (e.g., where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the Public Works Department make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this chapter. Where floodplain elevations have been defined, the floodplain shall be determined based on flood elevations rather than the area graphically delineated on the floodplain maps. However, if a base floodplain is delineated on the FEMA FIRMs, these boundaries are the minimum limit of the floodplain and must be adhered to. No interpretation that is less conservative may be used, unless officially approved in writing by FEMA; and 
(9)  All records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter shall be maintained in the Public Works Department offices and shall be open for public inspection. 
Secs. 10-5025—10-5030. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE C. - STANDARDS FOR DEVELOPMENT 

Sec. 10-5031. - Definition of floodplain boundaries. 
(1)  Studied "A" zones, as identified in the FIS, shall be used to establish base flood elevations whenever available. 
(2)  For all streams with a drainage area of 100 acres or greater, the future-conditions base flood elevations shall be provided by the Public Works Department. If future-conditions base flood elevation data are not available from the Public Works Department, then it shall be determined by a registered Professional Engineer using a method approved by FEMA and the Public Works Department. 
(Ord. No. 005-13, 3-18-13) 
Sec. 10-5032. - Definition of floodway boundaries. 
The width of a floodway shall be determined from the FIS or FEMA approved flood study. For all streams with a drainage area of one hundred (100) acres or greater, the regulatory floodway shall be provided by the Public Works Department. If floodway data are not available from the Public Works Department, then it shall be determined by a registered Professional Engineer using a method approved by FEMA and the Public Works Department. 
(Ord. No. 005-13, 3-18-13) 
Sec. 10-5033. - General standards. 
(1)  No development shall be allowed within the future-conditions base floodplain that could result in any of the following: 
(a)  Any increase in the base flood elevation or future-conditions base flood elevation. An increase is defined as equal to or more than 0.01 foot. This includes increases within the development area; 
(b)  Reducing the base flood or future-conditions base flood storage capacity; 
(c)  Changing the flow characteristics as to the depth and velocity of the waters of the base flood or future-conditions base flood as they pass both the upstream and the downstream boundaries of the development area; or 
(d)  Creating hazardous or erosion-producing velocities, or resulting in excessive sedimentation. 
(2)  Any development within the future-conditions base floodplain allowed under subsection 10-5033(1) above shall also meet the following conditions: 
(a)  Compensation for storage capacity shall occur between the average ground water table elevation and the base flood elevation for the base flood, and between the average ground water table elevation and the future-condition base flood elevation for the future-conditions base flood, and lie within the boundaries of ownership of the property being developed and shall be within the immediate vicinity of the location of the encroachment. Acceptable means of providing required compensation include lowering of natural ground elevations within the floodplain, or lowering of adjoining land areas to create additional floodplain storage. In no case shall any required compensation be provided via bottom storage or by excavating below the elevation of the top of the natural (pre-development) stream channel unless such excavation results from the widening or relocation of the stream channel; 
(b)  Cut areas shall be stabilized and graded to a slope of no less than two percent; 
(c)  Effective transitions shall be provided such that flow velocities occurring on both upstream and downstream properties are not increased or decreased; 
(d)  Verification of no-rise conditions (less than 0.01 foot), flood storage volumes, and flow characteristics shall be provided via a hydraulic analysis meeting the requirements of section 10-5034; 
(e)  Public utilities and facilities, such as water, sanitary sewer, gas, and electrical systems, shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration or contamination from flood waters; and 
(f)  Any significant physical changes to the base flood floodplain shall be submitted as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR), a conditional letter of map revision based on fill (CLOMR-F) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. The CLOMR or CLOMR-F submittals shall be subject to approval by the Public Works Department using the community consent forms before forwarding the submittal package to FEMA for final approval. The responsibility for forwarding the CLOMR or CLOMR-F to FEMA and for obtaining the CLOMR or CLOMR-F approval shall be the responsibility of the applicant. Within six months of the completion of construction, the applicant shall submit as-built surveys for a final letter of map revision (LOMR) or letter of map revision based on fill (LOMR-F). 
(3)  No new critical facilities shall be constructed within the 500-year floodplain. 
(Ord. No. 005-13, 3-18-13) 
Sec. 10-5034. - Engineering study requirements for floodplain encroachments. 
An engineering study is required, as appropriate to the proposed development activities on the site, whenever a development proposes to disturb any land within the future-conditions base floodplain, except for a residential single-lot development on streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodways for which the provisions of section 10-5034 apply. This study shall be prepared by a currently registered professional engineer in the State of Georgia and made a part of the application for a permit. This information shall be submitted to and approved by the Public Works Department prior to the approval of any permit which would authorize the disturbance of land located within the future-conditions base floodplain. Such study shall include: 
(1)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse or floodplain will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development; 
(2)  Hydraulic analysis and, if appropriate, hydrologic analysis, using a FEMA-approved methodology approved by the Public Works Department. Cross-sections (which may be supplemented by the applicant) and flow information will be obtained whenever available. Two sets of computations are required. The first set provides computations that duplicate the currently accepted base flood elevations and future-conditions base flood elevations, without considering the proposed development. The second set provides the computations of the new base flood elevations and future-conditions base flood elevations with the proposed modifications or development; 
(3)  Floodplain storage calculations based on cross-sections (at least one every 100 feet) showing existing and proposed floodplain conditions to show that base flood floodplain and future-conditions base floodplain storage capacity would not be diminished by the development; 
(4)  The study shall include a preliminary plat, grading plan, or site plan, as appropriate, which shall clearly define all future-conditions base floodplain encroachments. 
(Ord. No. 005-13, 3-18-13) 
Sec. 10-5035. - Floodway encroachments. 
The following provisions shall apply to any encroachments located within areas of special flood hazard designated as floodways: 
(1)  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway, except for activities specifically allowed in (2) below; 
(2)  Encroachments for bridges, culverts, roadways and utilities within the regulatory floodway may be permitted provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase to the pre-project base flood elevations or pre-project future-conditions base flood elevations. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof; and 
(3)  If the applicant proposes to revise the floodway boundaries, no permit authorizing the encroachment into or an alteration of the floodway shall be issued by the Public Works Department until an affirmative conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) is issued by FEMA and no-rise certification is approved by the Public Works Department. 
(Ord. No. 005-13, 3-18-13) 
Sec. 10-5036. - Maintenance requirements. 
The property owner shall be responsible for continuing maintenance as may be needed within an altered or relocated portion of a floodplain on his property so that the flood-carrying or flood storage capacity is not diminished. The Public Works Department may direct the property owner (at no cost to the city) to restore the flood-carrying or flood storage capacity of the floodplain if the owner has not performed maintenance as required by the approved floodplain management plan on file with the Public Works Department. The maintenance activities within the altered or relocated portion of the floodplain identified in the floodplain management plan shall adhere to the standard activities specified in the City of East Point Land Development and Engineering Standards Manual. 
(Ord. No. 005-13, 3-18-13) 
Secs. 10-5037—10-5040. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE D. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD DAMAGE REDUCTION 

Sec. 10-5041. - General standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions apply: 
(1)  New construction of principal buildings (residential or non-residential), including manufactured homes, shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions base floodplain, unless all requirements of sections 10-5033, 10-5034 and 10-5035 have been met; 
(2)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures, including manufactured homes, shall be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy; 
(3)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures, including manufactured homes, shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(4)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures, including manufactured homes, shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(5)  Elevated Buildings. For all new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures, fully enclosed areas located below the lowest floor (i.e., parking, unimproved storage areas, building access) that are subject to flooding are prohibited. 
(6)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions base flood elevation, whichever is higher, so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(7)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable State requirements for resisting wind forces; 
(8)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system; 
(9)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters; 
(10)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them, or contamination from them, during flooding; and 
(11)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure which is not compliant with the provisions of this chapter shall be undertaken only if the non-conformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. 
(12)  If the proposed development is located in multiple flood zones or multiple base flood elevations cross the proposed site, the higher or more restrictive base flood elevation or future condition base elevation and development standards shall take precedence. 
(13)  All new construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall have a final FEMA Elevation Certificate provided to the City, in compliance with section 10-5023(1), certified by a Professional Engineer or Land Surveyor, prior to a Certificate of Occupancy being issued. In addition, all new construction or substantial improvements to existing structures for which flood-proofing was conducted in lieu of elevation, shall also have a final FEMA flood-proofing certificate for non-residential Structures provided to the City, in compliance with section 10-5023(1), certified by a Professional Engineer or Architect, prior to a Certificate of Occupancy being issued. 
(Ord. No. 005-13, 3-18-13) 
Sec. 10-5042. - Building standards for structures and buildings within the future-conditions base floodplain. 
The following provisions, in addition to those in section 10-5041, shall apply: 
(1)  Residential buildings. 
a.  New construction. New construction of principal buildings, including manufactured homes, shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions base floodplain unless all requirements of sections 10-5033, 10-5034 and 10-5035 have been met. If all of the requirements of sections 10-5033, 10-5034 and 10-5035 have been met, all new construction shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions base flood elevation, whichever is higher. 
b.  Substantial improvements. Substantial improvement of any principal structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions base flood elevation, whichever is higher. 
(2)  Non-residential buildings. 
a.  New construction. New construction of principal buildings, including manufactured homes, shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions base floodplain unless all requirements of sections 10-5033, 10-5034 and 10-5035 have been met. New construction that has met all of the requirements of sections 10-5033, 10-5034 and 10-5035 may be flood-proofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be elevated to or be designed to be watertight to three feet above the base flood elevation, or one foot above the future-conditions base flood elevation, whichever is higher. If flood-proofed, the walls must be substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the Public Works Department. Certification of flood-proofed buildings must include completion of the latest version of FEMA's Floodproofing Certification for Non-Residential Structures, FEMA Form 81-65. 
b.  Substantial improvements. Substantial improvement of any principal nonresidential structure located in the limits of the future-conditions base floodplain may be authorized by the Public Works Department to be flood-proofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be elevated to or be designed to be watertight to three (3) feet above the base flood elevation, or one (1) foot above the future-conditions base flood elevation, whichever is higher, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered Professional Engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the Public Works Department. Certification of flood-proofed buildings must include completion of the latest version of FEMA's Floodproofing Certification for Non-Residential Structures, FEMA Form 81-65. 
(3)  Accessory structures and facilities. Accessory structures and facilities (i.e., barns, sheds, gazebos, detached garages, parking lots, recreational facilities and other similar non-habitable structures and facilities) which are permitted to be located within the limits of the floodplain shall be constructed of flood-resistant materials and be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure. In accordance with subsection 10-5041(5), these accessory structures and facilities shall have no enclosures below the lowest floor, and furthermore shall have no vertical walls which extend lower than three (3) feet above the base flood elevation, or one (1) foot above the future-conditions base flood elevation, whichever is higher. 
(4)  Standards for recreational vehicles. All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
a.  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days and be fully licensed and ready for highway use, (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or 
b.  The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for residential buildings—substantial improvements (subsection 10-5042(1)b.), including the anchoring and elevation requirements. 
(5)  Standards for manufactured homes. 
a.  New manufactured homes shall not be allowed to be placed within the limits of the future-conditions base floodplain unless all requirements of sections 10-5033, 10-5034, and 10-5035 have been met. 
b.  Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision shall be elevated so that either: 
(i)  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than three (3) feet above the level of the base flood elevation, or one foot above the future-conditions base flood elevation, whichever is higher; or 
(ii)  The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
c.  Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision, in a new manufactured home park or subdivision, in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, or in an existing home park or subdivision in which a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as the result of a flood, shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. This permanent foundation shall include no enclosures below the lowest floor per subsection 10-5041(5). 
d.  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement in accordance with standards of subsection 10-5041(7). 
(6)  Standards for critical facilities. 
a.  All substantially improved critical facilities shall be elevated above the 500-year flood elevation, or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be flood proofed so that below the 500-year flood elevation the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy. 
b.  A registered professional engineer or Architect shall certify that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the Public Works Department as set forth in section 10-5024. 
(i)  All critical facilities shall have access routes that are above the elevation of the 500-year flood. 
(ii)  No critical facilities shall be constructed in any designated floodway. 
(7)  Cumulative improvement. 
a.  A structure may be improved or modified without conforming to current requirements for elevation so long as the cumulative value of all work done within the last ten calendar years does not exceed 50 percent of the structure's current market value. 
b.  Any addition to an existing building must be protected from damage during the base flood, either by elevating the lowest floor to three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions base flood elevation, whichever is higher. For non-residential structures, the addition may instead be flood-proofed to three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions base flood elevation, whichever is higher. 
c.  If the cumulative value of the improvements exceeds 50 percent of the structure's current market value, the structure must be brought into compliance with subsection 10-5042(1) and (2). 
(Ord. No. 005-13, 3-18-13) 
Sec. 10-5043. - Building standards for structures and buildings authorized adjacent to the future-conditions base floodplain. 
(1)  Residential buildings. For new construction or substantial improvement of any principal residential building or manufactured home, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement and access to the building, shall be at least three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions base flood elevation for the adjacent floodplain, whichever is higher. 
(2)  Non-residential buildings. For new construction or substantial improvement of any principal non-residential building, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement and access to the building, shall be three (3) feet above the base flood elevation or one (1) foot above the future-conditions base flood elevation, whichever is higher. 
(3)  Critical facilities. For new or substantial improvement of any critical facilities, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement and access to the building, shall be elevated above the 500-year flood elevation, three (3) feet above the base flood elevation, or one foot above the future-conditions base flood elevation, whichever is higher. 
(Ord. No. 005-13, 3-18-13) 
Sec. 10-5044. - Building standards for residential single-lot developments on streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodway (A zones). 
(1)  For a residential single-lot development not part of a subdivision that has areas of special flood hazard, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A zones), the Public Works Department shall review and reasonably utilize any available scientific or historic flood elevation data, base flood elevation and floodway data, or future-conditions base flood elevation data available from a Federal, State, local or other source, in order to administer the provisions and standards of this chapter. 
(2)  If data are not available from any of these sources, the following provisions shall apply: 
(a)  No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within a distance from the top of that bank of the stream equal to twice the width of the stream or 50 feet, whichever is greater. 
(b)  In special flood hazard areas without base flood or future-conditions base flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. No enclosures shall be allowed below the lowest floor in accordance with subsection 10-5041(5). 
(Ord. No. 005-13, 3-18-13) 
Sec. 10-5045. - Building standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO zones). 
Areas of special flood hazard may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one (1) to three (3) feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. In these areas the following provisions apply: 
(1)  All substantial improvements of residential and non-residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to no lower than the flood depth number (in feet) specified on the FIRM plus three feet, above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least five feet above the highest adjacent grade. No enclosures shall be allowed below the lowest floor in accordance with standards of subsection 10-5041(5). 
(2)  Substantial improvement of a non-residential structure may be flood-proofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to no lower than three feet higher than the flood depth number (in feet) specified on the FIRM above the highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. If no flood depth is specified, the structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to at least five feet above the highest adjacent grade. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice. Certification of flood-proofed buildings must include completion of the latest version of FEMA's Flood-proofing Certification for Non-Residential Structures, FEMA Form 81-65; and 
(3)  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(Ord. No. 005-13, 3-18-13) 
Sec. 10-5046. - Standards for subdivisions. 
(1)  All subdivision proposals shall identify the special flood hazard area and provide base flood elevation data and future-conditions base flood elevation data. If no base flood elevation or future-conditions base flood elevation data exist for flooding sources within proximity, new analysis shall be provided in accordance with subsection 10-5034(2) as applicable; 
(2)  All residential lots in a subdivision proposal shall have sufficient buildable area outside of the future-conditions base floodplain such that encroachments into the future-conditions base floodplain for residential structures will not be required; 
(3)  All subdivision plans will provide the elevations of proposed structures in accordance with section 10-5022; 
(4)  All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
(5)  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as water, sanitary sewer, gas, electrical systems, ventilation, heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork) located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters, and discharges from the systems into flood waters; and 
(6)  All subdivision proposals shall include adequate drainage and stormwater management facilities per the requirements of the City to reduce potential exposure to flood hazards. 
(Ord. No. 005-13, 3-18-13) 
Secs. 10-5047—10-5050. - Reserved. 
Sec. 10-5051. - Nonconforming use. 
(1)  General policy: A structure or the use of a structure or premises which was lawful before the passage or amendment of the original version of these floodplain provisions but which is not in conformity with the provisions of this chapter may be continued subject to the following conditions: 
(a)  No such use or substantial improvement of that use shall be expanded, changed, enlarged or altered in a way which increases its nonconformity. 
(b)  If such use is discontinued for six consecutive months, any future use of the building premises shall conform to the substantive requirements of this chapter. Uses or adjuncts thereof which are or become nuisances shall not be entitled to continue as nonconforming uses. 
(c)  If any nonconforming use or structure is destroyed by any means, including flood, it shall not be reconstructed if the cost is 50 percent or more of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred; except, that if it is reconstructed in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. This limitation does not include the cost of any alteration to comply with existing State or local health, sanitary, building or safety codes or regulations or the cost of any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a state inventory of historic places. 
(Ord. No. 005-13, 3-18-13) 
ARTICLE E. - VARIANCE PROCEDURES 

Sec. 10-5052. - Variances. 
The following variance and appeals procedures shall apply to an applicant who has been denied a permit for a development activity, or to an owner or developer who has not applied for a permit because it is clear that the proposed development activity would be inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter. A request for a variance may be submitted by an applicant who has been denied a permit by the Public Works Department or by an owner or developer who has not previously applied for a permit for the reasons stated herein above. 
(1)  Requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter shall be submitted to the Public Works Department. All such requests shall be heard and decided in accordance with procedures to be published in writing by the Public Works Department. At a minimum, such procedures shall include notice to all affected parties and the opportunity to be heard. 
(2)  Any person adversely affected by any decision of the Public Works Department shall have the right to appeal such decision to the Mayor and City Council or their designee as established by the City in accordance with procedures to be published in writing by the Mayor and City Council or their designee. At a minimum, such procedures shall include notice to all affected parties and the opportunity to be heard. 
(3)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Mayor and City Council or their designee may appeal such decision to the Superior Court of Fulton County, as provided in Section 5-4-1 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
(4)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic structure, and the variance issued shall be the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(5)  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this section are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and future-conditions base flood, and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(6)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(7)  In reviewing such requests, the Public Works Department and the Mayor and City Council or their designee shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this chapter. 
(8)  Conditions for variances: 
a.  A variance shall be issued only when there is: 
(i)  A finding of good and sufficient cause; 
(ii)  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
(iii)  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, or the creation of a nuisance. 
b.  The provisions of this chapter are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore, any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of a historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
c.  Any person to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. In addition, the notice will specify the future-conditions base flood elevation, indicating the potential for an even higher cost of flood insurance in the future. 
d.  The Public Works Department shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(9)  Any person requesting a variance shall, from the time of the request until the time the request is acted upon, submit such information and documentation as the Public Works Department and the Mayor and City Council or their designee shall deem necessary to the consideration of the request. 
(10)  Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this chapter, the Public Works Department and the Mayor and City Council or their designee may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as they deem necessary or appropriate, consistent with the purposes of this chapter. 
(11)  Variances shall not be issued "after the fact." 
(Ord. No. 005-13, 3-18-13) 
Secs. 10-5053—10-5060. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE F. - ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 10-5061. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this chapter or the requirements of an approved plan or permit, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this article. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
(Ord. No. 005-13, 3-18-13) 
Sec. 10-5062. - Notice of violation. 
(1)  If the Public Works Department determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved plan or the provisions of this chapter, it shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this chapter without having first secured a permit therefore, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. 
(2)  The notice of violation shall contain: 
a.  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
b.  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
c.  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
d.  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the stormwater management plan or this chapter and the date for the completion of such remedial action; and 
e.  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed. 
(Ord. No. 005-13, 3-18-13) 
Sec. 10-5063. - Penalties. 
In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the Public Works Department shall notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten days (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the Public Works Department may take any one or more of the following actions or impose any one or more of the following penalties. 
(1)  Stop work order. The Public Works Department may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
(2)  Withhold certificate of occupancy. The Public Works Department may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
(3)  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The Public Works Department may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the Public Works Department may deem necessary) to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
(4)  Civil penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days, or such greater period as the Public Works Department shall deem appropriate (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours notice shall be sufficient), the Public Works Department may impose a penalty not to exceed one $1,000.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(5)  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this chapter, the Public Works Department may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in municipal court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 60 days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 005-13, 3-18-13) 
Sec. 10-5064. - Administrative appeal. 
Any person aggrieved by a decision or determination of the Public Works Department shall appeal in writing within 30 days after the issuance of such decision or determination to the Mayor and City Council or their designee and shall be entitled to a hearing within forty-five (45) days of receipt of the written appeal. 
(Ord. No. 005-13, 3-18-13) 
Sec. 10-5065. - Judicial review. 
Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of the Public Works Department, after exhausting all administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal de novo to the Superior Court of Fulton County. 
(Ord. No. 005-13, 3-18-13) 
Chapter 6 - TREE PROTECTION AND LANDSCAPING 

Sec. 10-6001. - Purpose. 
This Tree Protection and Landscaping Ordinance is developed to benefit the environmental and aesthetic quality of East Point. The intent is to create an opportunity and promote preservation of the city's natural resources and grow in a way that will provide a healthy environment for the city's future. The purpose is to provide standards for the preservation of trees as part of the land development process; to prevent massive grading of land, both developed and undeveloped, without provision for replacement of trees; and to protect trees during construction whenever possible in order to enhance the quality of life within the city. The regulations of this Tree Protection and Landscaping Ordinance shall be definitive, unless otherwise directed by the Zoning Ordinance. The benefits derived from this ordinance include: 
(a)  Provide visual buffering and enhance beautification of the city; 
(b)  Moderation of storm water runoff, and improved water quality; 
(c)  Protect and attempt to enhance property values, thus safeguarding private and public investment; 
(d)  Protect the unique identity of the city by promoting native plants and the use of the city's signature plant palette; 
(e)  Control soil erosion; 
(f)  Reduction of some air pollutants and interception of airborne particulate matter; 
(g)  Preserve stands of trees and "specimen" trees; and 
(h)  Protect natural vegetation except where its removal is necessary for responsible property development or control of disease and infestation. This article shall serve to dissuade the unnecessary clearing of land and its disturbance, so as to preserve, insofar as possible, the natural and existing growth of vegetation, and to replace whenever possible the removed foliage with new vegetation. 
Sec. 10-6002. - Definitions. 
Buffer: 
(a)  State waters buffer: An area along the course of any State waters to be maintained in an undisturbed and natural condition. 
(b)  Vegetative buffer: That portion of a lot set aside with adequate natural and planted vegetation to accomplish visual and sound screening to separate incompatible land uses or street right-of-way from the developed portion of a lot or parcel of land. 
(c)  Zoning buffer: A natural undisturbed portion of a lot, except for approved access and utility crossings, which is set aside to achieve a visual barrier between the use on the lot and adjacent lots and/or uses. Buffer is achieved with natural vegetation and must be replanted subject to the approval of the Director of Planning and Zoning or his/her designated agent(s) when sparsely vegetated. Cleaning of undergrowth from a buffer is prohibited except when accomplished under the supervision of the Director of Planning and Zoning or his/her designated agent(s). 
Canopy tree: A tree that will grow to a mature height of at least 40 feet with a spread of at least 30 feet. 
Certified arborist: Any person who is a Georgia Registered Forester, or at a minimum, certified by the International Society of Arboriculture (ISA) as an arborist and a member in good standing of the ISA. 
Certified arborist report: A typed report that is submitted and signed by a certified arborist, as defined above, and that at minimum clearly states the arborist's name, contact information and qualifications, and identifies the site address and each individual tree to be considered. 
Clearing: An activity which removes or disturbs the vegetative cover including trees. 
Critical root zone: The minimum area surrounding a tree that is considered essential to support the viability of the tree and is equal to a radius of one foot per inch of trunk diameter (DBH) 
Crown dripline: A vertical line extending from the outer surface of a tree branch tips to the ground. 
DBH (diameter-at-breast height): The diameter of a tree's trunk measured at four and one-half feet above the ground. For multi-trunk trees the diameter is measured at the narrowest point beneath the point of attachment of the multiple trunks. 
Damaged tree: A tree which has damage to any of its parts including, the roots, root buttress, trunk, or branches. 
Deciduous tree: Any tree which drops its leaves at the end of a growing season. 
Destroy: Any intentional or negligent act or lack of protection that is more likely than not to cause a tree to die within three growing seasons. Such acts include, not are not limited to: performing grade changes (including lowering or filling the grade) that affect more than 20 percent of the root save area; trenching of roots; cutting, girdling or conflicting other severe mechanical injury to the trunk, roots or other vital sections of the tree; removing in excess of 20 percent of the live crown of the tree; inflicting damage upon the root system of a tree by the application of toxic substances, including solvents, oils, gasoline and diesel fuel; causing damage by the storage of materials; and/or deliberately or negligently burning or setting fire to a tree. In addition, topping, tipping, or any similar improper pruning practices will automatically be deemed as destruction of a tree. 
Destroyed tree: A tree which has damage to any of its parts causing, as determined by a certified arborist, the tree's survival beyond three growing seasons to be unlikely. 
Disease: Any fungal, bacterial, or viral infection that will result in the death of the tree, as determined by a certified arborist. Disease shall also mean any fungal, bacterial or viral infection that has progressed to the point where treatment will not prevent the death of the tree, as determined by a certified arborist. In order for a certified arborist to deem that a tree has a disease, the person requesting such determination must present a report identifying and presenting the etiology (the cause and origin) of the fungal, bacterial or viral infection. 
Dripline area: The total area underneath a tree which encompasses all crown driplines. 
Evergreen: Any tree which retains its foliage throughout the year. 
Fair or better condition: means that the tree has a relatively sound and solid root, trunk, and canopy structure, no major insect infestation or other pathological problem, and a life expectancy greater than 15 years. 
Greenspace: Any area retained as permeable unpaved ground and dedicated on the site plan to supporting vegetation. 
Hazardous tree: A tree where the tree is at risk for failure because it is dead or structurally defective, and where that failure could result in personal injury or property damage. Land disturbance permit: A permit issued to authorize the disturbance of land and vegetation. 
Illegally removed tree: Any tree that is removed or destroyed without a permit. 
Improvement setback: An area adjacent to a zoning buffer in which no improvements and/or structures shall be constructed. No development activity such as tree removal or grinding, land disturbance or grading is permitted without the approval of the Director of the Department of Planning and Zoning. 
Landscape plan: A map and supporting documentation which describes for a particular site where vegetation is to be retained or provided in compliance with the requirements of this chapter. The landscape plan shall include any required buffer elements. 
Landscape strip: An area required by this article or any condition of zoning, use permit or variance approval, which is reserved for the installation and/or maintenance of plant materials. 
Landscaping: Any additions to the natural features of land to restore construction disturbance and make it more attractive, as by adding ground cover, shrubs and trees to the natural environment. 
Landscaping areas: An area set aside for the installation and maintenance of planting materials. 
Minimum setback: The minimum yards as specified in the regulations related to the zoning districts or use permit categories. A minimum required space between a property line and a structure. An area identified by a building line. 
Natural vegetation: A generally undisturbed, maintenance free, self-perpetuating stand of vegetation comprising indigenous shrubs, flowers, wild grasses and trees. 
Natural vegetation area: The areas within the boundaries of a given lot which is devoted to natural vegetation. 
Protected zone: Includes but is not limited to the following: 
(1)  Critical root zone plus an additional three feet; 
(2)  All areas of a parcel required to remain in undisturbed open space; 
(3)  All areas required as landscape strips and/or buffers (including zoning buffers, state water buffers and tributary buffers); 
(4)  Tree save areas according to provisions of the East Point Zoning Code and Development Regulations, conditions of zoning, use permit or variance approval, and/or the Tree Preservation and Landscape Ordinance. 
Protection area: All land which falls outside the buildable area of a lot or parcel of land, all areas of the parcel required to remain open space, the dripline areas beneath a tree or clusters of trees to be retained, and/or all areas required to remain landscape strips or buffers according to the City of East Point zoning ordinance or conditions of zoning approval. 
Roots: 
(1)  Feeder roots mean a complex system of small annual roots growing outward and predominately upward from the system of "transport roots". These roots branch four or more times to form fans or mats of thousands of fine, short, non-woody tips. Many of these small roots and their multiple tips are 0.2 to 1 mm or less in diameter and less than 1 to 2 mm long. These roots constitute the major fraction of a tree's root system surface area and are the primary sites of absorption of water and nutrients. 
(2)  Major woody roots mean first order tree roots originating at the "root collar" and growing horizontally in the soil to a distance of between three and 15 feet from the tree's trunk. These roots branch and decrease in diameter to give rise to "rope roots". The primary functions of major woody roots include anchorage, structural support, the storage of food reserves, and the transport of minerals and nutrients. 
(3)  Rope roots mean an extensive network of woody second order roots arising from major woody roots, occurring within the surface 12 to 18 inches of local soils, and with an average size ranging from .25 to 1 inch in diameter. The primary function of rope roots is the transport of water and nutrients and the storage of food reserves. 
(4)  Transport roots mean the system or framework of tree roots comprised of major woody roots and rope, roots. 
Root collar: The point of attachment of major woody roots to the tree trunk, usually at or near the groundline and associated with a marked swelling of the tree trunk. 
Root respiration: An active process occurring throughout the feeder root system of trees and involving the consumption of oxygen and sugars with the release of energy and carbon dioxide. Root respiration facilities the uptake and transport of minerals and nutrients essential for tree survival. 
Root save area: The area surrounding a tree that is essential to that tree's health and survival. For a free-standing tree with no apparent root restrictions the root save area shall consist of a circle having a radius of one foot for each one inch of diameter breast height of the tree. Adjustments to the root save area may be made if justified by specific documented site conditions. 
Severe mechanical injury: A wound or combination of wounds, measured at its or their widest extent, that expose or destroy the cambium layer of 30 percent or more of the circumference of the tree, measured at the top of the wounded area. 
Severe pruning: The removal of more than one quarter of the tree canopy, the leafy part, at any given time. 
Shrub: A woody plant or bush of relatively low height (two to 12 feet). 
Silvicultural prescription: Any typed site or individual tree prescription developed by a certified arborist, as defined above, that is aimed at preserving a tree. Prescriptions must include without limitation: the private arborist's name, signature, and contact information; the site address and individually identified trees at issue; a harvesting or stand improvement plan, soil and foliar analysis/treatment, fertilizer application, soil amendments, pesticide application with a copy of the pesticide labeling, and pruning. Trimming, topping, tipping or flush cutting of trees will not be accepted as a part of any silviculutral prescription. 
Specimen tree: Any tree in fair or better condition, which qualifies for special consideration for preservation due to size, species, or condition, and which meets the following: 
24″ dbh Large hardwoods such as oaks, hickories, yellow poplars, sweetgums, etc. 
36″ dbh - Large softwoods such as pines, deodar cedars, etc. 
4″ dbh - Small trees such as dogwoods, redbuds, sourwoods, etc.; 
Provided, however, that a lesser-size tree can be considered by a certified arborist to be and designated a specimen tree if it is a rare or unusual species, of exceptional or unique quality, or of historical significance; provided further that a lesser-size tree can be considered by a certified arborist to be and designated a specimen tree if it is specifically used by a builder, developer, or design professional as a focal point in a landscape project. 
Specimen tree stand: Any collective group of specimen trees, as defined by this ordinance, which has been determined to be of high value and which meets one or more of the following: 
(a)  A relatively mature, even aged stand; or 
(b)  A stand with purity of species composition or of a rare or unusual nature or ecological value; or 
(c)  A stand of historical significance; or 
(d)  A stand with exceptional aesthetic quality. 
Spiking: The use of metal spurs of gaffs to climb live trees for any purpose other than tree removal or human rescue. 
Soil erosion and sedimentation control ordinance: The ordinance adopted by the city that regulates soil erosion and its transportation to the City's lakes, rivers and streams. 
State waters: Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of Georgia which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
Structural root plate: The zone of rapid root taper that provides the tree stability against windthrow. The radius of the root plate is proportional to stem diameter (DBH) of a tree. The table below provides examples of root plate radii for upright trees without restricted roots. 

 
Thinning: Selective cutting or removal of timber. The basal units per acre for commercial districts and all other nonsingle-family districts; 20 units per acre for single family residential districts; 15 units per acre for agricultural districts shall be maintained after selective cutting, or removal of timber has occurred. 
Tipping: The cutting of a leader trunk in such manner as to leave a prominent stub extending beyond the node (crotch) of another leader trunk or major branch that may become a leader trunk. 
Topping: Is a very severe form of pruning which involves removing all branches and growths down to a few large branches or to the trunk of the tree. 
Tree: 
(1)  Tree means any self supporting woody perennial plant which has a trunk diameter of two inches or more measured at a point six inches above the ground level and which normally obtains a height of at least ten feet at maturity, usually with one main stem or trunk and many branches. 
(2)  Specimen tree means any tree in fair or better condition, which qualifies for special consideration for preservation due to size, species, or condition, and which meets the following: 
a.  24″ dbh—Large hardwoods such as oaks, hickories, yellow poplars, sweetgums, etc.; 
b.  30″ dbh—Large softwoods such as pines, deodar cedars, etc.; 
c.  4″ dbh—Small trees such as dogwoods, redbuds, sourwoods, etc.; 
Provided, however, that a lesser-size tree can be considered by a certified arborist to be and designated a specimen tree if it is a rare or unusual species, of exceptional or unique quality, or of historical significance; provided further that a lesser-size tree can be considered by a certified arborist to be and designated a specimen tree if it is specifically used by a builder, developer, or design professional as a focal point in a landscape project. 
(3)  Stand of specimen trees means a contiguous grouping of tree which has been determined to be of value by the department of planning and zoning. 
a.  A relatively mature even-aged stand. 
b.  A stand with purity if species composition or of a rare or unusual nature. 
c.  A stand of historical significance. 
d.  A stand with exceptional aesthetic quality. 
Tree bank: A site within the city limits of East Point, where the owner/developer shall donate and plant the required trees when it is not feasible to plant the required trees within their site's project area. 
Tree canopy: The square footage of the aggregate of the canopy of all trees contained on a property. 
Tree removal permit: A permit as required pursuant to this Ordinance issued by the East Point Planning and Zoning Department for the removal of trees. 
Tree replacement plan: A drawing which depicts the location, size and species of existing and replacement trees on the lot for which a permit is sought, and table detailing, by species and DBH, the existing trees to be saved, lost or destroyed, and, by species and caliper, the replacement trees to be planted. 
Tree save area: All areas designated for the purpose of meeting tree density requirements, saving specimen trees, and/or preserving natural buffers. 
Understory tree: Any tree or woody plant which is of lesser height and spread than the surrounding evergreens or deciduous trees but which still provides shade and a degree of protection to the earth and vegetation beneath it. 
(Ord. No. 020-11, § 1, 9-19-11) 
Sec. 10-6003. - Application requirements. 
Applications for permits for tree removal shall be submitted by the landowner or an authorized agent on a form provided for this purpose. Such application shall be submitted to the Planning and Zoning Department along with all required attachments. 
Sec. 10-6004. - Time limit on approval. 
A tree removal permit shall be valid for 12 months. In the event that the permittee has not begun the permitted work within 12 months, the permit shall lapse and a new permit must be obtained before work can begin. Once work is begun under a valid permit the permittee may continue the permitted work until the work is completed. Any permit, including grandfathered projects, will automatically lapse after 12 months of inactivity, unless the developer has obtained an extension from the Director of Planning and Zoning. 
Sec. 10-6005. - Applicability. 
(a)  Exemptions from the City of East Point Tree Protection and Landscaping Ordinance are: 
(1)  All commercial nurseries, botanical gardens, tree farms and grove operations shall be exempt from the provisions of this Ordinance, but only as to those trees which were planted for silvicultural or agricultural purposes or for the sale or intended sale in the ordinary course of business. 
(2)  Removal of trees not meeting the definition of specimen tree (non-specimen) on a developed single family detached lot do not require issuance of a permit. 
(b)  The removal of five or more non-specimen trees from a developed single family detached lot shall require an application and site plan submitted for review and approval by the Department of Planning and Zoning. The site plan shall identify the number and location of non-specimen trees to be removed. A fee will be assessed for the plan review. 
(Ord. No. 014-10, § 1, 9-20-10; Ord. No. 004-014, § 1, 3-3-14 ) 
Sec. 10-6006. - Tree removal permit for developed single-family lot. 
(a)  A permit for specimen tree removal from a single-family detached residential lot shall be issued for trees four DBH or more for which is demonstrated the existence of disease or damage to the owner or to the public. 
(1)  A report shall be submitted from the tree removal company when removing five or less specimen trees. 
(2)  A tree replacement plan and report from an arborist certified by the International Society of Arboriculture is required for the removal of six or more specimen trees. 
(b)  No more than six specimen trees may be removed within a twenty-four-month period without a report from a certified arborist stating that one or more trees are diseased or pose a danger to the health and safety of the owner and/or public safety. A permit is required and may be issued for a single tree or some combination thereof. 
(Ord. No. 014-10, § 1, 9-20-10; Ord. No. 020-11, § 2, 9-19-11; Ord. No. 004-014, § 1, 3-3-14 ) 
Sec. 10-6007. - Tree removal permit for non-single family lots. 
Sections 10-6007 through 10-6022 are applicable to non-single family residentially zoned lots. 
Prior to issuance of a tree removal permit for any site, covered by this Ordinance seven copies of a tree protection plan (TPP) must be submitted to the Planning and Zoning Department. The Department shall review the plan to ascertain compliance with the Tree Protection And Landscaping Ordinance. It is required that a qualified certified arborist prepare the TPP. 
(Ord. No. 020-11, § 3, 9-19-11; Ord. No. 004-14, § 2, 3-3-14 ) 
Sec. 10-6008. - Minimum landscape strips and buffers. 
(a)  Landscape areas shall be provided along all lot lines as specified in Table 1 and Table 2. 
(b)  Improvement setbacks shall be provided along all road frontage as specified in Table 1 and Table 2. 
(1)  Reduction of the improvement setback is prohibited. 
(2)  No grading, land disturbance or tree removal shall be allowed within the improvement setback unless permission is obtained from the Director of Planning and Zoning through an administrative variance pursuant to Section 10-2185. Said approval shall include a site visit report and recommendation by the Director of Planning and Zoning. 
(c)  Zoning buffers shall be provided where adjacent to single family detached residential (R-L, R-1 and R-1A) as specified in Table 1. 
(d)  Zoning buffers shall be provided where adjacent to any residential as specified in Table 2. 
(e)  Zoning buffers shall be undisturbed except for approved access and utility crossings and re-plantings as required by the Director of Planning and Zoning. 
(f)  Fences and/or walls shall be located interior to any required buffers and/or improvement setbacks except when zoning buffers are required between properties zoned for single family residences or developed with single family residences. Fences may be constructed along side and rear lot lines. 
(Ord. No. 020-11, § 4, 9-19-11) 
Sec. 10-6008.1. - Minimum landscape areas and buffers for existing structures. 
When minimum landscape areas or zoning buffers for uses in existing structures do not meet the requirements herein, conditions of zoning shall apply. Whenever deemed necessary to protect adjoining or nearby properties or to otherwise promote the public health, safety or welfare, the City Council and or Planning and Zoning Commission may specify conditions which require increased landscape areas and/or buffers, setbacks, berms, or other treatments to protect surrounding and nearby properties. 
(Ord. No. 020-11, § 4, 9-19-11) 
Sec. 10-6009. - Parking lot landscaping. 
At-grade, non-single-family parking lots shall provide minimum ten-foot wide landscape islands at the end of each parking bay, and a ten-foot wide landscape island every tenth parking space. Such landscape islands shall include minimum three-inch caliper shade trees from East Point's list of recommended trees. Refer to the East Point Tree Protection and Landscaping Ordinance, Appendix B. Landscaping in these islands should preserve and maintain adequate sight lines from the minor lane to the major lane. Alternate methods of landscaping parking lots may be approved whenever the Director of Planning and Zoning or his/her designee determines that the alternate method equals or exceeds this standard. 
Sec. 10-6010. - Landscape requirements. 
Landscape areas are within the required setbacks. When like uses are adjacent to each other a minimum five-foot planted landscape area is required meeting the following requirements: 
Minimum plant requirements 
(1)  One three-inch caliper canopy tree and one three-inch understory tree (see recommended species, Appendix B) shall be planted for every 2,000 sq. feet of impervious surface on site. 
(2)  One shrub (see recommended species, Appendix B) minimum of three-gallon container, shall be planted for every 500 sq. feet of impervious surface on site. 
(3)  Ground cover (see section Appendix B for recommended species) shall be provided in all pervious areas disturbed during construction. 
(4)  Plant material required by this ordinance shall be in addition to requirements for planting in buffer strips, however, trees planted in the landscape strip, if such is required by the city, shall be counted toward the landscape requirements. 
Design criteria 
(1)  One parking lot landscape island shall be provided for every ten parking spaces on site. Said landscape area shall be a minimum of ten feet in width and extend the length of the parking space. Such islands may be combined to form larger islands or public open spaces. 
(2)  A landscape island, minimum ten-foot in width and extending the length of the parking field, shall be provided for every fifth double row of parking. 
Maintenance. All material planted to meet the requirements of this ordinance shall be maintained by the property owner in perpetuity. Changes to the landscaping plan during and after construction must be submitted to the Director of Planning and Zoning. 
Enforcement 
(1)  All material shown on the landscape plan must be planted prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(2)  Failure to maintain the required landscape material shall be deemed a violation of the Code of Ordinances of the City of East Point and prosecuted under the provisions thereof. 
(Ord. No. 020-11, § 5, 9-19-11) 
Sec. 10-6011. - Required landscape buffer. 
A buffer shall be a strip of land running along the entire front, side or rear of a lot (except driveways) for the purpose of obstructing vision, muffling sound, separating incompatible uses and providing green space. The following types of landscape buffers are hereby established. 
(1)  Partially opaque buffer: This buffer shall be partially opaque from two and one-half feet above ground level to ten feet above ground level, and partial visual obstruction from ten feet above ground level to 25 feet above ground level. The following shall be minimum requirements, and shall not excuse compliance with the requirements of partial opacity: 
(a)  Minimum plant only requirements: 
1.  Minimum buffer area of ten feet in width, and 
2.  Minimum of five canopy trees for each 30 feet in length, and 
3.  Minimum of three understory trees for each 30 feet in length, and 
4.  Minimum of 20 shrubs for each 30 feet in length 
(b)  Minimum plant/fence requirements: 
1.  Minimum of seven and one-half feet in width, and 
2.  Minimum of two canopy trees for each 30 feet in length, and 
3.  Minimum of one understory tree for each 30 feet in length, and 
4.  Minimum of eight shrubs for each 30 feet in length 
(c)  Minimum plant/berm requirements: 
1.  Minimum buffer area of 20 feet in width, and 
2.  Minimum of one canopy tree for each 30 feet in length, and 
3.  Minimum of six shrubs for each 30 feet in length, and 
4.  Slope of the berm shall be of a gradual design or buttressed in such a way as to prevent erosion, and the berm shall be covered with grass, ground cover, and/or shrubs to prevent erosion; 
5.  Berm shall extend to a height of six feet above the centerline of any adjacent road or the average adjacent elevation. 
(2)  Broken buffer: This buffer shall be generally open but provide plantings from 2½ to 25 feet as broken screen. The minimum requirements shall be as follows: 
1.  Minimum buffer area of ten feet in width, and 
2.  Minimum of one canopy tree for each 100 feet in length, and 
3.  Minimum of one understory tree for each 100 feet in length, and 
4.  Minimum of eight shrubs for each 100 feet in length. 
Sec. 10-6012. - Tree survey required. 
(1)  Survey required. Unless specifically exempted from this article, before the commencement of any alteration, defoliation or land disturbing activity which requires the issuance of a permit, a tree survey shall be completed by a certified arborist and submitted to the Department of Planning and Zoning in accordance with the requirements. When an application for a preliminary plat is made, the applicant shall be required to submit a tree survey. 
(2)  Survey requirements. The tree survey shall be in the form of a to-scale map or a site plan prepared and sealed by an arborist certified by the International Society of Arboriculture noting the location of all specimen trees plus all other trees which will be preserved. Important natural features such as streams and wetlands shall also be shown on the tree survey. 
(3)  Specimen trees. All specimen trees and their critical root zones and drip lines shall be labeled, even if the tree trunk is not on the subject property, and must be shown on the tree survey and inventoried by size and species. This includes those specimen trees that are to be preserved as well as those proposed for removal, if any, and the portion of critical root zones and drip lines of trees on abutting properties which are contained within the subject property, to the extent that such drip lines and critical root zones can be determined from the vantage point of the property to be developed. This provision shall not authorize the trespass on other private property abutting the site. 
(4)  Other trees to be retained. All other trees that are to be counted toward meeting tree density unit requirements of this article must be shown on the survey and inventoried by size and species. Only trees with a caliper measurement of three inches or greater are to be identified as eligible for tree density unit compliance purposes. 
(5)  Trees to be removed. Trees other than specimen trees that are proposed to be removed and which thus cannot be counted toward tree density unit requirements are not required to be counted and shown individually on the tree survey. Such trees shall be estimated in number, size and species of such trees and quantified as part of the total site inventory of tree population. 
(6)  Sampling. Sampling methods may be used to determine tree densities for forested areas over two acres. 
(7)  Tree save areas. All tree save areas must be delineated on the tree survey. All buffers with existing trees must be delineated on the tree survey as tree save areas. Land disturbance within any buffer is subject to approval by the Planning and Zoning Department. 
(8)  List and tree density unit calculations. The tree survey shall provide an accurate list of those trees to be saved and a total value of tree density units for the entire property. 
Sec. 10-6013. - Tree protection plan specifications. 
The Tree Protection Plan shall be a detailed plan designed to protect and preserve trees before, during, and for a period of two years after construction. Required specifications for a Tree Protection Plan include the following: 
(1)  Separate drawing. The Tree Protection Plan shall be submitted as a separate drawing. 
(2)  Boundary survey. The Tree Protection Plan shall be submitted on a current boundary survey of the proposed site, drawn to scale, and showing clearly all required information in this Section. 
(3)  Tract identification. The plan shall identity the tract of land involved by acreage and location. 
(4)  Owner and contact. The name, address and phone number of the owner of the land and the name, address and phone number of any tenant of the property, and 24 hour emergency contact phone number. 
(5)  Trees to be protected. The type, location and size as measured at the diameter breast height of all tree(s) to be protected. Only trees designated on the approved Tree Protection Plan will be counted toward meeting minimum required tree density requirements. 
(6)  Specimen trees. Locations, species, size, critical root zones, and drip lines of those specimen trees proposed and, if any, proposed to be removed. The Tree Protection Plan must include any portion of a critical root zone or drip line of any trees on abutting properties proposed to be protected. Removal of specimen trees is subject to approval by the Director of Planning Zoning. 
(7)  Tree save areas and clearing limits. All natural areas to be retained and buffers shall be included in the tree save area. There shall be no material storage in tree save areas. Limits of clearing and land disturbance such as grading, trenching, etc. where these disturbances may affect tree save areas shall also be shown, including an indication of staging areas for parking, material storage, concrete washout, debris burn and burial holes and other areas where tree protection may be affected. 
(8)  Tree protection methods. Methods of tree protection shall be indicated for all tree save areas, including tree fencing, erosion control, retaining walls, tunneling for utilities, aeration systems, transplanting, staking, signage, geoweb or similar material, permeable paving, bollards, etc. 
(9)  Development characteristics. The locations of roads, existing and proposed structures, amount of impervious surface existing and proposed, driveways, cut and fill areas, drainage before and after construction including detention areas, etc. 
(10)  Utilities and easements. The locations of all existing and proposed utility lines or easements, including the location for any boring sites for underground utilities. 
(11)  Tree density units. Calculations showing the amount of existing trees to be retained for purposes of complying with the minimum required tree density units required by this Ordinance. Only existing trees with a dbh of three inches or greater shall be counted toward meeting the minimum tree density unit requirements. 
(12)  Irrigation systems. The Tree Protection Plan must also indicate any irrigation systems required by this Ordinance. 
(13)  Additional information. Additional information as required on a case-by-case basis by the Director of Planning and Zoning. 
Sec. 10-6014. - Planning and Zoning authority and action on a tree protection plan. 
Prior to approval of the Tree Protection Plan, the Planning and Zoning staff may require relocation or replacement of trees as uniformly as possible throughout the site. The planning and zoning staff may require the use of active tree protection fencing for any or all tree save areas. Passive tree protection fencing is to be used only for areas remote from construction activity. 
Standards for tree protection during construction: 
(1)  Materials prohibited in tree save areas. No structure(s), improvement(s), or any activity including solvents, material, construction machinery, portable toilets, construction trailers, or temporary soil deposits shall encroach or be placed within a drip line and within six feet of the area immediately outside the drip line, of any specimen tree or any tree within a tree save area unless authorized by the Planning and Zoning staff in writing. 
(2)  Tree protection devices. Before development, land clearing, filling, or any land alteration, the developer shall be required to erect suitable protective barriers as required by the Planning and Zoning staff pursuant to an approved Tree Protection Plan, including tree fences, tree protection signs, and erosion barriers. Inspection of tree protection barriers is required prior to the commencement of any land disturbance or development. Said tree protection measures shall remain in functioning condition until completion of site landscaping, completion of the project or until the Certificate of Occupancy is issued. Authorization to remove the protective devices shall be evidenced in writing by the Planning and Zoning staff or by the issuance of a final Certificate of Occupancy. 
(3)  Active tree protection devices. Materials for active tree protection shall consist of chain link, orange laminated plastic, wooden post and rail fencing or other equivalent restraining material. In addition to fencing, where active tree protection is required, each tree to be saved shall be marked at the base of the trunk with blue colored water-based paint. 
(4)  Passive tree protection. Materials for passive tree protection shall consist of heavy mil plastic flagging, a minimum of four inches wide with dark letters reading "Tree Protection Area - Do Not Enter" or equivalent signage on a continuous, durable restraint. 
(5)  Additional measures. The developer shall take measures to ensure the health of the protected trees during construction, including but not limited to the following measures: 
(a)  Water, fertilize and treat the trees for pests or disease as needed, in accordance with standards of the International Society of Arboriculture. 
(b)  If grading covers the trees with dust, hose them off. 
(c)  Do not randomly or incorrectly prune live branches so that equipment or structures can "fit" within the tree's protected zone. 
(d)  Do not strip the topsoil or remove the natural leaf mulch or material from beneath a protected tree. 
(e)  Trees should be felled away from, rather than into, tree save areas. 
(f)  Provide adequate mulching and water for trees that will be retained. 
Sec. 10-6015. - Tree damage. 
Any tree, designated on a tree protection plan to be saved, which is damaged during construction or as a result of construction, as determined by the Department of Planning and Zoning, shall be treated according to accepted standards of the National Arborists Association, or replaced with a tree or trees equal to the tree density unit value of the tree removed. However, any specimen tree damaged as described above shall be replaced with trees equal to two times the unit value of the tree removed or damaged. If a damaged specimen tree must be removed, the area occupied by its drip line must remain in a pervious state. A replacement plan for such area must be approved by the Department of Planning and Zoning. 
Sec. 10-6016. - Pruning. 
(a)  Pruning shall not cause long-term health or structural problems and must be done in accordance with International Society of Arboriculture Standards (ANSI A300) standards. 
Example: The pruning cut should not be too large when compared to the growing point. For instance, a large cut on a 20 cm trunk down to a 15 cm branch should be fine, but the same cut to the trunk down to a one cm twig or bud is considerably less ideal and should be avoided. 
(b)  "Topping" or severe pruning is prohibited. Severe pruning seriously affects a tree's food supply, can scald the newly exposed outer bark, make trees vulnerable to insect invasion, stimulate the regrowth of dense, upright branches below the pruning cut, make the tree more vulnerable to wind damage, disfigure the tree aesthetically, and sometimes result in the death of the tree. 
Sec. 10-6017. - Removal of specimen trees. 
Unless specifically exempted from the requirements of this Ordinance, no specimen tree as defined by this Ordinance shall be removed except in accordance with this section. 
(a)  Justification for removal. Any applicant proposing to remove a specimen tree(s) regulated by this Ordinance shall apply for a tree removal permit. In addition to the requirements for tree removal permits specified by this Ordinance, the applicant shall provide a written explanation as to why the specimen tree(s) cannot be retained on the site which shall include a description of all alternative site development plans considered by the applicant to avoid the removal of said specimen tree(s). 
Said written explanation shall at minimum include the following: 
(1)  Consideration of whether any buildings or structures, parking areas, storm water facilities, utilities, driveways, or other features of the proposed development can be relocated or designed to retain the specimen tree(s), and the additional costs of such relocations or design, if any. 
(2)  Consideration of whether the land area consumed by the proposed development can be reduced via decked parking, reduction of the footprint of a building or structure by increasing the height or number of stories, placement of storm water facilities underground, and other appropriate means, to retain the specimen tree(s), and the additional costs involved in such surface area consumption, if any. 
(3)  Consideration of whether the development proposal can be reduced in size, scale, or extent without jeopardizing the economic feasibility of the proposed development. 
(4)  The total estimated value of the development before approval and upon completion as proposed, if approved. 
(5)  Explanation must be written by a certified arborist. 
(b)  Director of Planning and Zoning approval. An application to remove a specimen tree shall require the approval of the Director of Planning and Zoning. The Director of Planning and Zoning may also consult with the City Engineer in determining the accuracy of cost estimates submitted in the applicant's written analysis. The Director of Planning and Zoning may issue a permit to remove specimen trees after finding that one or more of the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The written analysis provides convincing evidence that alternative site and building designs have been considered by the applicant but would not result in retention of the specimen tree(s). 
(2)  The additional cost associated with developing the site or constructing buildings as redesigned or reducing the site area consumed to retain the specimen tree(s) would be disproportional to the value of the specimen tree(s) retained, calculated at $100.00 per tree density unit. 
(3)  Retention of the specimen tree(s) would result in a less than viable economic use of the subject property. 
(4)  If more than one specimen tree is proposed to be removed, the site design results in the minimum number of specimen trees removed that are necessary to accommodate the proposed development. 
(5)  A variance to the dimensional requirements of the zoning ordinance may be an appropriate remedy to preserve a specimen tree. Where in the opinion of the Director of Planning and Zoning one or more variances would enable a site and building design to be accomplished while saving one or more specimen trees, and where the objectives of tree protection would outweigh the purposes of the zoning regulations that would be varied, the Director of Planning and Zoning may suggest an applicant apply for variances instead of proposing to remove one or more specimen trees. A determination by the Director of Planning and Zoning that one or more variances to the dimensional requirements of this Ordinance would not be appropriate may support a finding by the Director of Planning and Zoning in favor of granting approval to remove one or more specimen trees. 
(6)  The request to remove a specimen tree or trees is reasonable considering the remaining specimen trees on the site that will be retained. 
(7)  The Director of Planning and Zoning may apply any or all decision criteria for the removal of trees as specified in this Ordinance. The Director of Planning and Zoning may approve or deny an application for a tree removal permit based on the above referenced criteria. The determination of the Director of Planning and Zoning pursuant to this provision may be appealed to the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
(c)  Tree bank contribution. When removal of a specimen tree(s) is approved by the Director of Planning and Zoning, as a condition precedent to issuing said tree removal permit, the project applicant shall contribute to the City of East Point Tree Bank an amount of $220.00 for each tree density unit of the specimen tree(s) removed, calculated on the basis of Table 2 of this article. In any case where a specimen tree was removed without or prior to a lawfully issued tree removal permit, the amount contributed to the tree bank shall be $1,000.00 per tree density unit of the specimen tree removed. The tree removal permit shall not be issued, nor shall the specimen tree(s) be removed, until funds are received for deposit in the City of East Point Tree Bank. 
(d)  Recompense. Contributions to the East Point Tree Bank may be adjusted by recompense subject to the following criteria: 
(1)  Credit, based on the tree density units as specified in Table 3, may be given for new trees planted on the subject site, above and beyond the minimum site density requirement, if approved by the planning and zoning staff. 
(2)  Such newly planted trees shall be of a caliper of three inches or greater. 
(3)  In cases where the obligation is not fully reduced by recompensed trees, the remaining obligation shall be deposited to the East Point Tree Bank and calculated based on $220.00 per density unit. 
Sec. 10-6018. - Criteria for removal of trees. 
This section is intended to guide the Planning and Zoning staff in considering whether non-specimen trees shall be permitted to be removed. At the discretion of the Director of Planning and Zoning, the provisions of this section may be used along with other criteria in determining whether specimen trees shall be permitted to be removed. 
(a)  Tree removal shall be disallowed if soil erosion or runoff problems will result due to topography, soil type, or proximity to flood plain or river protection areas; or if the removal will substantially alter the existing soils adversely with regard to runoff and erosion. Information submitted by the City Engineer or other environmental specialist may be used by the planning and zoning staff in such an evaluation. 
(b)  Removal of non-specimen trees from a site may be allowed at the discretion of the Planning and Zoning staff if: 
(1)  The tree is located in an area where a structure or improvement will be placed and the tree cannot be relocated on the site because of age, species, or size of tree. 
(2)  The tree is diseased or structurally unsound. 
(3)  The tree is injured and/or poses an imminent danger. 
(4)  The tree interferes with existing utility service. 
(5)  The tree creates an unsafe vision clearance for vehicular movement. 
Sec. 10-6019. - Establishment of the East Point Tree Bank. 
(a)  There is hereby established an East Point Tree Bank for the maintenance and disbursement of funds required to be paid pursuant to the terms of this ordinance. 
(b)  Where it is determined by the Director of Planning and Zoning that payment into the East Point Tree Bank shall be required hereunder, the required funds shall be paid to the East Point Tree Bank prior to issuance of any related permit. 
(c)  Funds maintained in the East Point Tree Bank shall be administered by the Department of Finance pursuant to rules and regulations regarding said funds. 
Sec. 10-6020. - Appeal procedure. 
(a)  Any applicant who is aggrieved or affected by any decision of the of the Department relating to the application of these regulations may file an appeal within 30 days of the decision with the Planning and Zoning Commission through the Director of the Department of Planning and Zoning. 
(b)  Appeals shall only be granted for errors of interpretation, application, or where the unique natural features of the site are such that it is impractical or impossible to apply the terms, conditions or standards of these regulations resulting in an undue hardship to the property owner. 
(c)  Any person aggrieved by an action of the Planning and Zoning Commission as it relates to this Ordinance may appeal within 30 days to the Superior Court of Fulton County Georgia by writ of certiorari. 
Sec. 10-6021. - Severability and conflicts. 
Should any article, clause or provision of this ordinance be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such action shall not affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole or any part hereof so declared to be invalid, it being the intent of the City Council that each article, clause and provision hereof be severable. 
Sec. 10-6022. - Appendix A density factor analysis. 
A basic condition of this article is that all applicable sites maintain a minimum tree density of 30 units per acre. The term "unit" is an expression of basal area and is not synonymous with "tree". 
The minimum tree density requirement must be met whether or not a site had trees prior to development. The density may be achieved by counting existing trees to be preserved, planting new trees, or some combination of the two. 
For density factor analysis, the following formula shall apply: 
SDF = EDF + RDF 
Where: 
SDF (Site Density Factor) = The minimum tree density required to be maintained on a developed site (30 units per acre). 
EDF (Existing Density Factor) = Density of existing trees to be preserved on a site. 
RDF (Replacement Density Factor) = Density of new trees to be planted on a site. 
PROCEDURE FOR CALCULATING THE REQUIRED TREE REPLACEMENT: 
Step 1. Calculate the Site Density Factor (SDF): 
The SDF is calculated by multiplying the number of site acres by 30.  EXAMPLE: A 2.2 acre site has a SDF of 2.2 X 30 = 66 
Step 2. Calculate the Existing Density Factor (EDF): 
The Existing Density Factor, EDF, is determined by converting the diameter breast height (dbh) of individual existing trees to density factor units as shown in the following Table 2. These units are totaled to determine the EDF for the site. 
EXAMPLE: A total of eight existing trees will remain on the 2.2 acre site in  Step 1. These existing trees include: 
3 - 14" pines 
3 - 18" oaks 
1 - 20" hickory 
1 - 30" oak 
When converted to density factor units using Table 1 (on the following page), we arrive at the following values for existing trees on the site: 
dbh UNITS X NUMBER OF TREES 
14" 4.8 x 3 = 14.4 
18" 5.7 x 3 = 17.1 
20" 6.0 x 1 = 6.0 
36" 8.4 x 1 = 8.4  45.9 units total 
The total units, 45.9, is the EDF (Existing Density Factor)) This is the density value of existing trees that will remain on the site. 
Step 3. Calculate the Replacement Density Factor (RDF): 
Replacement Density Factor (RDF) is determined by subtracting the EDF from the SDF. 
EXAMPLE: 66 (SDF) - 45.9 (EDF) = 20.1 
TABLE 2  CONVERTING EXISTING TREE DIAMETERS TO DENSITY UNITS 

 
This means that 20.1 tree units are required as replacements for the total site to meet the requirement of 30 units per acre. 
The Density Factor credit for each caliper size of replacement (new) trees is shown in Table 3 on the following page. 
TABLE 3  CONVERTING REPLACEMENT TREES TO DENSITY UNITS 

 
A seven gallon container grown pine tree is given replacement credit of 0.3 units. The minimum size for an overstory tree is three inches. 
For tree relocation, replacement units will be granted to trees relocated on site. Tree relocation is subject to planning and zoning staff approval. 
Sec. 10-6023. - Appendix B landscaping and tree species selection list. 
Vines 

 
Ground Cover 

 
Evergreen Shrubs 

 
Deciduous Shrubs 

 
Special Accent Trees 

 
Deciduous Trees 

 
Evergreen Trees 

 
Perennials 

 
Ornamental Grasses 

 
Sec. 10-6024. - Appendix C formula for determining contributions to East Point Tree Bank. 
The required contribution amount is $220.00 per tree density unit, based on cost of materials, labor and guarantee for trees planted in the East Point area. 
Example: To determine the appropriate contribution, first calculate the Density Factor Deficient (DFD) or unit value which cannot be planted on the site.  Determine the Density Factor Deficient (DFD) using the formula:  DFD = SDF - EDF - Approved RDF 
Where: 
SDF (Site Density Factor) = The minimum tree density required to be maintained on a developed site (30 units per acre). 
Example: A 2.2 acre site will have a required Site Density Factor of 66.0 units  (2.2 x 30 = 66). 
EDF (Existing Density Factor) = Density of existing trees to be preserved on a site. The site has existing trees totaling 45.9 units (Existing Density Factor). 
Approved RDF (Replacement Density Factor) = Density of new trees to be planted on a site. Due to space limitations, the site can only bear 15.0 units as replacement trees. 
Example: 
DFD = SDF - EDF - Approved RDF  DFD = 66 - 45.9 - 15  DFD = 5.1 (the number of tree density units that cannot be planted on site) 
This means that the value of 5.1 tree density units must be contributed to the East Point Tree Bank. Determine the acceptable contribution amount as follows: 
5.1 tree density units X $220.00 per tree density unit = $1,122.00    $1,122.00 = TOTAL CONTRIBUTION TO TREE BANK 
Chapter 7 - SIGNS 

Sec. 10-7001. - Purpose and findings. 
(a)  Purpose. The article is enacted for the following purposes: 
(1)  To encourage the effective use of signs as a means of communication; 
(2)  To maintain and enhance the aesthetic environment and the city's ability to attract sources of economic development; 
(3)  To improve pedestrian and traffic safety; 
(4)  To minimize the possible adverse effects of signs on nearby public and private property; and to enable the fair and consistent enforcement of these sign restrictions; 
(5)  To prevent the destruction of the natural beauty and environment of the city; 
(6)  To protect the public health, safety, and general welfare; 
(7)  To restrict the continued existence of abandoned or nonconforming signs unless in compliance with the terms of this article and to eliminate, over time, all nonconforming signs; 
(8)  To ensure the fair and consistent enforcement of sign standards; and 
(9)  To make it easy, quick and economically efficient to apply for a sign permit. 
(b)  Findings. 
(1)  The city finds that signs are a proper use of private property, are a means of personal free expression and a necessary component of a commercial environment. As such, signs are entitled to the protection of the law. In the absence of regulation, however, the number of such signs tends to proliferate, with property owners' desiring ever increasing numbers and sizes of signs, leading to cluttered and aesthetically blighted thoroughfares. In addition, the competition among competing sign owners for visibility of their signs contributes to safety hazards for both vehicles and pedestrians and undermines the sign owners' original purpose of presenting a clear message of its idea or identification of its premises. 
(2)  The city further finds that the regulation of the size, height, number and spacing of signs is necessary to protect the public safety, to assure compatibility of signs with surrounding land uses, to enhance the business and economy of the city, to protect the public investment in the streets and highways, to maintain the tranquil environment of residential areas, to promote industry and commerce, to eliminate visual clutter and blight, to provide an aesthetically appealing environment, and to provide for the orderly and reasonable display of signs for the benefit of all the city's citizens. 
(3)  The city further finds that there is a substantial difference between signs erected by public authority and signs erected by private citizens or businesses. Signs erected by public authority are virtually all erected for the purpose of maintaining the public safety either through direct control of traffic or through provision of such type signage as street signs which enable the traveling public to know where they are located and to find where they are going. As such, with the exception of signs identifying government buildings, virtually all government signs are erected purely for public safety purposes. Moreover, their use in the public right-of-way is necessary to ensure their visibility to the motoring public. The city finds that public utility signs are frequently of the same nature as those signs erected by governmental entities in that they provide necessary information to safeguard the public from downed power lines and from street excavations. Even where signs serve a propriety purpose, such as identifying markings on utility poles, those signs are marked primarily for the purpose of benefiting the public generally through identification of locations where there may be temporary losses of power. 
(4)  Signs and other structures belonging to East Point are exempt from this Ordinance. 
(5)  The city further finds that some signage has a single targeted function and that identification of such signage by description is impossible without referring to its function. For instance, address numerals are used for the sole purpose of locating addresses, which is of benefit to persons looking for those addresses and is essential to public safety personnel responding to emergencies. Subdivision signs at the entrances to subdivisions favor a similar purpose in enabling both the traveling public and emergency personnel to quickly locate subdivision entrances for the purpose of either visitation or responding to emergency calls. While such signage is often referenced based upon the function it serves within the context of this ordinance, whenever possible, it is the intent of this ordinance to refer to signs unrelated to the content of the speech provided and to allow maximum expressive potential to sign owners. 
Sec. 10-7002. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply: 
Abandoned sign: Any sign that contains or exhibits broken panels, visible rust, visible rot, damaged support structures, or missing letters or which is otherwise dilapidated, unsightly, or unkempt, and for which no person accepts maintenance responsibility. (Prohibited) 
Aerial view sign: A sign painted to the horizontal face of a building roof intended to be viewed from an aircraft and accordingly, not readily viewable from the adjacent ground. Aerial view signs shall not be displayed on any structure that is not a building. 
Animated sign: Any sign, or part of a sign, that uses any movement or change of lighting or color to depict action or create a special effect or scene. (Prohibited) 
Area of sign: The area within a continuous perimeter enclosing the limits of writing, representation, emblem, or any figure of similar character, together with any frame or other material or color forming an integral part of the display or used to differentiate such sign from the background against which such sign is placed. 
Audible sign: Any sign, or part of a sign, that uses any movement or change lighting or color to depict action or create a special effect or scene. Any sign which emits a sound which is audible or emits a signal which can be converted into audible sounds, whether by radio or other means. (Prohibited) 
Awning/canopy sign: Any sign that is a part of, or attached to, an awning, canopy or other fabric, plastic or structural protective cover over a door, entrance, window, or outdoor service area. 
Banner: A sign other than a flag with or without characters, letters, illustrations or ornamentation applied to cloth, paper, or fabric that is intended to be hung either with a frame or without a frame. Neither flags nor canopy signs are considered banners. (Prohibited) 
Beacon: Any light with one or more beams directed into the atmosphere or directed at one or more points not on the same lots as the light source; also, any light with one or more beams that rotate or move. (Prohibited) 
Billboard, traditional: A sign which may be supported by a pole structure, with an area of more than 72 square feet but not more than 672 square feet. The billboard directs attention to a business, commodity, service, or entertainment conducted, sold or offered at a location other than the premises on which the billboard is located. The billboard may either be illuminated or non-lluminated. This sign type does include dynamic digital billboards as defined by this section. Below are examples of billboards. 

Changeable copy sign: Any sign that incorporates changing letters or images to form a sign message or messages, whether such changes are accomplished electronically or manually. Changeable copy signs shall not incorporate changing lights or electronic images. ( Prohibited, except for a church/place of worship or school ) 
Code of compliance certificate: A certificate executed by a certified building inspector and stating compliance with those minimum standards described in an inspection report approved by the Director of Planning and Community Development. 
Direct illumination: The light source originates on the face of the sign. 
Directory sign: A single sign for multiple businesses, offices, professionals, industries, or other entities located within a planned center. 
Directional signs: Any sign which points the way to public accommodations and facilities or commercial services. 
Dynamic digital billboards: Digital billboards include a display that incorporates a technology or method that allows for multiple advertisements on one structure without physically or mechanically replacing the sign face or its components. The signs also can be used to convey public safety messages. Digital billboards generally take the form of large LED displays, which function like giant TV screens, and show advertisements that change intermittently. (Prohibited, except in I-1, I-2 and BP) 

Fall zone: An area equal to 133 percent of the height of the structure in every direction. 
Flag: Any fabric or bunting containing colors, patterns, or symbols used as a symbol of a government or other entity or organization. 
Flashing sign: A sign, the illumination of which is not kept constant in intensity at all times when in use and which exhibits marked changes in lighting effects. 
Free standing sign: Any sign supported by structures or supports that are placed on or anchored in, the ground and that are independent from any building or other structure. Permanently affixed sign which is wholly independent of a building for support with a base of a width not less than the width of the sign face. 
Funeral home: An establishment with facilities for the preparation of the dead for burial or cremation, for the viewing of the body, and for funerals. A funeral home specifically does not include a crematory as a principal or accessory use. 
Historic sign: A sign deemed worthy of preservation by reason of its value to the City of East Point for one or more of the following reasons: 
(a)  It is an outstanding example of a sign representative of its era; 
(b)  It is one of the few remaining examples of past sign design or style; 
(c)  It is a sign associated with an event or person of historic or cultural significance to the City of East Point; or 
(d)  It is a sign located on a property which has been designated as historic property by the State of Georgia or the U.S. Secretary of the Interior. 
The determination as to whether a sign meets the definition of historic sign shall be made by the Director of Planning and Community Development or a designee thereof. 
Illegal sign: Any sign that was erected in violation of the laws, as they existed at the time the sign permit was issued or signs that were not built in conformance with the issued permit. 
Indirect illumination: The light source is projected on to the face of the sign. 
Lot: A parcel of land that is of sufficient size to meet minimum zoning requirements for lot area, coverage, and use and that can provide such yards as required by the zoning standards. 
Marquee, marquee sign: Any permanent structure projecting beyond a building or extending along and projecting beyond a building or extending along and projecting beyond the wall of the building, generally designed and constructed to provide protection from the weather. 
Monument sign: "Monument sign" means a sign not erected on one or more poles or similar supports but erected to rest on the ground or to rest on a monument base designed as an architectural unit with the sign. Ground signs that are mounted generally flush with the surrounding grade. It may not be attached to a pole or pylon, nor raised by mounting on a man-made berm, wall, or similar structure. Below is an illustration of monument signs. 

Multi-tenant: One or more buildings, located on a single premise, containing two or more separate and distinct individual establishments, which occupy separate portions of the building and which are physically separated from each other by walls. 
Mural: A very large image, such as a painting, applied directly to a wall. Murals are signs that promote public art and are not used for advertising. 

Nonconforming sign: A sign which, when erected, was lawful but which would be prohibited, regulated or restricted under the terms of the current ordinance or subsequently adopted amendments. This definition does not include signs that are defined as historic signs. 
Obscene: Material is obscene if to the average person, applying contemporary community standards, taken as a whole, it predominantly appeals to the prurient interest, that is, a shameful or morbid interest in nudity, sex or excretion; the material taken as a whole lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value; and the material depicts or describes, in a patently offensive way, sexual conduct specifically defined as: (A) acts of sexual intercourse, heterosexual or homosexual, normal or perverted, actual or simulated; (B) acts of masturbation; (C) acts involving excretory functions or lewd exhibition of the genitals; (D) acts of bestiality or the fondling of sex organs of animals; or (E) sexual acts of flagellation, torture, or other violence indicating a sadomasochistic sexual relationship. 
Permanent sign: Any sign which, when installed, is intended for permanent use. A permanent freestanding sign shall be of a type and construction as not to be easily or readily removed from the lot on which it has been erected. 
Portable sign: A sign which is not permanently affixed to the ground or to a structure, including but not limited to signs on trailers or signs mounted or painted on vehicles which are parked in such a manner as to serve the purpose of a sign. 
Principal building: The building in which the principal use of the lot is conducted. Nonresidential lots with multiple principal uses may have multiple principal buildings, but storage buildings, garages, and other structures with clearly accessory uses shall not be considered principal buildings. 
Projecting sign: A single or multiple faced sign which is designed and attached to, and extending outward from, a building's face and shall not extend more than 12 inches from the wall. 
Public sign: Any sign erected by a governmental entity. 
Roof sign: Any sign erected and constructed wholly on and over the roof of a building, or supported by the roof structure. 
Sidewalk sign: A sign with two faces that is adjoined at the top and is displayed at an angle, which is not permanently anchored or secured. 

Sign: Any name, identification, description, display, illustration, banner, string of lights or device which is affixed to or represented directly or indirectly upon a window, building, structure, vehicle or land in view of the general public and which directs attention to a product, place, activity, person, institution or business. 
Sign face: That part of a sign that is or can be used for advertising purposes. 
Street pole banner: Non-illuminated temporary banners mounted on light poles that announce unique areas or special/seasonal events. 

Temporary event sign: A sign that is erected on private property informing citizens of upcoming events. Signs are permitted for a period of no more than 60 days before and five days after the event without obtaining a permit. Signs are permitted only for events sponsored by local governments, religious organizations, civic and community organizations. Signs may be placed in the windows of commercial/office/retail establishments and shall not exceed a size of 36 inches by 44 inches (36" × 44") 
Temporary political sign: A sign that is erected in private yards and along roadways informing residents of candidates for office. No sign shall be located within 15 feet of the public right-of-way at a street intersection, nor over the right of way. 
Temporary sign: Any sign that is not permanently mounted. 
Unified Development: A single development project reviewed, platted and permitted together that may or may not include outparcels. 
Wall sign: Any sign attached parallel to a wall, painted on the wall surface or erected and confined within the limits of an outside wall of any building or structure, which is supported by such wall or building and which displays only one sign surface. No wall sign shall extend more than six inches from any wall, building, or structure. Wall signs shall not cover architectural features or details, and not extend beyond the roof line or outer edges of the building. Raceways shall be painted to match the color of the exterior walls to which they are attached. 
Window sign: Any sign that is placed inside a window or upon the window panes or glass, either inside or outside the building, and is visible from the exterior of the structure. ( Prohibited ) 
(Ord. No. 007-10, § 1, 3-15-10; Ord. No. 025-015, § 2, 3-16-15 ; Ord. No. 040-15, § 2, 10-19-15 ; Ord. No. 082-017 , § 1, 12-4-17; Ord. No. 087-018 , § 1, 4-16-18; Ord. No. 088-018 , § 1, 4-16-18; Ord. No. 102-019 , § 1, 1-22-19) 
Sec. 10-7003. - Powers and duties. 
The Director is hereby authorized and directed to administer and enforce this article, unless otherwise specifically provided by resolution of the city council. 
Sec. 10-7004. - Applicability. 
The standards of this article shall apply to all signs erected within the City of East Point. 
Sec. 10-7005. - Permit required. 
It shall be unlawful to commence the erection, hanging, alteration, relocation, reassembly or repair of any sign as defined herein until the Chief Building Official has issued a permit for such work. Failure to secure a required permit shall be a violation of this chapter. A sign permit shall be required and a fee shall be paid according to the current fee schedule for all signs requiring a permit as provided herein. Any change in the permanent message shall require a new permit. A permit that is issued in violation of this article is void. A permit does not create a vested right to maintain any sign which violates any terms of this article or any other law. A sign permit shall expire six months after the issuance of the permit if construction of the sign has not begun. Sign permits shall be renewed on an annual basis and renewal rests upon the owner. 
Sec. 10-7006. - Application for permit. 
Applications for sign permits required by this ordinance shall be filed with the Department of Planning and Zoning during normal business hours and shall include the following to be considered by the Permits Manager: 
(a)  The name, street address, and phone number of the owner of the property where the sign is to be installed along with a site plan showing the proposed location of the sign on the property. 
(b)  The type and purpose of the sign as defined in this article. 
(c)  The value of the sign. 
(d)  The name, address, telephone number, and business license number of the sign contractor. All applications for signs which incorporate electricity must obtain an electrical permit. 
(e)  The zoning district in which the subject property is located and a statement of compliance with all requirements of the zoning district. 
(f)  If the applicant is not the owner of the property, a signed and notarized authorization by the property owner shall be included with the application. 
(g)  A description of the type of sign to be erected which shall include a schematic drawing of the sign indicating overall dimensions (height, width, square footage, shape and number of faces) and a photograph of the proposed sign location and other signs located on the property, the distance of the proposed sign from the subject property's boundaries, and all existing structures or buildings on the subject property. 
(h)  Sign details, including a proposed color scheme of sign, and scaled elevation of the size and height of the proposed sign from ground level and adjacent street level. 
(i)  For wall signs: Two sets of building elevations. 
(j)  All applications for signage shall be on a form provided by the Department of Planning and Zoning. 
(k)  Any additional information as required by the Director or his/her designee on an application form which shall remain on file at the Department. 
Sec. 10-7007. - Denial, revocation, suspension and variance. 
(a)  The Director or his/her designee shall deny all applications for signs that do not comply with this ordinance. 
(b)  Revocation of permits. The Director or his/her designee may revoke a sign permit in those cases where an administrative determination has been duly made that false statements or misrepresentations existed as to material facts in the application or plans upon which the permit of approval was based. If it is determined that a sign was not constructed in accordance with renderings, drawings or specifications presented a permit will be revoked. Sign permits shall be renewed on an annual basis and renewal rests upon the owner. 
(c)  Processing Time; Denial. The city shall process all complete and accurate sign permit applications within 30 business days of the Department's actual receipt of a complete and accurate application and upon remittance of the appropriate sign permit fee. The Director shall give notice to the applicant of his/her decision in the office of Planning and Zoning on or before the thirtieth business day. If the decision of the Director is to deny the application, the decision shall state the grounds upon which the denial is based. Failure of the city to act within the 30-day period shall be deemed an approval of the permit. If notice is given in conformity with this Section, notice shall be deemed to have been given upon the date of notification in the office of Planning and Zoning. Any application meeting the standards of this article shall be granted. Any application not meeting the standards of this article shall be denied. 
(d)  Suspension of permits. The Director or his/her designee may suspend a sign permit where an administrative determination has been duly made that an error or omission on the part of either the permit applicant or a government agency existed in the issuance of the permit. A new permit shall be issued in place of the incorrect permit after correction of the error or omission. 
(e)  Appeals. Any individual whose application has been denied or revoked may appeal the decision of the Director or his/her designee to the Planning and Zoning Commission within (30) days of notification of denial or revocation. Once an applicant has notified the city of their intent to appeal, within 90 days written notification of the Director or his/her designee's response shall be presented to the applicant. If written notification is not presented within 90 days then the appeal is determined in favor of the applicant. 
(f)  Variance. To apply for relief from any requirements in this ordinance, the property owner, or his or her representatives, may file for a variance with the Planning and Zoning Commission. That variance shall be considered in conformance with the procedures and standards contained in the City Code Part 10, Planning and Zoning, Chapter 2, Article I, APPEALS. 
Sec. 10-7008. - Identification labels. 
(a)  With each sign permit, the permits manager shall issue a sticker bearing the same number as the permit with which it is issued. It shall be the duty of the permittee or his agent to affix such sticker to the sign in the lower right hand area so it is easily seen. The absence of a proper sticker shall be prima facie evidence that the sign has been, or is being, erected or operated in violation of the standards of this article. 
(b)  The Director or his/her designee shall inspect all existing signs in the City to determine if such signs conform to the standards of this article. Identification stickers shall be provided for all signs in order to identify existing conforming and nonconforming signs. 
Sec. 10-7009. - Occupational tax certificate, public liability insurance required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of erecting or maintaining signs within the city, unless and until such entity shall have obtained an occupation tax certificate and a certificate of insurance from an insurance company authorized to do business in the state evidencing that the entity has in effect public liability and property damage insurance in the sum of $25,000.00 for property damage for any one claim, and public liability insurance in an amount not less than $100,000.00 for injuries, including accidental death to one person. The certificate of insurance shall state that the insurance carrier shall notify the city 30 days in advance of any termination and/or restriction of the coverage, including nonrenewal, cancellation, and nonpayment of any premium. 
Sec. 10-7010. - Prohibited signs. 
Any sign not specifically identified in this article as a permitted sign shall be prohibited except where otherwise permitted. Examples of signs which are prohibited are as follows: 
(a)  Banners, balloons, streamers, air gas filled figures. 
(b)  Painted window signs. 
(c)  Twirling, sandwich type, sidewalk or curb type signs, and portable displays. 
(d)  Series, lines or rows of lights whether supported by cables or other physical means. 
(e)  Promotional beacons, search lights or laser lights/images. 
(f)  Neon tubing, or bare bulb lights used in signage or encircling a window or outlining the structure. 
(g)  Electronic changeable copy signs, flashing, blinking, rotating, fluctuating, or otherwise animated signs shall not be permitted. ( Exception: Permitted in I-1, I-2 and BP zoning districts ) 
(h)  Signs that emit audible sound or permit visible smoke, vapor, particles or odor. 
(i)  Signs other than those belonging to local or state governments, public service agencies, railroads and the like shall not be located in the public right-of-way. 
(j)  Signs shall not be affixed directly to a tree or utility pole. 
(k)  Signs identifying a home based business 
(l)  Sign copy shall not be permitted on trash receptacles, vending machines or similar structures, except for copy that indicates product sold or dispensed from within the structure. 
(m)  No sign shall depict nudity, sexual conduct, obscene or pornographic material as defined in the United States and/or Georgia Codes. 
(n)  No sign shall advertise an activity which is illegal under federal, state or local laws. 
(o)  Billboards are prohibited in all zoning districts except I-1, I-2 and BP. 
(p)  Posters, placards, or signs affixed to or placed in windows are prohibited. 
(q)  Signs not in good repair, in violation of codes, broken panels, chipped paint, damaged support structures, missing letters or abandoned signs which advertise an activity, business, product or service no longer conducted or available. 
(r)  Roof signs and signs which extend vertically above any portion of a roof of the applicable wall. 
(s)  Portable signs when not attached to a motor vehicle including sign attached to or painted on vehicles which prevent the vehicle from being used for its intended purpose and that are legible from the public right-of-way area also considered portable signs; 
(t)  Any sign not specifically provided for in this resolution is unlawful. 
Sec. 10-7011. - Signs which require no permit. 
The following shall not count toward the total amount of signage allowed and no permit is required so long as all standards in this article are met, including those set forth below: 
(1)  Numerals displayed for the purpose of identifying property location not to exceed eight inches in height; 
(2)  Flags, such as the flag of the United States, State of Georgia, or other government, corporate, agency, civic, charitable, religious, patriotic, fraternal or similar flag not to exceed more than four per site. Such flag shall be the greater of ½ the primary sign height for the district or 15 sq. ft. whichever is greater in residential districts. Flags shall not be used for the purpose of advertising or selling any goods; 
(3)  Signs that denote the words open and closed are allowed and may be directly illuminated (non-blinking) but may not exceed 25 percent of the window area; 
(4)  Door signs not to exceed one square foot in size and not more than one sign per door; 
(5)  Temporary event signs provided all such signs are placed not more than 60 days prior to the event and the sign shall exhibit the date of the conclusion of the event. Said sign shall not exceed 36-inches by 44-inches and shall be removed within five days following the advertised event's conclusion; 
(6)  Garage sale signs provided such signs are located out of the right-of-way and on private property with the owner's consent. Such signs shall be located no farther than one mile away from the property to which the signs refer, do not exceed one square foot in area and are removed within one day following the sale. Garage sale signs are exempt from the minimum lettering-numbering provisions; 
(7)  Hiring sign. An advertisement sign for employment. Said sign shall be located behind the minimum yard setback and shall not exceed four square feet in size and three feet in height. Only one sign per business is allowed for the location for which employment is advertised; 
(8)  Dangerous animal uniform symbols and signs. Dangerous animal and similar warning symbols and signs may be located wherever necessary to provide sufficient warning to the public; 
(9)  Seasonal or holiday decorations associated with calendar holidays. These may include but are not limited to Christmas, Hanukkah, New Year, Easter, Halloween, Thanksgiving, and Fourth of July representations. No commercial message or copy shall be permitted in conjunction with a seasonal display. Each seasonal display may continue for a 15-day period in any one year except Halloween through New Year's, where a 61-day period is allowed; 
(10)  Unilluminated real estate sales and lease signs in all but single-family dwelling districts provided they are removed within 30 days of sale or of being 80 percent leased. Such signs shall be unilluminated and limited to one on-premise sign per street frontage, and shall not exceed 16 square feet in area; 
(11)  Unilluminated real estate sales and lease signs in AG-1 and single-family dwelling districts provided they are removed at the owner's expense within 30 days of lease or sale. Such signs shall be limited to one on-premise sign per street frontage and shall not exceed 16 square feet in area along arterials and major collectors, or four square feet adjacent to all other streets. Subdivisions with fewer than 80 percent of the lots have been sold shall be entitled to one such 16 square foot sign per access-providing street; and 
(12)  Notice sign. Any notice or warning required by federal, state or local law, regulation or ordinance. Signs for no trespassing on private property allowed, but not exceeding two square feet. 
( Ord. No. 040-15, § 1, 10-19-15 ) 
Sec. 10-7012. - Exceptions (permit required). 
(1)  Banners shall be allowed for a period not exceeding 30 days with no more than three such 30-day periods being permitted per calendar year per lot. Time periods shall not be consecutive. Banners shall not be more than 24 square feet. No banner shall be mounted so as to extend above the horizontal plane of the roof where the building wall and roof meet or shall not extend more than five feet above grade when on the ground. Banners shall not be erected in any landscape area or placed so as to impede off-street parking. Banners shall not be mounted by any permanent fastener when mounted to a wall. Banners shall be permitted in zoning districts C-1, C-2, CL, CR, MI and EI. 
(2)  Banners shall be allowed for a period not exceeding 30 days with no more than three such 30-day periods being permitted per calendar year per lot. Time periods shall not be consecutive. Banners shall not be more than 16 square feet. No banner shall be mounted so as to extend above the horizontal plane of the roof where the building wall and roof meet or shall not extend more than five feet above grade when on the ground. Banners shall not be erected in any landscape area or placed so as to impede off-street parking. Banners shall not be mounted by any permanent fastener when mounted to a wall. Banners shall be permitted in zoning districts R-3, R-4, and R-5. 
(3)  Grand opening banners are allowed for one day only. Applicant must submit an application as required in section 10-7006 and meet all other requirements listed in 10-7012(1) and (2). The fee is waived for one day. If a banner is erected for more than one day the permit fee must be submitted. Penalties will be added. 
(4)  Changeable copy signs are permitted for churches/places of worship or schools. Signs may not be audible. 
(5)  Electronic changeable copy signs, flashing, blinking, rotating, fluctuating or animated signs are permitted in I-1, I-2 and BP zoning districts. Signs may not be audible. 
(Ord. No. 007-10, § 1, 3-15-10) 
Sec. 10-7013. - Violations; penalties. 
(a)  Noncompliance. No person shall erect on any premises owned or controlled by that person any sign which does not comply with the standards of this article. 
(b)  Dangerous or defective. No person shall maintain or permit to be maintained on any premises owned or controlled by that person any sign which is in a dangerous or defective condition. Any such sign shall be removed or repaired by the permitted of the sign, the owner of the premises, or as otherwise provided for in this article. 
(c)  Separate violation. Each sign installed, created, erected or maintained in violation of this article shall be considered a separate violation when applying the penalty portions herein. 
(d)  Public nuisance. Any sign erected or maintained in violation of this article is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. 
(e)  Notice. The Director shall give the permittee or sign owner ten days written notice, based on the practical considerations of completing measures to comport with the standards of this article, to correct the deficiencies or to remove the sign(s) which is in violation of this article. If the permittee or sign owner refuses to correct the deficiencies or remove the sign, the Director will have the sign removed at the expense of the permittee or sign owner. 
(f)  Citations. If any sign or other device covered by this article is, or is proposed to be, erected, constructed, altered, converted or used in violation of any provision of this article, the Director or his/her designee shall issue a citation. Additionally, the city may seek an injunction for a continuing violation or take other appropriate action to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, alteration, conversion or use to correct or abate such violation. Any violation of this article shall be an offense, and the violator shall be subject to a fine of up to $1,000.00, imprisonment for up to sixty (60) days, or both. 
Sec. 10-7014. - Nonconforming, historic and abandoned signs, enforcement. 
Nonconforming and historic signs: Any sign that becomes noncompliant as a result of a change in these regulations is a nonconforming or historic sign and shall be entitled to all rights herein. The following standards apply to nonconforming and historic signs: 
(a)  No nonconforming or historical sign shall be enlarged, extended, structurally reconstructed, moved, replaced or altered in any manner including the sign face except for normal maintenance as referenced in item (c) below. 
(b)  Destruction of a nonconforming sign, by any means, to more than 51 percent of its replacement cost at the time of destruction, shall require that the sign be brought into compliance with the provisions of this article and resolution if reconstructed. A historic sign similarly destroyed may be replaced under the following conditions: 1) the historic sign's former existence, original design, original colors, composition, size, and other original aesthetic qualities are established to the satisfaction of the Director or a designee thereof through photographs or other reliable documentation; 2) any replacement of the historic sign shall be a reasonably exact replica of the original sign located on the property. 
(c)  Normal maintenance of nonconforming and historical signs is allowable. Any repair or maintenance to more than 51 percent of the replacement cost shall require that the sign be reconstructed in conformity with the provisions of this article and resolution. 
(d)  No sign or advertising device shall be permitted on-site where a nonconforming or historical sign referring to the same business on the same lot exists until the nonconforming or historical sign has been removed or made to conform to the provisions of this article and resolution. 
(e)  Nonconforming signs may stay in place until one of the following conditions occurs: 
(1)  The advertised business ceases at that location for a period of more than 30 days; 
(2)  The deterioration of the sign or damage to the sign makes it a hazard or renders it dilapidated, unsightly, or unkempt; or 
(3)  The sign has been damaged to such extent that more than minor repairs or a material change is required to restore the sign. No structural repairs or change in shape or size shall be permitted except to make the sign comply with all standards of this article. 
Abandoned signs: Any sign, other than a historic sign, that is located on property which becomes vacant or unoccupied, or pertains to a business which does not currently conduct a business with a valid business license, or pertains to a product no longer being sold on the premises or pertains to a time, event or purpose which has passed or no longer applies for a period of 90 days shall be deemed to have been abandoned. Abandonment does not apply to billboard or historic signs, as defined herein. 
(a)  Any abandoned sign including canopy or awning signs shall be prohibited in all zoning districts and shall be removed by the owner of the sign or owner of the property. 
(b)  The frame support structure of a freestanding abandoned sign may remain for a period of six months from abandonment, if no other ground signs exist on the property, and it conforms to safety standards and all other applicable terms contained in this article and resolution. Within 30 days of the sign being abandoned, the owner, agent or person having the beneficial use of the sign or property upon which the sign is located shall have the face of the abandoned sign structure replaced with a weatherproof blank face or similar materials of other panels on the structure or materials subject to approval by the Department of Planning and Zoning. Should the sign remain abandoned after a one year period, the complete sign structure shall be removed by the owner of the property or sign structure. 
(c)  Any abandoned sign that is inconsistent with any terms of this article and resolution shall immediately be altered to comply with the provisions of this resolution or be removed by the owner of such structure or property within 90 days of the abandonment. 
(d)  Abandoned tenant panel signs shall be removed or replaced in accordance with this article. 
(e)  The city shall remove any sign in violation of this ordinance, without giving notice to any party if; 
(1)  Said sign is upon the public right-of-way or upon other public property; or 
(2)  Said sign poses an immediate safety threat to the life or health of any members of the public. 
(f)  Following such removal or repair, the city may collect the costs as set by the East Point City Council for any reclaimed signs. Signs not claimed will be destroyed after 14 days. 
Enforcement: Violations of this article and resolution shall be enforced by the Department of Planning and Zoning. It shall also be the duty of all officers and employees of the city and especially all members of the Police Department to assist the Planning and Zoning Department by reporting any seeming violation in new construction, reconstruction, alteration or relocation of any signs governed under this article and resolution. Appeal from the decision of the Department of Planning and Zoning may be made to the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
(Ord. No. 102-019 , § 2, 1-22-19) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 102-019 , § 2, adopted Jan. 22, 2019, repealed the former § 10-7014, and enacted a new § 10-7014 as set out herein. The former 10-7014 pertained to general sign regulations and derived from the original codification of this code. 
Sec. 10-7015. - Removal of unlawful or dangerous signs. 
(a)  Removal. The city may order the removal of any sign in violation of this article by written notice to the permit holder; or if there is no permit holder, then to the owner of the sign; or if the sign owner cannot be found or cannot be determined, then to the sign erector and any party that procured the erection of the sign. If a permit has been issued, such notice shall operate to revoke the permit. 
(b)  Procedure following removal order. If the sign is not removed within the time allowable the city shall remove or cause to be removed the sign and collect the costs thereof as provided below. 
(c)  Removal without notice. The city shall have removed any sign in violation of this article, without giving notice to any party, if: 
(1)  Said sign is upon the public right-of-way or upon other public property or upon the pavement of a private street or drive; or 
(2)  Said sign poses an immediate safety threat to the life or health of any members of the public. 
(d)  Removal after court determination. Other than signs located in a public right-of-way, a sign shall be removed by the city after a final determination by a court that the sign is unlawful and should be removed. If the permittee or owner fails to remove the sign the sign may be immediately removed and disposed of by the city at the expense of the owner. 
Sec. 10-7016. - Sign specifications. 
Location: All signs shall be located outside of any public right-of-way except where otherwise specifically permitted by provisions in this article. Any sign placed on public right-of-way except where otherwise permitted by this article shall be deemed illegal and shall be immediately removed by the responsible party or be subject to removal by the appropriate enforcement body. The Department of Planning and Zoning shall have the right to recover from the owner or person placing such sign the full cost of its removal and disposal. 
Setback: Unless a more restrictive setback is specified in conditions of zoning, all signs shall set back at least ten feet from the right-of-way or twenty (20) feet from the edge of pavement if a private street sign and no sign shall project over the right-of-way. 
Height: The height of a sign shall be computed as the distance from the base of the sign structure at normal grade to the top of the highest attached component of the sign. Normal grade shall be construed to be the lower of: (1) existing grade prior to construction or (2) the newly established grade after construction, exclusive of any filling, berming, mounding, or excavating solely for the purpose of locating the sign. In cases in which the normal grade cannot reasonably be determined, sign height shall be computed on the assumption that the elevation of the normal grade at the base of the sign is equal to the elevation of the nearest point of the crown of a public street or the grade of the land at the principal entrance to the principal structure on the zoned lot, whichever is greater (surveyor's certificate required). Where the normal grade is below the normal grade of a public street, the sign base can be raised to the elevation of the normal grade of the street before the height limitations are applied (surveyor's certificate required). At no time shall any sign's overall height exceed the zoning district's height limitations. 
Area: Sign area is calculated by squaring the area on one side of all sign faces. Signs are entitled to double faces and signs may have more than one single or double face signs as long as the total area of the single sides do not exceed the maximum sign area allowed. Three and four sided signs are not allowed. Regardless of the geometric configuration of the sign, the sign face shall be calculated by adding the total squared areas of the polygons covering the sign face, including any open space within the polygons. 
Graphics: Lettering and numerals on signs located next to limited access, arterial and major collector streets shall not exceed eight inches in height and, next to all other streets, lettering and numerals shall not exceed eight inches in height. 
Safety: No sign shall obstruct or impair the vision of any vehicle operator at the intersection of any public rights-of-way, at any entrance onto or exit from a public road, or any other location where said obstruction could create a traffic hazard. No sign shall be constructed or located where by reason of its position, shape, wording or color, may be confused with an authorized traffic or emergency vehicle device. All signs shall be built in compliance with all applicable building and electrical codes. 
Sign lighting. Sign lighting shall not be directed skyward and the source of light shall be effectively shielded from adjacent residential properties and streets. Sign illumination may be direct or indirect. 
Sec. 10-7017. - Sign regulations by zoning district. 
(a)  Agricultural District AG-1 
Monument sign 
(1)  One, maximum 32-square foot, identification monument sign or two single faced identification monument signs not to exceed eight square feet each for each side of a platted development entrance. Such sign shall identify only the name of the subdivision. Subdivisions with more than one identifiable section as shown on an approved preliminary plat may be allowed identification monuments of four square feet on one side of the entrance to each section. 
(2)  Indirect or direct illumination permitted. 
(3)  Materials used to construct the monument's exterior encasement shall be composed of brick, granite, stone or marble. Material requirement does not include the sign face. 
(4)  Sign height may not exceed eight feet in height. 
Signs during construction 
(1)  One additional sign shall be allowed during construction. The sign shall not be internally illuminated, shall not exceed 12 square feet in area and five feet in height, and shall be allowed beginning with the commencement of construction and ending with the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy or installation of a permanent sign, whichever occurs first. 
Directional signs 
(1)  Signs shall not exceed two (2) feet in height. 
(2)  Company or subdivision logo only. 
(3)  The words enter and exit may be on the directional sign and arrows pointing towards the direction of travel. 
Flags 
(1)  Flag shall be the greater of ½ the primary sign height for the district or fifteen (15) sq. ft. whichever is greater. 
(b)  Single-family residential, CUP R-1, R-1A, RL, RT 
Monument sign 
(1)  One, maximum sixteen (16) square foot, identification monument sign or two (2) single faced identification monument signs not to exceed eight (8) square feet for each side of a platted development entrance, identifying the name of the subdivision only. Subdivisions with more than one (1) identifiable section as shown on an approved preliminary plat may be allowed internal identification monuments of four (4) square feet on one side of the entrance to each section. 
(2)  Indirect or direct illumination permitted. 
(3)  Materials used to construct the monument's exterior encasement shall be composed of brick, granite, stone or marble. Material requirement does not include the sign face. 
(4)  Sign height may not exceed eight feet in height. 
Signs during construction 
(1)  One sign shall be allowed during construction. The sign shall not be internally illuminated, shall not exceed 12 square feet in area and five feet in height, and shall be allowed beginning with the commencement of construction and ending with the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy or installation of a permanent sign, whichever occurs first. 
Directional signs 
(1)  Signs shall not exceed two (2) feet in height. 
(2)  Company or subdivision logo only. 
(3)  The words enter and exit may be on the directional sign and arrows pointing towards the direction of travel. 
Flags 
(1)  Flag shall be the greater of one-half (½) the primary sign height for the district or fifteen (15) sq. ft. whichever is greater. 
(c)  Multi-family residential, R-2, R-3, R-4 and R-5 
Monument sign 
(1)  One, maximum sixteen (16) square foot, identification monument sign or one two-faced monument sign not to exceed eight (8) square feet for each side of the development's entrance identifying the name of the apartments/townhouses only. 
(2)  Indirect or direct illumination permitted. 
(3)  Materials used to construct the monument's exterior encasement shall be composed of brick, granite, stone or marble. Material requirement does not include the sign face. 
(4)  Sign height may not exceed four (4) feet in height. 
Signs during construction 
(1)  One sign shall be allowed during construction. The sign shall not be internally illuminated, shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet in area and five (5) feet in height, and shall be allowed beginning with the commencement of construction and ending with the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy or installation of a permanent sign, whichever occurs first. 
Directional signs 
(1)  Signs shall not exceed two feet in height. 
(2)  Company or subdivision logo only. 
(3)  The words enter and exit may be on the directional sign and arrows pointing towards the direction of travel. 
Flags 
(1)  Flag shall be the greater of one-half the primary sign height for the district or 15 sq. ft. whichever is greater. 
(d)  Commercial Redevelopment (CR) 
Wall sign 
(1)  One wall sign at the front of each place of business except on corner lots which are allowed two wall signs, one on each street facing wall. Wall signs shall not exceed 48 square feet. All such signs shall not be less than 12 inches from the top of the wall or building or closer than nine feet from adjoining ground level. All such signs shall be constructed of brick, wood, plastic or metal materials. May be directly illuminated 
Sidewalk sign 
(1)  Sandwich and sidewalk signs are allowed not to exceed 16 square feet in size. Sign material should be of durable weather resistant PVC or hardwood. Lettering should not exceed four feet in height. 
Signs during construction 
(1)  One sign shall be allowed during construction. The sign shall not be internally illuminated, shall not exceed 12 square feet in area and five feet in height, and shall be allowed beginning with the commencement of construction and ending with the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy or installation of a permanent sign, whichever occurs first. 
Banners 
(1)  Banners shall be allowed for a period not exceeding 30 days with no more than three such 30-day periods being permitted per calendar year per lot. Time periods shall not be consecutive. Banners shall not be more than 24 square feet. No banner shall be mounted so as to extend above the horizontal plane of the roof where the building wall and roof meet or shall not extend more than five feet above grade when on the ground. Banners shall not be erected in any landscape area or placed so as to impede off-street parking. Banners shall not be mounted by any permanent fastener when mounted to a wall. 
Street pole banners 
(1)  Street pole banners shall be mounted on light poles and not exceed 24 square feet. Street pole banners shall not project over a city right-of-way. Street pole banners shall be allowed for a period not to exceed 60 days per calendar year, and a maximum of 30 days per event, with a minimum 30-day break between events. Top and bottom portions must be securely affixed to banner brackets. Banners must be constructed of awning like materials and shall be professionally printed and tasteful in color and design. Signs which become tattered or torn while being displayed shall be immediately replaced or removed. 
Projecting signs 
(1)  The area of each projecting sign shall not exceed 12 square feet per sign face. Each projecting sign may not have more than two sign faces which shall be mounted back-to-back. Only one projecting sign shall be permitted per building. No other signs will be allowed with the permitting of a projecting sign. Projecting signs shall not extend more than three feet into the public right-of-way, but in no case shall a projecting sign pose a hazard to pedestrians or any vehicles. The bottom edge of any projecting sign shall be at least eight feet above the top of the curb of the street adjacent to the building upon which the sign will be attached. In no case, however, may the projecting sign extend above the roofline of the building. Projecting signs may be directly illuminated. To avoid a cluttered appearance and to help ensure a high level of pedestrian visibility, projecting signs must be spaced at least 25 feet apart. Projecting signs may not extend vertically above the window sill of a second story. 
Murals 
(1)  Murals shall be allowed to promote public art. No advertising shall be allowed. 
Directional signs 
(1)  Signs shall not exceed two feet in height. 
(2)  Company or subdivision logo only. 
(3)  The words enter and exit may be on the directional sign and arrows pointing towards the direction of travel. 
Flags 
(1)  One flag may be erected per development. The flagpole shall not exceed 35 feet in height. Flag dimensions shall be proportional to the pole such that the hoist side of the flag is not more than 50 percent of the vertical height of the flagpole. 
(e)  Commercial Districts (C-1, C-2, CL), Medical Institutional Districts (MI) and Educational Institutional Districts (El) 
Monument sign 
(1)  One identification monument per unified development which shall not exceed a maximum surface area of 64 square feet and a maximum 20 feet in height measured from finished grade. May be directly or indirectly illuminated. 
(2)  One identification monument for non-unified businesses shall not exceed a maximum surface area of 24 square feet and a maximum six feet in height measured from finished grade. May be directly or indirectly illuminated. 
(3)  Developments defined as unified developments consisting of outparcels requesting additional monument signs within the unified development may be submitted to the Department of Planning and Zoning for review and permitting. The developer shall submit a sign schedule, including details and a site plan that strategically identifies the location for each additional monument sign. The signs must be located such that more than one business can locate a panel on the sign. Additional monument signs within the unified development shall not exceed four feet in height. 
(4)  Panels displaying the names of each establishment in a unified development must be permitted. Space for each business establishment must be provided. 
(5)  Electronic light emitting diode (LED) electronically changing signage is permitted in accordance with the following provisions: 
a.  The portion of the sign face which is capable of employing (LED) changing sign technology shall be limited to 20 percent or less of the total area of the sign face. 
b.  Each message displayed on any sign display shall remain static for at least ten seconds following the completion of its transition from the previous message. As used in this subsection "static" shall mean a display that is fixed in one position with no portion of the display being in motion or changing in color or light intensity. 
c.  When a message is changed electronically, the transition between a complete static display of the previous message and a complete static display of the next message shall be accomplished in two seconds or less. The transition period shall be measured as that period between the time that the previous message is static and fully illuminated and the next message is static and fully illuminated. 
d.  No changing sign may include animated, flashing, full-motion video or other intermittent elements. The transition period between two fully illuminated static messages displays in an electronically changed sign shall not be considered an intermittent element so long as the purpose of the changing light intensity is to fade or dissolve into the next message. 
e.  No changing sign may have any type of changing effect on the border of the sign that is not fully integrated with a static message display and which does not transition to the next static message display in the same manner as the rest of the display. 
f.  No display or other effect from any electronically changed sign shall cause a glare or other condition that impairs the vision of the driver of any motor vehicle or which otherwise interferes with the safe operation of a motor vehicle. Such display or effect shall be considered an acute traffic hazard and shall be subject to the regulations contained in this chapter. 
g.  An electronically changed sign which uses the scrolling of letters, numbers or symbols onto the sign face to form words or messages shall be allowed to appear on the sign face from only one direction for each static display. Messages transitions achieved by means of the scrolling of the letters, numbers or symbols shall be completed within two seconds and shall remain static for at least ten seconds following the completion of the transition from the previous message. 
h.  All signs shall appropriately adjust display brightness as ambient light levels change so that the brightness of the display does not cause a glare or other condition that impairs the vision of the driver of any motor vehicle or which otherwise interferes with the safe operation of a motor vehicle. The failure of an electronically changed sign to appropriately adjust display brightness as ambient light levels change shall be considered an acute traffic hazard and shall be subject to the regulations contained in this chapter. 
i.  No malfunction of a changing sign shall cause a glare or other condition that impairs the vision of the driver of any motor vehicle or which otherwise interferes with the safe operation of a motor vehicle. Any such condition resulting from a malfunction shall be considered an acute traffic hazard and shall be subject to the regulations contained in this chapter. 
j.  Permit applications for electronically changed signs must also include a certification from the owner or operator of the sign stating that the sign shall at all times be operated in accordance with this part and that the owner or operator shall provide proof of such conformance upon request of the director. Whether the sign is programmed from the site or from a remote location, the computer interface or other method that programs or controls the changing of the sign shall be available for inspection upon request of the director so that the director can determine the messages being displayed. If the information from the computer interface or other control method is not immediately available, the sign shall cease operation until such access can be provided. 
k.  Any general advertising sign which applies to employ changing sign technology shall be required to include as a part of its application, a statement which shall indicate whether the applicant is willing to allow law enforcement agencies to utilize its display capabilities to disseminate emergency messages. (Ord. No. 025-015, 3-15-15) 
(6)  Materials used to construct the monument's exterior encasement shall be composed of brick, granite, stone, or marble. Material requirement does not include the sign face. 
Wall sign 
(1)  One wall sign at the front of each place of business except on corner lots which are allowed two wall signs, one on each street facing wall. Wall signs shall not exceed 25 percent of the wall elevation. All such signs shall not be less the 12 inches from the top of the building. Signs may be directly or indirectly illuminated. Indirectly illuminated signs must have a downward illumination. 
Signs during construction 
(1)  One sign shall be allowed during construction. The sign shall not be internally illuminated, shall not exceed 12 square feet in area and five feet in height, and shall be allowed beginning with the commencement of construction and ending with the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or installation of a permanent sign, whichever occurs first. 
Banners 
(1)  Banners shall be allowed for a period not exceeding 30 days with no more than three such 30-day periods being permitted per calendar year per lot. Time periods shall not be consecutive. Banners shall not be more than 24 square feet. No banner shall be mounted so as to extend above the horizontal plane of the roof where the building wall and roof meet or shall not extend more than five feet above grade when on the ground. Banners shall not be erected in any landscape area or placed so as to impede off-street parking. Banners shall not be mounted by any permanent fastener when mounted to a wall. (Ord. No. 007-10, § 03-15-10) 
Street pole banners 
(1)  Street pole banners shall be mounted on light poles and not exceed 24 square feet. Street pole banners shall not project over a city right-of-way. Street pole banners shall be allowed for a period not to exceed 60 days per calendar year, and a maximum of 30 days per event, with a minimum 30-day break between events. Top and bottom portions must be securely affixed to banner brackets. Banners must be constructed of awning like materials and shall be professionally printed and tasteful in color and design. Signs which become tattered or torn while being displayed shall be immediately replaced or removed. 
Flags 
(1)  One flag may be erected per development. The flagpole shall not exceed 35 feet in height. Flag dimensions shall be proportional to the pole such that the hoist side of the flag is not more than 50 percent of the vertical height of the flagpole. 
Murals 
(1)  Murals shall be allowed to promote public art. No advertising shall be allowed. 
Dynamic digital billboards 
(1)  For every dynamic digital billboard permit that is issued one traditional billboard owned by the permittee must be removed. Billboards may not exceed 35 feet in height. Regulations outlined in subsection 10-7017(f) apply to dynamic digital billboards in the C2 zoning district, excluding d., height. 
Directional signs 
(1)  Signs shall not exceed two feet in height. 
(2)  Company or subdivision logo only. 
(3)  The words enter and exit may be on the directional sign and arrows pointing towards the direction of travel. 
Aerial view signs 
(1)  No aerial view sign shall be visible from the adjacent grade. 
(2)  No aerial view sign shall be displayed on any structure that is not a building. 
(3)  Aerial view signs shall be limited to a maximum area of 24,000 square feet. 
(4)  Aerial view signs shall not be illuminated. 
(5)  The area of any aerial view sign shall not be used in calculating "aggregate sign area." 
(f)  Industrial areas (I-1, I-2 and BP). 
Monument sign 
(1)  One identification monument sign per unified development which shall not exceed 48 square feet in surface area and a maximum 12 feet in height measured from finished grade. May be directly or indirectly illuminated. 
(2)  One identification monument for non-unified businesses shall not exceed a maximum surface area of 24 square feet and a maximum six feet in height measured from finished grade. May be directly or internally illuminated. 
(3)  Developments defined as unified developments consisting of outparcels requesting additional monument signs within the unified development may be submitted to the Department of Planning and Zoning for review and permitting. The developer shall submit a sign schedule, including details and a site plan that strategically identifies the location for each additional monument sign. The signs must be located such that more than one business can locate a panel on the sign. Additional monument signs within the unified development shall not exceed four feet in height. 
(4)  Panels displaying the names of each establishment in a unified development must be permitted. Space for each business establishment must be provided. 
(5)  Materials used to construct the monument's exterior encasement shall be composed of brick, granite, stone or marble. Material requirement does not include the sign face. 
Wall sign 
(1)  One wall sign at the front of each place of business except on corner lots which are allowed two wall signs, one on each street facing wall. Wall signs shall not exceed 25 percent of the wall elevation. All such signs shall not be less than 12 inches from the top of the building. Signs may be directly or indirectly illuminated. Indirectly illuminated signs must have a downward illumination. 
Murals 
(1)  Murals shall be allowed that promote public art. No advertising shall be allowed. 
Flags 
(1)  One flag may be erected per development. The flagpole shall not exceed 35 feet in height. Flag dimensions shall be proportional to the pole such that the hoist side of the flag is not more than 50 percent of the vertical height of the flagpole. 
Billboards 
(1)  Billboards shall be at a minimum 72 square feet and not exceed 672 square feet and shall be located according to the following standards: 
a.  Along, and oriented toward, interstate only. 
b.  At least 500 feet from all residential or AG-1 zoning districts. 
c.  Minimum 35-foot setback from the right-of-way. 
d.  Shall not exceed 75 feet in height. 
e.  Minimum of 500 feet from any other billboards or free standing sign. 
f.  The lot on which the billboard is located shall have sufficient area to accommodate the fall zone, and excepting the sign, no buildings, structures, or appurtenances shall be contained in the fall zone. 
g.  Billboards placed along interstates must attain permission from the Georgia Department of Transportation. 
Dynamic digital billboards 
(1)  Dynamic digital billboards shall be at a minimum 72 square feet and not exceed 672 square feet and shall be located according to the following standards: 
a.  Along, and oriented toward, interstate only. 
b.  At least 500 feet from all residential or AG-1 zoning districts. 
c.  Minimum 35-foot setback from the right-of-way. 
d.  Shall not exceed 75 feet in height. 
e.  Minimum of 500 feet from any other billboards or free standing sign. 
f.  The lot on which the billboard is located shall have sufficient area to accommodate the fall zone, and excepting the sign, no buildings, structures, or appurtenances shall be contained in the fall zone. 
g.  Billboards placed along interstates must attain permission from the Georgia Department of Transportation. 
h.  Any permit for a dynamic digital billboard sign will include a maximum number of displays per cycle for the structure. No more than six displays per minute will be allowed. 
i.  All such signs shall be programmed to automatically freeze in a single display in the event of a malfunction or computer error. 
j.  Signs must be time programmed to change the illuminance of the sign from day to night to maintain the brightness at a level similar to a traditional internally or externally lit sign. Dark backgrounds with light lettering or symbols are preferred between dusk and dawn to minimize detrimental effects. In any event glare, and excessive brightness in the field of view causes loss in visual performance or annoyance, to jeopardize health, safety or welfare, is to be avoided. 
k.  Should the Department of Planning and Zoning, at its sole discretion, until such time as an industry standard is developed, acting within accepted standards, find the sign, any display or effect thereon, to cause glare or impair the vision of the driver of any motor vehicle or which otherwise interferes with the operation of a motor vehicle, upon request, the owner of the sign shall, within one hour, reduce the intensity or contrast of the sign to a level acceptable to the Department, or make any other changes necessary to reduce the interference with the operation of a motor vehicle. Failure to make changes on request shall be cause for revocation of the permit. 
(2)  Such displays shall contain static messages only, changed instantaneously, through dissolve or fade transitions, or other subtle transitions that do not have the appearance of moving text or images. 
(3)  For every one dynamic digital billboard permitted two traditional billboards owned by the permittee must be removed. 
Directional signs 
(1)  Signs shall not exceed two feet in height. 
(2)  Company or subdivision logo only. 
(3)  The words enter and exit may be on the directional sign and arrows pointing towards the direction of travel. 
Aerial view signs 
(1)  No aerial view sign shall be visible from the adjacent grade. 
(2)  No aerial view sign shall be displayed on any structure that is not a building. 
(3)  Aerial view signs shall be limited to a maximum area of 24,000 square feet. 
(4)  Aerial view signs shall not be illuminated. 
(5)  The area of any aerial view sign shall not be used in calculating "aggregate sign area." 
(Ord. No. 007-10, § 1, 3-15-10; Ord. No. 025-015, § 1, 3-16-15 ; Ord. No. 082-017 , § 2, 12-4-17) 
Sec. 10-7018. - Severability. 
Should any article, clause or provision of this ordinance be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such action shall not affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole or any part hereof other than the part hereof other than the part so declared to be invalid, it being the intent of the City Council of East Point that each article, clause and provision hereof be severable. 
Chapter 8 - UNIFORM ROADWAY ADDRESSING SYSTEM 
ARTICLE A. -   

Sec. 10-8001. - Purpose and intent. 
The City Council finds that the efficient and prompt provision of emergency services is essential to the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of East Point. The City Council further finds that inadequate, duplicative and or incorrect address numbers and street names pose a real and substantial threat to the provision of such emergency services. In order to improve the provision of emergency services, the City Council hereby creates the following system for uniformly assigning roadway names and property addresses within East Point. 
Sec. 10-8002. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply: 
Access shall mean point of or means of entry. 
Department shall mean the East Point Department of Planning and Zoning, or any successor to that department. 
Building shall mean the dominant building or buildings on a parcel of land. "Principal building" shall not include accessory structures such as sheds, cabanas or garages (provided that any such garage is not used, in whole or in part, for residential, commercial, office or institutional purposes). 
Corner lots (AKA lot, corner) shall mean a multiple frontage lot adjoining two streets at their intersection. 
Cul-de-sac shall mean a street having only one connection to another street, and is terminated by a vehicular turn around. The maximum depth of a cul-de-sac shall be 600 feet, as measured from the intersection of the center line with the center line of the intersecting street to the back of curb of the cul-de-sac. 
Driveway shall mean a roadway (or driveway) owned and maintained by a private entity and used for access and circulation internal to a property. 
Entrance way shall mean the main access to the building or structure. 
Entrance roadway shall mean the roadway from which access to a property or principle structure located upon said property is obtained. 
Gated communities shall mean an enclave of homes with a unique identity, surrounded by walls, often with security guards, containing privately owned and maintained roadways under the management and responsibility of an established homeowner's association. 
Lot frontage shall mean the shortest of any property line adjoining a street or, for lots requiring no street frontages, oriented toward a street. A property line adjoining a stub street shall not be considered as frontage unless it is proposed for access or is the only street frontage. Front yard requirements shall be measured from this property line. In situations where a multiple frontage lot has equal distance on street frontages, the director of the Department of Planning and Zoning shall determine the legal lot frontage. 
Private street shall mean a roadway constructed to East Point Standards but owned and maintained by a private entity. Necessary easements for ingress and egress for police, fire, emergency vehicles and all operating utilities shall be provided. 
Public street shall mean a roadway owned and maintained by the federal, state, or local government. 
Privately owned communities. See gated communities. 
Project shall mean an organized undertaking to develop a property pursuant to a permit from East Point, issued pursuant to an approved plan found to be consistent with the rules, regulations and standards of State, Federal and local regulatory agencies. 
Roadway shall mean and include, but not be limited to, any and all roads, drives, streets, highways, or routes (regardless of designation) for vehicular traffic in East Point, whether public or private, accepted or unaccepted. "Roadway" shall not include private driveways that serve only one principal building. 
Sec. 10-8003. - Address numbers. 
All residential, commercial, office, industrial and other tracts of land in East Point on which a principal building is or will be located are required to be issued an address by the department or its successor department. Each such address shall be posted by the owner on or about the tract in accordance with the following guidelines: 
(1)  Except as permitted in subsection 10-8003(1) of this ordinance, all addresses shall contain (in addition to the roadway name) numbers only. Alphanumeric or lettered addresses shall not be permitted. Each address shall conform to the following rules: 
(a)  Multi-tenant or multi-occupant commercial, office or institutional developments shall have only one address and shall be assigned a building address for each principal building and individual suite or unit numbers by the department. Once a systematic pattern of address has been established, it shall be maintained for the entire project. Alternatively, such commercial, office or institutional developments shall seek approval of names of internal streets within the development, in which case the department shall assign addresses on such internal streets. Multi-family residential developments (including apartments, townhouses and condominiums) shall have building addresses for each principal building and numbers for each individual unit as approved by the department. Condominiums and/or town homes to be occupied by independent owners may be assigned individual addresses for each separate unit as long as said units are not stacked one over the other. 
(b)  For non-single family residential properties, all principal buildings which are 50 feet or less from the edge of the roadway shall have affixed to the building the address number(s) directly over or on the main entrance door(s). Such address numbers shall be at least six inches and not more than 12 inches in height and shall be of a color which contrasts with the surrounding surface so as to be readily identifiable without obstruction from the edge of the roadway. (2000 International Fire Code, Section 505). Each building number shall be prominently displayed on each side of said building that is visible from the main access or parking area serving the project or complex in which the building is located. Such building number shall be at least 12 inches in height and shall be of a color which contrasts with the surrounding surface so as to be readily identifiable without obstruction from the edge of the roadway.) 
(c)  For non-single family residential properties, all principal buildings which are more than 50 feet from the edge of the roadway shall have affixed to the building or structure the address number(s) directly over or on the main entrance door(s). Such address numbers shall be at least eight inches and no more than 16 inches in height and shall be of a color that contrasts with the surrounding surface so as to be readily identifiable without obstruction from the edge of the roadway. (2000 International Fire Code, Section 505). Each building number shall be prominently displayed on each side of said building that is visible from the main access or parking area serving the project or complex in which the building is located. Such building number shall be at least 12 inches in height and shall be of a color which contrasts with the surrounding surface so as to be readily identifiable without obstruction from the edge of the roadway.) 
(d)  For all commercial, office, industrial or multi-family residential developments that contain multiple addresses and/or building numbers, the range of addresses and/or building numbers shall also be posted on the main sign or identification monument at the main entrance and shall be readily identifiable from the edge of the roadway. Directions to other buildings within such a development shall be clearly posted at each internal roadway intersection. For multi-family residential developments, directional signs indicating the location of individual units shall be placed on each floor at the primary point of ingress and egress (e.g., at the elevator or main stairwell). 
(e)  For all commercial, office, industrial or multi-family residential developments any entrance way or principal building that is not readily visible from the roadway, address numbers shall also be posted at the main entrance or driveway to the principal building. Such address numbers shall be at least six inches and not more than 12 inches in height and shall be of a color which contrasts with the surrounding surface so as to be readily identifiable without obstruction from the edge of the roadway. (2000 International Fire Code, Section 505). 
(f)  For properties whose primary access is different from their lot frontage, address number shall be assigned and posted from the access point. 
(g)  Each residential one- or two-family dwelling shall have its address number posted on a mailbox or addressing post located at or near the main entrance or vehicle access point to the property. Such address numbers shall have a minimum stroke height of three inches and shall be of a color that contrasts with the surrounding surface so as to be readily identifiable without obstruction from the edge of the roadway. 
(h)  Notwithstanding any other provisions in this article, all properties shall be identified by a property number of a minimum size as identified in this section. All signs, including temporary signs and identification monuments on properties which have been assigned a property number (street number) shall display the numbers and/or letters with characters that are at least four inches tall for signs located along limited access, arterial and major collector streets, and three inches tall along minor collector and local streets. 
(i)  If access to any principal building is by way of a roadway different from the principal building's address roadway, the address number shall be posted on the address roadway. In such cases, the address roadway and address number shall also be posted on each entrance roadway at the intersection of the access point and the entrance roadway. 
(j)  Each roadway, including state and federal highways, shall contain address numbers that are consistently sequenced throughout its length. 
(k)  Address numbers shall be assigned such that, traveling from lower address numbers to higher address numbers, odd-numbered addresses are on the right side of the roadway and even-numbered addresses are on the left side of the roadway. 
(1)  Each property owner shall keep all address numbers in good repair and shall not allow such numbers to be obscured as viewed from the roadway. 
(m)  To the extent not in conflict with the provisions of this article, East Point shall follow the guidelines set forth in the Proposed Property Numbering System for Metropolitan Atlanta promulgated by the Atlanta Region Metropolitan Planning Commission (1963), except for cul-de-sacs. Cul-de-sacs shall be addressed in three digits numbers (100, 110, etc). Cul-de-sacs shall comply with the remaining provisions of this section and this article. 
(n)  The property owner shall have the responsibility of ensuring compliance with the requirements of this section, regardless of whether the premises are leased or owner-occupied. 
Sec. 10-8004. - Subdivisions and other new developments. 
All project names for and roadway names and addresses within subdivisions and other new developments shall be reviewed and approved by the department during the minor subdivision plat or land disturbance permit (LDP) approval process. Prior to the release of a LDP, all street names must be approved for use within the subdivision. Once a project name has been approved, it shall not be changed without written permission by the director of the department. For continuity, the LDP number assigned to the project, regardless of the project name used at the time of submittal, must appear on the face of all referenced documents, including, but not limited to, all LDP drawings, studies, plans and plats. 
A temporary sign bearing the name of the project and the approved LDP number shall be installed within 24-hours of the beginning of any activity on the subject property, clearly visible in both directions from the main thoroughfare serving as access to the project. This sign must be updated within 24-hours should there be any change of the name approved by the director of the department and shall be maintained until a permanent identification sign or monument is installed. Sign must be in accordance with regulations outlined in Chapter 7, Signs. 
Each application for a land disturbance permit for a multi-family development shall include a concept plan identifying all proposed roadways with the proposed names for said roadways. Any subsequent request for roadway name or address changes by the subdivider or developer will require submission of a new preliminary plat (or concept plan, as applicable) for review by the department. 
Once an LDP is approved, no lot number, street name or address shall be changed by the re-recording of a plat without the prior expressed written consent of the department. No application for a permit on said lot thus affected will be considered until approved by the department. Each request submitted for the re-recordation of a plat shall be charged a processing fee as approved by the City Council. 
Exceptions. When the director of the department finds that adherence to the address numbering standards, set forth in this article would pose a threat to public safety, deviations from the standard address numbering policies and procedures may be allowed. 
Project names. No new project names may be recorded, used or posted unless and until approved by the department. Duplication of project names is prohibited. The use of a project name that is a homonym, sounds like or may otherwise be confused with a project name that is already in use within the City of East Point is prohibited. 
Roadway names. No new roadway name may be posted or used in an address unless and until approved by the department. 
(1)  Roadway names must be reserved for use prior to the release of the land disturbance permit or minor plat. 
(2)  Roadway names, once approved, shall be held in reservation for use by the owner/developer for a period not to exceed 36 months. 
Standards for roadway names. 
(a)  Duplication of roadway names is prohibited. No roadway name shall contain a number (e.g., 5th Street), and, except for suffixes, there shall be no punctuation or abbreviation allowed in any roadway name. 
(b)  The use of the same roadway name that is already in use within the City of East Point is prohibited. 
(c)  Except to the extent that the department assigns a quadrant designation for inclusion in an address (e.g., "S.W."), the use of directions or compass points in roadway names is prohibited. 
(d)  The use of a roadway name that is a homonym, sounds like or may otherwise be confused with a roadway name that is already in use within the City of East Point is prohibited. Duplicate names with different suffixes should be limited within the same project whenever possible, subject to the review and approval of the department. 
(e)  Each roadway, regardless of length, shall have only one name designation throughout its length. Each new roadway that is in alignment with an existing roadway shall bear the same name as said existing roadway. 
(f)  No roadway shall be assigned the name of a person, including first and last, of any person, living or dead, and/or assigned honorary names unless the person has been dead ten or more years. Name changes must be approved by action of City Council after notice is given and a public hearing is held. 
(g)  No roadway name, including spaces between words and suffix, may be more than 16 letters in length, unless approved by the Department of Public Works. 
(h)  To the greatest extent feasible, roadways that cross into other jurisdictions shall be named and addressed consistently with the names and addresses assigned by such other jurisdictions. 
(i)  Street signs, including street name signs, must be installed before any building permits are issued within a development, except that a bond may be offered to cover the costs of the signage, with an additional ten percent for administrative fees, and temporary signs erected to release building permits. Permanent signs must be installed prior to the release of any certificate of occupancy within the development. 
Sec. 10-8005. - Private roadway naming. 
The following procedures and regulations are established for the mandatory and voluntary naming of private roadways, easements and drives. 
(1)  A private roadway, easement or drive serving residential properties shall be required to be named and addressed if there are more than two principal buildings that are not part of a single tract of land which derive access from such private roadway, easement or drive. 
(2)  If a private roadway, easement or drive requires naming pursuant to subsection (a), above, a petition, containing the signatures of at least 90 percent of the owners of all real property along such private roadway, easement or drive, must be submitted to the department. In addition to a request for approval, the petition shall include the proposed name for the private roadway, easement or drive that is acceptable to the petitioners. The proposed name shall conform to the other requirements of this article. The petition shall be accompanied by a general location map and the land lot(s), district, and section within which such private roadway, easement or drive is located. 
(3)  Upon approval of a name for the private roadway, easement or drive, and prior to the issuance of any building permits or additional permits the petitioners, shall cause a roadway sign conforming to East Point Guidelines from the Sign Installation Policy in New Subdivisions approved by the East Point City Council to be erected and maintained at each intersection of such private roadway, easement or drive and any adjacent East Point or state right-of-way. Maintenance of such roadway signs and private roadways, easements or drives shall be the responsibility of the owners of the real property situated along such private roadways, easements or drives; East Point shall have no responsibility for the erection and/or maintenance of these items. 
(4)  In the event that the owners of the real property situated along a private roadway, easement or drive that requires a name, as set forth above, fail to initiate, respond to or participate in the naming procedure set forth above, the department, after due notice and a minimum 30-day grace period, shall recommend to the city council a name and address numbers for the private roadway, easement or drive and all real property located thereon. The property owners along such private roadway, easement or drive shall be responsible for the erection and maintenance of roadway signs, as set forth in subsection (3), above. 
Sec. 10-8006. - Changing of existing roadway names and addresses. 
(a)  In any instance where the City Council, upon recommendation of the director of the department, determines that an existing road name may pose a threat to the public health, safety or welfare, the City Council on its own motion may change such roadway name after notice is given and a public hearing is held. 
(1)  Notice of the proposed change and hearing date shall be given at least 25 days, but no more than 45 days, prior to the scheduled date of the City Council hearing on the proposed change. 
(2)  The director of the department shall post a sign at approximately one mile intervals throughout the length of the roadway for which a name change is proposed and shall give notice by regular mail to the owners (according to the tax records of East Point) of each property which bears an address on the roadway for which a name change is proposed. 
(3)  Such signs and notices shall contain the time, date, place and purpose of the hearing, as well as a statement of the beginning and ending points of the segment of the roadway for which the name change is proposed. Notice shall not be considered inadequate if the signs are removed or mail is not delivered. 
(b)  Where the City Council, upon recommendation from the director of the department, determines that the existing address numbering on a particular roadway poses a threat to the public health, safety or welfare, the City Council may change such address numbering after notice. 
(1)  Notice of the change shall be given by regular mail to the owners (according to the tax records of East Point) of each property that bears an address on the roadway for which an address numbering change will occur. 
(2)  Such notice shall contain the existing full address, the new address, the reason for the change, and the effective date of the change. 
(3)  The effective date shall be no less than 30 or no more than 60 days following the date on which the matter is scheduled for decision by the City Council. Notice shall not be considered inadequate if mail is not delivered. 
(c)  When no more than ten percent of the existing addresses along a public or private roadway are deemed to pose a threat to the public health, safety or welfare, the director of the department may approve the change of such address numbering after notice is given by regular mail to the owners (according to the tax records of East Point) of each property that bears an address on the roadway for which an address numbering change will occur. 
(1)  Such notice shall contain the existing full address, the new address, the reason for the change, and the effective date of the change. 
(2)  These changes shall be considered effective at the time of the approval by the director, and shall be presented for ratification to the City Council at the next regularly scheduled meeting. 
(3)  The effective date shall be no less than 30 or no more than 60 days following the date on which the matter is scheduled for decision by the City Council. Notice shall not be considered inadequate if mail is not delivered. 
(d)  No name of any commercial, office, industrial or residential development or subdivision shall be changed unless a request for such a change is first submitted to and approved by the department. In determining the acceptability of such a name change, the department shall seek to avoid confusion from similarly named developments. 
Sec. 10-8007. - Roadway and thoroughfare designation suffixes. 
Any suffix accepted within the standards of the United States Postal Service, reflected in part in the lists provided by the National Emergency Number Association (NENA), shall be acceptable for naming roadways and thoroughfares within East Point. The following are examples of the most commonly used permitted suffixes in the naming of private and public roadways: 
(1)  Avenue (to be abbreviated "Ave") 
(2)  Bend (to be abbreviated "Bnd") 
(3)  Boulevard (to be abbreviated "Blvd") 
(4)  Circle (to be abbreviated "Cir") 
(5)  Court (to be abbreviated "Ct") 
(6)  Cove (to be abbreviated "Cv") 
(7)  Drive (to be abbreviated "Dr") 
(8)  Grove (to be abbreviated "Grv") 
(9)  Hall (no abbreviation) 
(10)  Highway (to be abbreviated "Hwy") 
(11)  Hill (to be abbreviated "HI") 
(12)  Lane (to be abbreviated "Ln") 
(13)  Loop (no abbreviation) 
(14)  Parkway (to be abbreviated ("Pkwy") 
(15)  Pass (no abbreviation) 
(16)  Place (to be abbreviated ("P1") 
(17)  Point (to be abbreviated "Pt") 
(18)  Ridge (to be abbreviated "Rdg") 
(19)  Road (to be abbreviated "Rd") 
(20)  Square (to be abbreviated "Sq") 
(21)  Street (to be abbreviated "St") 
(22)  Terrace (to be abbreviated "Ter") 
(23)  Trace (to be abbreviated "Tree") 
(24)  Trail (to be abbreviated "Tr1") 
(25)  View (to be abbreviated "Vw") 
(26)  Walk (no abbreviation) 
(27)  Way (no abbreviation) 
Sec. 10-8008. - Street signs. 
(a)  Each roadway intersection shall have a minimum of one street sign indicating the names of each roadway. 
(b)  At each intersection of an arterial or major collector roadway and another roadway, the required sign(s) may also include numbering indicating addresses on the arterial or major collector roadway in the vicinity of the intersection. 
(c)  Public streets shall be identified by a sign bearing white retro-reflective letters and a green retro-reflective background. 
(d)  Private streets shall be identified by a sign bearing white retro-reflective letters and a blue retro-reflective background. 
(e)  Private signage on a public street shall be allowed in accordance to the standards as established by the Department of Public Works pursuant to the completion and approval of an application entitled "Permit to Erect and Maintain Custom Street Signs on East Point's Right-of-Way". 
Sec. 10-8009. - Administration and enforcement. 
This article shall be administered and enforced by the Department of Planning and Zoning, with the assistance of the Fire Department, the Department of Public Works, and of Emergency Services/911. 
The Director of Planning and Zoning the Fire Chief, the Director of Emergency Services/911, and their representatives shall have the right to periodically inspect property within East Point for compliance with this article. If, through inspection, it is determined that a particular property is not in compliance with any provision of this article, the Director of Planning and Zoning shall notify the owner (according to the tax records of East Point) of the property by regular mail of such violation and shall further give the owner a reasonable time (not less than 120 days) within which to cause the property to be brought into compliance with this article. In the event that such compliance is not effected within the time period set forth in the above notice, the owner shall be deemed in violation of this article. If any person other than the owner removes or damages an address number that is otherwise incompliance with this article without the permission of the property owner, or if any person removes or damages any public or private street sign, said person shall be deemed to have violated this article. 
Only the Director of Planning and Zoning, the Director of Public Works, and their representatives shall have the right to require that signs are installed and maintained on public roadways. Individuals or entities seeking to erect a sign for a private roadway shall obtain a custom sign permit from the Department of Public Works. 
The Director of Planning and Zoning, the Fire Chief, the Director of Emergency Services/911, and their representatives shall have the power to conduct such investigations as they may deem reasonably necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose shall have the power to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purposes of investigation and inspecting such property for compliance with any or all provisions of this article. 
No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of East Point who requests entry for the purposes of investigation and inspection and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper, or interfere with such representative or agent while he or she is in the process of carrying out his or her official duties. 
Notwithstanding the contents of this article, the director may establish additional procedures or requirements as may be deemed necessary when to do so is determined to be in the best interest of the community and the provision of the general safety and welfare of the public. 
Sec. 10-8010. - Appeals. 
Unless otherwise stated, all appeals to the standards as established herein shall be subject to the review and approval of the Director of Planning and Zoning. The director may confer with the Department of Public Works or the Department of Emergency Services/911 for consideration of the ramification such a waiver may have upon public safety. 
Sec. 10-8011. - Penalties. 
(a)  Stop work orders. Upon notice from the director of the department, work that is being done on any subdivision, new development or other project (1) contrary to the provisions of this article, (2) without having first obtained approved roadway names and addresses from East Point, or (3) not in compliance with such approved roadways or addresses shall be immediately stopped. Such notice shall (1) be in writing, (2) shall be given to the owner of the property, his or her authorized agent, or the person or persons in charge of the activity on the property, and (3) shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. 
(b)  Violations. For purposes of enforcing the provisions of this article, the Municipal Court of East Point, or any other court of competent jurisdiction hearing cases brought as violations of the provisions of this article, or Code Enforcement shall be authorized to impose penalties or fines not to exceed $1,000.00 for each violation. Each day during which a violation exists shall constitute a separate violation. 
(c)  Lien power. In the event a property owner fails or refuses to correct a violation of this article within the time set forth in the written notice provided for in subsection 10-8008(b) of this article, East Point shall be entitled to take such remedial action as it deems necessary to ensure compliance, whereupon the property owner shall reimburse East Point for any cost or expense associated with such compliance efforts. In the event that the property owner fails or refuses to make such reimbursement, East Point shall be entitled to place a lien on the property to secure payment and reimbursement for such costs and expenses. 
(d)  Citation power. Persons designated by the Director of Planning and Zoning and by the Director of Public Works are hereby authorized to issue citations or summons or both, charging violations under this article, returnable to the Municipal Court of East Point. 
Chapter 9 - CONDITION AND USE OF COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL BUILDINGS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Health and sanitation, Pt. 7. 

Sec. 10-9001. - Findings. 
(a)  Findings and declaration of policy. 
(1)  It is hereby found and declared that there exist, in the City of East Point, structures used for commercial and industrial use which are, or may become in the future substandard with respect to structure, equipment or maintenance or, further, that such conditions, including, but not limited to, structural deterioration, lack of maintenance and appearance of exterior premises, infestation and existence of fire hazards constitute a menace to the health, safety, morals, welfare and reasonable comfort of the citizens of East Point. 
(2)  It is further found and declared that, by reason of lack of maintenance and because of progressive deterioration, certain properties have the further effect of creating blighting conditions and initiating slums, and that if the same are not curtailed and removed, these conditions will grow and spread and will necessitate the expenditure of large amounts of public funds to correct and eliminate such conditions, that by reason if timely regulations and restrictions contained in this code, the desirability and amenities of commercial and industrial uses may be enhanced and the public health, safety and welfare protected and fostered. 
Sec. 10-9002. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this code is: 
(1)  To protect the public health, safety, morals and welfare by establishing minimum standards governing the maintenance, appearance and conditions of commercial, business and industrial premises; 
(2)  To establish minimum standards governing utilities, facilities and other physical components and conditions essential to make the aforesaid facilities fit for occupancy and use; 
(3)  To fix certain responsibilities and duties upon owners and operators; 
(4)  To authorize and establish procedures for the inspection of commercial and industrial premises and; 
(5)  To fix penalties for the violations of this code, and to provide for the repair, demolition or vacation of premises unfit for occupancy or use. 
This code is hereby declared to be remedial and essential for the public interest and it is intended that this code be liberally construed to effectuate the purposes as stated herein. 
Sec. 10-9003. - Definitions. 
Accessory structure: A structure, the use of which is incidental to that of the main building and which is attached thereto or located on the same premises. 
Building: Any structure with a roof, designed or built for the support, enclosure, shelter, or protection of any persons, animals, or property of any kind. 
Chief Building Official: Any person inspecting for compliance with the various adopted codes who is a licensed design professional (architect or engineer) or holds one of the following certifications from SBCCI (ICC): Property Maintenance and Housing Inspector, Housing Rehabilitation Inspector, Building Inspector, Building Plan Examiner or Commercial Combination Inspector. 
Deterioration: the condition of a building or part thereof characterized by holes, breaks, rot, crumbling, cracking, peeling, rusting or other evidence of physical decay or neglect, excessive use. All exterior wood and composition surfaces shall be properly protected from the elements and against decay by paint, stain, or other protective coating and applied in a workmanlike manner. 
Elements: Any element, whether created by nature or by man, which, with reasonable forseeability could carry liter from one place to another. Elements shall include, but not be limited to, air current, rain, water current and animals. 
Exposed to public view: Any premises, or any part thereof, or any building, or any part thereof, which may be viewed by the public. 
Exterior of premises: Open space on the premises outside of any building thereon. 
Extermination: The control and elimination of insects, rodents and vermin. 
Garbage: Decayed and decomposed animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preemption, cooking and consumption of food. 
Infestation: The presence of insects, rodents, vermin or other pests on the premises which constitute a health hazard. 
Nuisance: 
(1)  Any public nuisance known at common law or in equity jurisprudence, or as provided by the statutes of the state or the ordinances of the city. 
(2)  Any attractive nuisance which may prove detrimental to the health or safety of children whether in a building, on the premises of a building, or upon an unoccupied lot. This includes, but is not limited to, abandoned wells, shafts, basements, excavations, abandoned iceboxes, refrigerators, motor vehicles, any structurally unsound fences or structures; lumber, trash, fences, debris, or vegetation such as poison ivy, oak or sumac, which may prove a hazard for inquisitive minors. 
(3)  Physical conditions dangerous to human life or detrimental to health of persons on or near the premises where the condition exists. 
(4)  Insanitary conditions or anything offensive to the senses or dangerous to health, in violation of this code. 
(5)  Whatever renders air, food, or drink unwholesome or detrimental to the health of human beings. 
(6)  Fire hazards. 
Operator: Any person who has charge, care or control of premises, or a part thereof, whether with or without the knowledge and consent of the owner. 
Owner: Any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others, shall have a legal or equitable title to any premises, with or without accompanying actual possession thereof; or shall have charge, care, or control of premises, as owner or agent of the owner, or as executor, executrix, administrator, administratrix, trustee, receiver or guardian of the estate or as a mortgagee in possession either by virtue of a court order or by voluntary surrender by the person holding the legal title. Any person who is a lessee subletting or reassigning any part or all of any premises shall be deemed to be a co-owner with the lessor and shall have joint responsibility over the portion of the premises sublet or assigned by said lessee. 
Premises: A lot, plot or parcel of land including the buildings or structures thereon. 
Refuse: All decayed and decomposed solid waste, except body wastes, including, but not limited to, garbage, rubbish, ashes, dead animals, abandoned automobiles and solid wastes. 
Registered mail: Letters needing a chain of custody that provides more control than regular mail. The mail has its details recorded in a register to enable their location to be tracked. 
Rubbish: Solid wastes consisting of both combustible and non combustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery, and similar materials. 
Sec. 10-9004. - Applicability. 
(a)  Generally. Every commercial or industrial establishment, and the premises on which it is situated in the city, used or intended to be used for commercial or industrial occupancy shall comply with the provisions of this code, whether or not such building shall have been constructed, altered or repaired before or after the enactment of this code, and irrespective of any permits or licenses which shall have been issued for the use or occupancy of the building or premises for the construction or repair of the building, or for the installation or repair of equipment or facilities prior to the enactment of this code. This code establishes minimum standards for the initial and continued occupancy and use of all commercial and industrial buildings, and does not replace or modify standards otherwise established for the construction, repair, alteration or use of the building, equipment or facilities contained therein, except as provided in subsection (b). Where there is mixed occupancy, any commercial or industrial use therein shall be nevertheless regulated by and subject to the provisions of this code. 
(b)  Higher standard to prevail in case of conflict with other ordinances or laws. In any case where the provisions of this code imposes a higher standard than set forth in any other ordinances of the city or under the laws of the state, then the standard as set forth herein shall prevail, but if the provisions of this code impose a lower standard than any other ordinance of the city or of the laws of the state, then the higher standard contained in any other ordinance or law shall prevail. 
(c)  Issuance and renewal of other permits and licenses. All licenses and permits shall be issued upon compliance with this code as well as compliance with the ordinance under which such licenses and permits are granted. 
(d)  Enforcement of and compliance with other ordinances. No license or permit or other certification of compliance with this code shall constitute a defense against any violation of any other ordinance of the city applicable to any structure or premises, nor shall any provision herein relieve any owner or operator from complying with any such other provision or any official of the city from enforcing any such other provision. 
Sec. 10-9005. - Administrative provisions. 
(a)  Supervision. Responsibility for enforcement of this code is vested in the chief building official and all inspections, regulations, enforcement and hearings on violations of the provision of this code, unless expressly stated to the contrary, shall be under his or her direction and supervision. The city manager may appoint or designate such other public officials or employees of the city to perform duties as may be necessary to the enforcement of this code, including the making of inspections and holding of hearings. 
(b)  When inspections are to be made. All buildings and premises subject to this code are subject to inspections from time to time by the enforcing officer. At the time of such inspections, all rooms and parts of the premises must be available and accessible for such inspections, and the owner and occupant operator are required to provide the necessary arrangements to facilitate such inspections. Such inspections shall be made during regular business hours of the commercial or industrial enterprise occupying the said premises unless there is reason to believe a violation exists of a character which is an immediate threat to health or safety requiring inspection or abatement without delay. 
(c)  Where entry by inspectors is refused. 
(1)  Penalties. Where the chief building official or his or her agent is refused entry or access or is otherwise impeded or prevented by the owner or occupant operator from conducting an inspection of the premises, such person shall be in violation of this code and subject to the penalties hereunder. 
(2)  Search warrant or access warrant. In addition to the provisions of subsection (c)(1) the chief building official may, upon affidavit, apply to the magistrate of the city for a search warrant setting forth factually the actual conditions and circumstances that provide a reasonable basis for believing that a nuisance or violation of this code exists on the premises, and if the magistrate is satisfied as to the matter set forth in the said affidavit, he or she shall authorize the issuance of a search warrant permitting access to and inspection of that part of the premises on which the nuisance or violation exists. 
(3)  Procedure where violation discovered. Where a violation of this code hereunder is found to exist, a written notice from the chief building official shall be served on the person or persons responsible for the correction thereof. The notice shall give the property owner ten days based on the practical considerations of completing measures to comport with standards, specify the violation or violations committed and what must be done to correct the same. 
(4)  Service of notice. Notice shall be served personally or by certified mail, addressed to the last known address of the person to be served. If the last known address cannot be ascertained, the notice may be posted on the outside front entrance of the building. 
(5)  Notice to become an order unless hearing is requested. Within ten days of the date of service of a notice, the notice shall constitute a final order unless any person affected by the notice requests a hearing thereon, serves, a written request within the ten-day period in person or by mail to the chief building official. Such request for a hearing shall set forth briefly the grounds or reasons on which the request for a hearing is based and the factual matters contained in the notice of violation which are to be disputed at the hearing. The chief building official upon receipt of the request shall within 30 days from and upon five days' notice to the party aggrieved set the matter down for hearing. 
(6)  Determination at hearing. At any hearing provided hereunder the chief building official shall be vested with all the powers provided by law to compel the attendance of witnesses and parties in interest and service of subpoena, to require by subpoena the production of books, records or other documents at any such hearing which may be pertinent to matters to be determined by him and to enforce any such subpoena or secure any order for the enforcement of such subpoena as provided by law. Determination shall be made within ten days from the completion of the hearing. The chief building official shall issue an order either incorporating the determinations and directions contained in the notice, modifying the same or withdrawing the notice. 
(7)  Extensions of time. The chief building official may extend the time for correction or abatement of the violations for an additional period of time not to exceed 30 days, except where major capital improvements or renovations are involved, in which instance the time for completion may be extended for a period not to exceed 90 days beyond the expiration date of the original notice. 
(8)  Summary abatement in emergency; notice and hearing not required. Where the violation or condition existing on the premises are of such a nature as to constitute an immediate threat to life and limb unless abated without delay, the chief building official may either abate the violation or condition immediately or order the owner, operator or occupant to correct the violation within a period of time not to exceed three days, and upon failure to do so, the chief building official shall abate the condition immediately thereafter. 
(9)  Cost of abatement to be a lien against premises. Where abatement of a violation or condition is required hereunder, the chief building official shall cause to be certified to the owner of the premises the cost thereof. After determination of abatement is made as the determination shall be certified to the tax collector and shall become a lien on the property and be collected by the same procedure as real property taxes. 
Sec. 10-9006. - Penalties. 
A violation of any of the sections or subsections of this code shall be punishable as provided in section 1-1006 of this Code. Each violation of a section or subsection of this code shall constitute a separate and distinct violation independent of any other section or subsection or any order issued pursuant to this code. Each day's failure to comply with any such section or subsection shall constitute a separate violation. 
Sec. 10-9007. - Duties and responsibilities of owner and operator. 
(a)  Maintenance of exterior of premises free of hazards and insanitary conditions. The exterior of the premises and of all structures thereon shall be kept free of all nuisances, and any hazards to the safety of occupants, pedestrians and other persons utilizing the premises, and free of insanitary conditions, and any of the foregoing shall be promptly removed and abated by the owner or operator. It shall be the duty of the owner or operator to keep the premises free of hazards which include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Refuse. An accumulation of brush, broken glass, stumps and roots that present a safety hazard. Also garbage, trash and debris which present an unsanitary and/or a safety hazard. 
(2)  Natural growth. Dead trees and limbs or other natural growth which, by reason of rotting or deteriorating conditions or storm damage, constitutes a hazard to persons in the vicinity thereof. 
(3)  Overhangings. Loose and overhanging objects which, by reason of location above ground level, constitute a danger of falling on persons in the vicinity thereof. 
(4)  Sources of Infestations. The permitting of any premises to become infested with vermin or rodents is declared to be a nuisance and unlawful. No owner, occupant or person in charge or control of any premises shall cause or knowingly permit such premises to become or to remain infested with vermin or rodents. 
(5)  The exterior of the premises, the exterior of structures and the condition of accessory structures shall be maintained so that the appearance of the premises and structures shall not constitute a blighting factor. 
(b)  Storage of commercial and industrial material. There shall not be stored or used at a location visible from the sidewalk, street or other public areas, equipment and materials relating to commercial or industrial use. 
(c)  General maintenance. The exterior of every commercial structure or accessory structure, including fences or enclosures, shall be maintained in good repair. The same shall be maintained free of broken glass, loose shingles, crumbling stone or brick, excessive peeling paint, loose boards or other conditions reflective of deterioration or inadequate maintenance to the end that the property itself may be preserved, safety and fire hazards eliminated and adjoining properties from blighting influences. 
(d)  Litter control 
(1)  Litter collections and storage area. Every owner, occupant or lessee of a building used for commercial or industrial purposes shall maintain litter collection and storage areas in a clean condition and insure that all litter collection and storage areas shall constitute a violation of this subsection. 
(2)  Duty to collect litter before it is carried from the premises. All litter that is subject to movement by the elements shall be secured by the owner of the premises where it is found before the litter is allowed to be removed from the premises by the elements. 
(3)  Neglected premises visible to the public. It shall be the duty of any person owning or controlling any premises, including vacant lots visible from any public place or private premises, to maintain such premises in a reasonable clean and orderly manner. It shall be a validation of this subsection to abandon, neglect or disregard the condition or appearance of any premises so as to permit it to accumulate litter. 
(4)  Areas around business premises. The owner or person in control of any public place, including, but not limited to, restaurants, shopping centers, fast food outlets, stores, hotels, motels, industrial establishments, office buildings, gas stations, and hospitals and clinics shall at all times keep the premises clean of all litter and shall take measures, including daily cleanup of the premises, to prevent litter from being carried by the elements to adjoining premises. It shall be a violation of this subsection to abandon, neglect or disregard the condition or appearance of such premises so as to permit it to accumulate litter. 
(5)  Loading and unloading docks. The person owning, operating or in control of loading or unloading a dock shall at all timed maintain the dock area free of litter in such a manner that litter will be prevented from being carried from the premises by the elements. 
(6)  Construction sites. The property owners and the prime contractors in charge of nay construction site shall maintain the construction site in such a manner that litter will be prevented from being carried from the premises by the elements. All litter from construction activities or any related activities shall be picked up at the end of each work day and place in containers which will prevent litter being carried from the premises by the elements. 
(7)  Maintaining sidewalks and alleys. Persons owning, occupying or in control of any premises shall keep the sidewalks and alleys adjacent thereto free of litter. Owners or occupants shall sweep or rinse off the sidewalks abutting their premises as often as may be required to keep the walk reasonably free from dirt, paper and waste. 
(8)  Abandoned garbage. It shall be unlawful for any person who is in control of any premises upon which is located or on whose behalf there is maintained any container of refuse, waste, garbage, which has been containerized in accordance with a contract for its removal, to allow refuse, waste or garbage to remain uncollected for longer than seven days or, in any case, until after that refuse, waste or garbage creates any condition which is offensive to persons upon any private premises or public places. 
(e)  Windows. All windows exposed to public view shall be kept clean and free foreign substances except when necessary in the course of changing displays. No storage of materials, stock or inventory shall be permitted in window display areas or other areas ordinarily exposed to public view. 
(f)  Store fronts. All store fronts shall be kept in good repair, painted where required, and shall not constitute a safety hazard or nuisance. In the event repairs to a store front become necessary, such repairs shall be made with the same or similar materials used in the construction of the store front in such a manner as to permanently repair the damaged area or areas. Any cornice visible above a store front shall be kept painted, where required, and in good repair. 
(g)  Awnings and marquees. Any awning or marquee and its accompanying structural members which extend over any street, sidewalk or any other portion of the premises shall be maintained in good repair and shall not constitute a nuisance or a safety hazard. In the event such awnings or marquees are not properly maintained in accordance with the foregoing, they shall, together with their supporting members, be removed forthwith. In the event said awnings or marquees are made of cloth, plastic or of a similar material, said cloth or plastic where exposed to public view shall be maintained in good condition and shall not show evidence of excessive weathering, discoloration, ripping, tearing or other holes. Nothing herein shall be construed to authorize any encroachment on streets, sidewalks, or other parts of the public domain. 
(h)  Structural soundness and general exterior maintenance. The exterior of every structure or accessory structure including fences, signs and store fronts shall be maintained in good repair and all surfaces thereof shall be kept painted or whitewashed where necessary for purposes of preservation and appearance or coated with a protective coating or treated to prevent rot and decay. All surfaces shall be maintained free of broken windows, crumbling stone or brick, peeling paint or other conditions reflective of deterioration or inadequate maintenance to the end that the property itself may be preserved, safety and fire hazards eliminated, and adjoining properties and the neighborhood protected from blighting influences. 
(1)  Reconstruction of walls and sidings. All reconstruction of walls and sidings shall be of standard quality and appearance commensurate with the character of other properties in the same block and on both sides of the street on which the premises front such that the materials used shall not be of a kind that by their appearance under prevailing appraisal practices and standards will depreciate the value of neighboring and adjoin premises as aforesaid. 
(2)  Floors generally. Floors shall be considered to be structurally sound when capable of safely bearing imposed loads and shall be maintained at all times in a condition so as to be smooth, clean, free from cracks, breaks and other hazards. 
(3)  Washroom and water closet compartment floors. Washroom and water closet compartment floors shall be surfaced with water-resistant material and shall be kept in a dry, clean and sanitary condition at all times. 
(4)  Supporting structural members. Supporting structural members are to be kept structurally sound, free of deterioration and capable of bearing imposed loads safely. 
(5)  Walls and ceilings generally. Walls and ceilings shall be considered to be in good repair when clean, free from cracks, breaks, loose plaster and similar conditions. Walls shall be provided with paint, paper sealing material or other protective covering so that the said walls and ceilings shall be kept clean, free of visible foreign matter, sanitary, and well-maintained. 
(6)  Lighting of washrooms. Every washroom and water closet compartment shall be provided with permanently installed artificial lighting fixtures with a switch and wall plate so located and maintained that there is no danger of short-circuiting from water from other bathroom facilities or from splashing of water. 
(7)  Electrical service generally. All premises shall be properly connected to and be provided with electric power through safely insulated conductors conforming to the National Electrical Code and any and all amendments made to the National Electrical Code by the city. 
(8)  Loose or exposed wiring. Except as hereinafter stated, all wiring or cables shall be properly affixed or attached to the structure. Insulation shall be provided for all wiring and cables and kept in good repair. No loose cords or loose extension lines in excess of six feet in length shall be permitted and no ceiling or wall fixture shall be used for supplying power to equipment other than that for which they are designed. 
(9)  Fuses and protective devices. Maximum fuse sizes consistent with safety shall be posted conspicuously on the inside cover of all fuse boxes and no fuse shall be installed therein in excess of the stated maximum except that owners shall not be responsible for violation in fuse installations without their knowledge where the correct maximum is stated and the fuse box is located within any part of the premises which is in the exclusive possession of occupants other than the owner. 
(10)  Overloading of circuits. Overloading of circuits is prohibited. Where the chief building official finds after notice and hearing that by reason of the appliances and fixtures there is continuing overloading of an electrical line creating a hazard, the owner shall be required to install a line of sufficient capacity to absorb the load to which the line is subjected or otherwise eliminate the conditions causing the overload. For purposes of this section, the director of inspections may consider the peak seasonal load to which the line is subjected. 
(11)  Responsibility for removal. The owner or operator shall have the duty and responsibility of removing garbage. 
(12)  Accumulating refuse and nonfireproof storage prohibited. Storage bins, rooms and areas shall not be used for accumulated garbage or refuse. Inflammable or combustible liquids or other materials may not be stored on the premises unless they are of a type approved for storage by the regulations of the fire department, and then only in such quantities and in such fireproof storage containers as may be prescribed by the regulations. 
(i)  Damage to city-owned public property or right-of-way: Any party, including, but not limited to individuals, private businesses, corporations, developers, builders, utility companies, owners or occupant operators, or their contractors, shall be responsible for any damage they or their contractors, subcontractors, employees, agents or representatives do to any road, right-of-way or other city property while performing any construction, pipe or cable installation, landscaping or other duties. Upon causing said damage, the responsible party shall take all necessary steps within ten days to correct such damages by removing all debris and restoring the city-owned property or right-of-way to its original condition. In the event that the corrections are not made within said time, the persons or entities responsible shall indemnify the city for the full costs of having such damages repaired. Upon a finding by the Director of Public Works or his or her designee, that a party has failed to comply with this ordinance such party shall be subject to a cease and desist work order and a fine which may be set at the maximum penalty fee allowed for such an offense under the law but shall be no more than $1,000.00. Additionally, the persons or entities may be subject to treble the actual damages incurred by the city or other property owners in restoring the affected property to its original condition. 
Chapter 10 - SOIL EROSION, SEDIMENTATION AND POLLUTION CONTROL[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 093-018 , adopted Aug. 20, 2018, amended Ch. 10 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 10, §§ 10-10001—10-10010, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 078-017 , adopted Aug. 21, 2017. 

Sec. 10-10001. - Title. 
This chapter will be known as the "The City of East Point's Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 093-018 , 8-20-18) 
Sec. 10-10002. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter, unless otherwise specifically stated: 
Best management practices (BMPS): These include sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" published by the Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
Board: The Board of Natural Resources. 
Buffer: The area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
Certified personnel: A person who has successfully completed the appropriate certification course approved by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission. 
Commission: The Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission (GSWCC). 
CPESC: Certified professional in erosion and sediment control with current certification by EnviroCert, Inc. which is also referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc. 
Cut: A portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to excavated surface. Also known as excavation. 
Department: The Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR). 
Design professional: A professional licensed by the State of Georgia in the field of: engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying; or a person that is a certified professional in erosion and sediment control (CPESC) with a current certification by EnviroCert, Inc. Design Professionals shall practice in a manner that complies with applicable Georgia law governing professional licensure. 
Director: The Director of the Environmental Protection Division of the Department of Natural Resources or an authorized representative. 
District: The Fulton County Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Division: The Environmental Protection Division (EPD) of the Department of Natural Resources. 
Drainage structure: A device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for stormwater management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
Erosion: The process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan: A plan required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, O.C.G.A. Chapter 12-7, that includes, as a minimum protections at least as stringent as the state general permit, best management practices, and requirements in subsection 10-10004(c) of this chapter. 
Fill: A portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground surface or an excavation. 
Final stabilization: All soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that has been certified by EPD for waste disposal, 100 percent of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of 70 percent or greater, or landscaped according to the plan (uniformly covered with landscaping materials in planned landscape areas), or equivalent permanent stabilization measures as defined in the manual (excluding a crop of annual vegetation and seeding of target crop perennials appropriate for the region). Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction. 
Finished grade: The final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Grading: Altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Ground elevation: The original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Land-disturbing activity: Any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in section 10-10003(5). 
Larger common plan of development or sale: A contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this paragraph, "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
Local issuing authority (LIA): This term shall mean the City of East Point as the governing authority of a municipality which is certified pursuant to subsection (a) O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8. 
Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA): A state law referenced as O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et. seq. which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
Natural ground surface: The ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU): Numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed or suspended particles are present. 
NOI: A notice of intent form provided by EPD for coverage under the state general permit. 
NOT: A notice of termination form provided by EPD to terminate coverage under the state general permit. 
Operator: The party or parties that have: (a) operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or (b) day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
Outfall: The location where storm water in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, leaves a facility or site or, if there is a receiving water on site, becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water. 
Permit: The authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this chapter. 
Person: Any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of the state of Georgia, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Phase or phased: Sub-parts or segments of construction projects where the sub-part or segment is constructed and stabilized prior to completing construction activities on the entire construction site. 
Project: The entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
Properly designed: Designed in accordance with the design requirements and specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" (manual) published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted and amendments to the manual as approved by the Commission up until the date of NOI submittal. 
Qualified personnel: Any person who meets or exceeds the education and training requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19. 
Roadway drainage structure: A device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled roadway consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Sediment: Solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by wind, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation: The process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
Soil and water conservation district approved plan: An erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan approved in writing by the Fulton County Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Stabilization: The process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
State general permit: The National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) general permit or permits for storm water runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq., and subsection (f) of Code section 12-5-30. 
State waters: Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of Georgia which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
Structural erosion, sedimentation and pollution control practices: Practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures and sediment traps, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication, Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Trout streams: All streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the Wildlife Resources Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20, in the rules and regulations for Water Quality Control, Chapter 391-3-6 at www.epd.georiga.gov . Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures: Measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
(1)  Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover; or 
(2)  Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or 
(3)  Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
Such measures can be found in the publication, Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Watercourse: Any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or flood water. 
Wetlands: Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
(Ord. No. 093-018 , 8-20-18) 
Sec. 10-10003. - Exemptions. 
This chapter shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
(1)  Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72, "The Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968"; 
(2)  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; 
(3)  Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
(4)  The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre and not otherwise exempted under this paragraph; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 and this subsection. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this paragraph, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer zone, no land-disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, but the Director may grant variances to no less than 25 feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least 25 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 and the buffer zones provided by this paragraph shall be enforced by the local issuing authority; 
(5)  Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, "definitions," to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including but not limited to cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including but not limited to chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds; however, this exemption does not extend to kennels or other pet breeding facilities; 
(6)  Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land-disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in paragraphs (15) and (16) of section 10-10004(c) of this chapter, no other land-disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three years after completion of such forestry practices; 
(7)  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
(8)  Any project involving less than one acre of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre or within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this paragraph, "state waters" excludes channels and drainage ways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one acre, which involves land-disturbing activity, and which is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainage way, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the local issuing authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by paragraphs (1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7), (9) or (10) of this section; 
(9)  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the Department of Transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the State Road and Tollway Authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of the Department of Transportation or the State Road and Tollway Authority which disturb one or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7.1; except where the Department of Transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the State Road and Tollway Authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the local issuing authority, the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; 
(10)  Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and 
(11)  Any public water system reservoir. 
(Ord. No. 093-018 , 8-20-18) 
Sec. 10-10004. - Minimum requirements for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control using best management practices. 
(a)  General provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land-disturbing activities if requirements of the ordinance and the NPDES general permit are not met. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities which are not exempted by this chapter shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of sections 10-10004(b) and (c) of this chapter. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion, sedimentation and pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity in accordance with requirements of this chapter and the NPDES general permit. 
(b)  Minimum requirements/BMPs. 
(1)  Best management practices as set forth in sections 10-10004(b) and (c) of this chapter, shall be required for all land-disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the Director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with paragraph (2) of this subsection or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of storm water issued pursuant to subsection (f) of O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act". As used in this subsection the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 subsection (b). 
(2)  A discharge of storm water runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the Division pursuant to subsection (f) of O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the Director. This paragraph shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five acres. 
(3)  Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the Division pursuant to subsection (f) of Code section 12-5-30, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such failure occurs. 
(4)  The Director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the Board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land disturbing activities occur. 
(5)  The LIA may set more stringent buffer requirements than stated in subsections (c)(15) and (16), in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(c). 
(c)  The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et. seq. for the purpose of governing land-disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit; and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
(1)  Stripping of vegetation, regrading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; 
(2)  Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum; 
(3)  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practicable erosion potential; 
(4)  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; 
(5)  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
(6)  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; 
(7)  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
(8)  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; 
(9)  To the extent necessary, sediment in run-off water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this paragraph, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; 
(10)  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills; 
(11)  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property; 
(12)  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
(13)  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; 
(14)  Land-disturbing activity plans for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in section 10-10004(b)(2) of this chapter. 
(15)  Except as provided in paragraph (16) and (17) of this subsection, there is established a 25-foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the Director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the Director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; or where bulkheads and sea walls are installed to prevent shoreline erosion on Lake Oconee and Lake Sinclair; or along any ephemeral stream. As used in this provision, the term 'ephemeral stream' means a stream: that under normal circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; that has the channel located above the ground-water table year round; for which ground water is not a source of water; and for which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow, Unless exempted as along an ephemeral stream, the buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to part 6 of Article 5, Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the Director as provided in this paragraph. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until ail land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) stream crossings for sewer lines; and there is established a 25 foot buffer along coastal marshlands, as measured horizontally from the coastal marshland-upland interface, as determined in accordance with Chapter 5 of Title 12 of this title, the "Coastal Marshlands Protection Act of 1970." And the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to Code section 12-2-8, where an alteration within the buffer area has been authorized pursuant to Code section 12-5-286, for maintenance of any currently serviceable structure, landscaping, or hardscaping, including bridges, roads, parking lots, golf courses, golf cart paths, retaining walls, bulkheads, and patios; provided, however, that if such maintenance requires any land-disturbing activity, adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented, where a drainage structure or roadway drainage structure is constructed or maintained; provided, however, that if such maintenance requires any land-disturbing activity, adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented, on the landward side of any currently serviceable shoreline stabilization structure, or for the maintenance of any manmade storm-water detention basin, golf course pond, or impoundment that is located entirely within the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. For the purposes of this paragraph maintenance shall be defined as actions necessary or appropriate for retaining or restoring a currently serviceable improvement to the specified operable condition to achieve its maximum useful life. Maintenance includes emergency reconstruction of recently damaged parts of a currently serviceable structure so long as it occurs within a reasonable period of time after damage occurs. Maintenance does not include any modification that changes the character, scope or size of the original design and serviceable shall be defined as usable in its current state or with minor maintenance but not so degraded as to essentially require reconstruction. 
c.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat; and 
d.  The buffer shall not apply to crossings for utility lines that cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer, provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. 
e.  The buffer shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity conducted pursuant to and in compliance with a valid and effective land-disturbing permit issued subsequent to April 22, 2014, and prior to December 31, 2015; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented or any lot for which the preliminary plat has been approved prior to December 31, 2015 if roadways, bridges, or water and sewer lines have been extended to such lot prior to the effective date of this Act and if the requirement to maintain a 25 foot buffer would consume at least 18 percent of the high ground of the platted lot otherwise available for development; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. 
f.  Activities where the area within the buffer is not more than 500 square feet or that have a "Minor Buffer Impact" as defined in 391-3-7-.01(r), provided that the total area of buffer impacts is less than 5,000 square feet are deemed to have an approved buffer variance by rule. Bank stabilization structures are not eligible for coverage under the variance by rule and notification shall be made to the Division at least 14 days prior to the commencement of land disturbing activities. 
(16)  There is established a 50-foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of 25 gallons per minute or less shall have a 25-foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the Board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The Director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land-disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed: provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) stream crossings for sewer lines. 
(d)  Nothing contained in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. shall prevent any local issuing authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain stream buffer requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in sections 10-10004(b) and (c) of this chapter. 
(e)  The fact that land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this chapter or the terms of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 093-018 , 8-20-18) 
Sec. 10-10005. - Application/permit process. 
(a)  General. The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall design and review before submittal the general development plans. The local issuing authority shall review the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall consult the zoning ordinance, storm water management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, this chapter, and any other ordinances, rules, regulations or permits, which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. However, the owner and/or operator are the only parties who may obtain a permit. 
(b)  Application requirements. 
(1)  No person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city without first obtaining a permit from the city to perform such activity and providing a copy of notice of intent submitted to EPD if applicable. 
(2)  The application for a permit shall be submitted to the permit office and must include the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in section 10-10005(c) of this chapter. Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans, together with supporting data, must demonstrate affirmatively that the land disturbing activity proposed will be carried out in such a manner that the provisions of sections 10-10004(b) and (c) of this chapter will be met. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by three copies of the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan in accordance with EPD Rule 391-3-7-.10 or that such a visit was not required in accordance with rules and regulations established by the board. 
(3)  A fee, payable to the city, in the amount of $250.00 shall be charged for each acre or fraction thereof in the project area. 
(4)  In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to paragraph (5) subsection (a) of O.C.G.A. § 12-5-23, provided that such fees shall not exceed $80.00 per acre of land-disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land-disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. In a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to subsection (a) of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8 half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the Division; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to paragraph (9) or (10) of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17 shall be submitted in full to the Division, regardless of the existence of a local issuing authority in the jurisdiction. 
(5)  Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the local issuing authority shall refer the application and plan to the District for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. The District shall approve or disapprove a plan within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the District to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the District review shall be forwarded to the local issuing authority. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the District, and any variances required by sections 10-10004(c)(15) and (16) have been obtained, all fees have been paid, and bonding, if required as per section 10-10005(b)(7), have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the local issuing authority and the District have entered into an agreement which allows the local issuing authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the District. The local issuing authority with plan review authority shall approve or disapprove a revised plan submittal within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the local issuing authority with plan review authority to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the revised plan submittal. 
(6)  If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this section of this chapter, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three years prior to the date of filing the application under consideration, the local issuing authority may deny the permit application. 
(7)  The local issuing authority may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land-disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this section or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the local issuing authority with respect to alleged permit violations. 
(c)  Plan requirements. 
(1)  Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in sections 10-10004(b) and (c) of conformance with the minimum requirements may be attained through the use of design criteria in the current issue of the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, published by the state Soil and Water Conservation Commission as a guide; or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia is hereby incorporated by reference into this chapter. The plan for the land-disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and storm water management facilities, local ordinances and state laws. Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature and seal of the certified design professional. Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspections or any land disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on his or her level of involvement with the process, as developed by the Commission and in consultation with the Division and the Stakeholder Advisory Board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(2)  Data required for site plan. 
a.  Narrative or notes, and other information: Notes or narrative to be located on the site plan in general notes or in erosion and sediment control notes. 
b.  Description of existing land use at project site and description of proposed project. 
c.  Name, address, and phone number of the property owner. 
d.  Name and phone number of 24-hour local contact who is responsible for erosion and sedimentation controls. 
e.  Size of project, or phase under construction, in acres. 
f.  Activity schedule showing anticipated starting and completion dates for the project. Include the statement in bold letters, that "the installation of erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices shall occur prior to or concurrent with land-disturbing activities." 
g.  Stormwater and sedimentation management systems-storage capacity, hydrologic study, and calculations, including off-site drainage areas. 
h.  Vegetative plan for all temporary and permanent vegetative measures, including species, planting dates, and seeding, fertilizer, lime, and mulching rates. The vegetative plan should show options for year-round seeding. 
i.  Detail drawings for all structural practices. Specifications may follow guidelines set forth in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
j.  Maintenance statement. "Erosion and sedimentation control measures will be maintained at all times. If full implementation of the approved plan does not provide for effective erosion and sediment control, additional erosion and sediment control measures shall be implemented to control or treat the sediment source." 
(3)  Maps, drawings, and supportive computations shall bear the signature/seal of a registered or certified professional in engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, land surveying, or erosion and sedimentation control. After December 31, 2006, all persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements as developed by the commission pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. The certified plans shall contain: 
a.  Graphic scale and north point or arrow indicating magnetic north. 
b.  Vicinity maps showing location of project and existing streets. 
c.  Boundary line survey. 
d.  Delineation of disturbed areas within project boundary. 
e.  Existing and planned contours, with an interval in accordance with the following: 

 
f.  Adjacent areas and feature areas such as streams, lakes, wetlands, residential areas, etc. which might be affected should be indicated on the plan. 
g.  Proposed structures or additions to existing structures and paved areas. 
h.  Delineate the 25-foot horizontal buffer adjacent to state waters and the specified width in MRPA areas. 
i.  Delineate the specified horizontal buffer along designated trout streams, where applicable. 
j.  Location of erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices using coding symbols from the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, Chapter 6. 
(4)  Maintenance of all soil erosion and sedimentation control practices, whether temporary or permanent, shall be at all times the responsibility of the property owner. 
(d)  Permits. 
(1)  Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than 45 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary and all applicable fees have been paid prior to permit issuance. The permit shall include conditions under which the activity may be undertaken. 
(2)  No permit shall be issued by the local issuing authority unless the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan has been approved by the District and the local issuing authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this chapter, any variances required by sections 10-10004(c)(15) and (16) are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per section 10-10005(b)(7) are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(3)  Any land-disturbing activities by a local issuing authority shall be subject to the same requirements of this chapter, and any other ordinances relating to land development, as are applied to private persons and the division shall enforce such requirements upon the local issuing authority. 
(4)  If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
(5)  The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the local issuing authority, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this chapter. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
(6)  The LIA may reject a permit application if the applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act permit requirements within three years prior to the date of the application, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(f)(1). 
(Ord. No. 093-018 , 8-20-18) 
Sec. 10-10006. - Inspection and enforcement. 
(a)  The department of public works will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, the local issuing authority shall regulate primary, secondary and tertiary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Tertiary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance where the tertiary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this chapter, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this chapter. 
(b)  The local issuing authority must amend its ordinances to the extent appropriate within 12 months of any amendments to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975. 
(c)  The department of public works shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this chapter, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land-disturbing activities. 
(d)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the local issuing authority, the Commission, the District, or Division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(e)  The District or the Commission or both shall semi-annually review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). The District or the Commission or both may provide technical assistance to any county or municipality for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the county's or municipality's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control program. The District or the Commission shall notify the Division and request investigation by the Division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. 
(f)  The Division may periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of a governing authority's ordinance and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the governing authority. If such review indicates that the governing authority of any county or municipality certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(e), the Division shall notify the governing authority of the county or municipality in writing. The governing authority of any county or municipality so notified shall have 90 days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as a local issuing authority. If the county or municipality does not take necessary corrective action within 90 days after notification by the division, the division shall revoke the certification of the county or municipality as a local issuing authority. 
(Ord. No. 093-018 , 8-20-18) 
Sec. 10-10007. - Penalties and incentives. 
(a)  Failure to obtain a permit for land-disturbing activity. If any person commences any land-disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbing permit as prescribed in this chapter without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. 
(b)  Stop-work orders. 
(1)  For the first and second violations of the provisions of this chapter, the Director or the local issuing authority shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five days, the Director or the local issuing authority shall issue a stop-work order requiring that land-disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land-disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order in lieu of a warning; 
(2)  For a third and each subsequent violation, the Director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order and may assess a fine of up to $2,500.00 per day that the stop-work order is in effect; and 
(3)  All stop-work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. 
(4)  When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the local issuing authority or by the Director or his or her designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop work order shall be issued by the local issuing authority or by the Director or his or her designee. All such stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop work orders shall apply to all land-disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. 
(c)  Bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this chapter and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of section 10-10005(b)(7). The local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(d)  Monetary penalties. 
(1)  Any person who violates any provisions of this chapter, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this chapter, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the Director issued as provided in this chapter shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter, notwithstanding any provisions in any city charter to the contrary, municipal courts shall be authorized to impose penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of county ordinances, any magistrate court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of this chapter under county ordinances approved under this chapter shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 093-018 , 8-20-18) 
Sec. 10-10008. - Education and certification. 
(a)  Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(b)  For each site on which land-disturbing activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary, secondary, or tertiary permittee, as defined in the state general permit, shall have as a minimum one person who is in responsible charge of erosion and sedimentation control activities on behalf of said entity or person and meets the applicable education or training certification requirements developed by the Commission present on site whenever land-disturbing activities are conducted on that site. A project site shall herein be defined as any land-disturbance site or multiple sites within a larger common plan of development or sale permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the state general permit. 
(c)  Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit but otherwise requiring certified personnel on site may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of this chapter. 
(d)  If a state general permittee who has operational control of land-disturbing activities for a site has met the certification requirements of paragraph (1) of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19, then any person or entity involved in land-disturbing activity at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee shall meet those educational requirements specified in paragraph (4) of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A § 12-719 and shall not be required to meet any educational requirements that exceed those specified in said paragraph. 
(Ord. No. 093-018 , 8-20-18) 
Sec. 10-10009. - Administrative appeal judicial review. 
(a)  Administrative remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the local issuing authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion, sediment and pollution control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the mayor and council, or its designated hearing officer, within 30 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of written notice of appeal. 
(b)  Judicial review. Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the local issuing authority, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal de novo to the Superior Court of Fulton County within 30 days of any such adverse decision. 
(Ord. No. 093-018 , 8-20-18) 
Sec. 10-10010. - Effective date, validity and liability. 
(a)  Effective date. This chapter shall become effective as of the date and year it is adopted and enacted. 
(b)  Validity. If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase, or provision of this chapter shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, such decisions shall not affect the remaining portions of this chapter. 
(c)  Liability. 
(1)  Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this chapter, nor the compliance with provisions of this chapter shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the local issuing authority or District for damage to any person or property. 
(2)  The fact that a land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this chapter or the terms of the permit. 
(3)  No provision of this chapter shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder or pollute any waters of the state as defined thereby. 
(4)  No provision of this chapter shall permit any persons to violate any other ordinance of the city. 
(Ord. No. 093-018 , 8-20-18) 
Chapter 11 - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT 
ARTICLE A. - POST-DEVELOPMENT STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FOR NEW DEVELOPMENT AND REDEVELOPMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-11001. - Findings. 
It is hereby determined that: 
(1)  Land development projects and other land use conversions, and their associated changes to land cover, permanently alter the hydrologic response of local watersheds and increase stormwater runoff rates and volumes, which in turn increase flooding, stream channel erosion, and sediment transport and deposition; 
(2)  Land development projects and other land use conversions also contribute to increased nonpoint source pollution and degradation of receiving waters; 
(3)  The impacts of post-development stormwater runoff quantity and quality can adversely affect public safety, public and private property, drinking water supplies, recreation, fish and other aquatic life, property values and other uses of lands and waters; 
(4)  These adverse impacts can be controlled and minimized through the regulation of stormwater runoff quantity and quality from new development and redevelopment, by the use of both structural facilities as well as nonstructural measures, such as the conservation of open space and greenspace areas. The preservation and protection of natural area and greenspace for stormwater management benefits is encouraged through the use of incentives or "credits." The Georgia Greenspace Program provides a mechanism for the preservation and coordination of those greenspace areas which provide stormwater management quality and quantity benefits; 
(5)  Localities in the State of Georgia are required to comply with a number of both state and federal laws, regulations and permits which require a locality to address the impacts of post-development stormwater runoff quality and nonpoint source pollution; 
(6)  Therefore, the City of East Point has established this set of stormwater management policies to provide reasonable guidance for the regulation of post-development stormwater runoff for the purpose of protecting local water resources from degradation. It has determined that it is in the public interest to regulate post-development stormwater runoff discharges in order to control and minimize increases in stormwater runoff rates and volumes, post-construction soil erosion and sedimentation, stream channel erosion, and nonpoint source pollution associated with post-development stormwater runoff. 
Sec. 10-11002. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this article is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety, environment and general welfare by establishing minimum requirements and procedures to control the adverse effects of increased post-development stormwater runoff and nonpoint source pollution associated with new development and redevelopment. It has been determined that proper management of post-development stormwater runoff will minimize damage to public and private property and infrastructure, safeguard the public health, safety, environment and general welfare of the public, and protect water and aquatic resources. This article seeks to meet that purpose through the following objectives: 
(1)  Establish decision-making processes surrounding land development activities that protect the integrity of the watershed and preserve the health of water resources; 
(2)  Require that new development and redevelopment maintain the pre-development hydrologic response in their post-development state as nearly as practicable in order to reduce flooding, streambank erosion, nonpoint source pollution and increases in stream temperature, and maintain the integrity of stream channels and aquatic habitats; 
(3)  Establish minimum post-development stormwater management standards and design criteria for the regulation and control of stormwater runoff quantity and quality; 
(4)  Establish design and application criteria for the construction and use of structural stormwater control facilities that can be used to meet the minimum post-development stormwater management standards; 
(5)  Encourage the use of nonstructural stormwater management and stormwater better site design practices, such as the preservation of greenspace and other conservation areas, to the maximum extent practicable. Coordinate site design plans, which include greenspace, with the county's greenspace protection plan; 
(6)  Establish provisions for the long-term responsibility for and maintenance of structural stormwater control facilities and nonstructural stormwater management practices to ensure that they continue to function as designed, are maintained, and pose no threat to public safety; and 
(7)  Establish administrative procedures for the submission, review, approval and disapproval of stormwater management plans, and for the inspection of approved active projects, and long-term follow up. 
Sec. 10-11003. - Applicability. 
(a)  This article shall be applicable to all land development, including, but not limited to, site plan applications, subdivision applications, and grading applications, unless exempt pursuant to subsection (b) below. These standards apply to any new development or redevelopment site that meets one or more of the following criteria: 
(1)  New development that involves the creation of 5,000 square feet or more of impervious cover, or that involves other land development activities of one acre or more; 
(2)  Redevelopment that includes the creation, addition or replacement of 5,000 square feet or more of impervious cover, or that involves other land development activity of one acre or more; 
(3)  Any new development or redevelopment, regardless of size, that is defined by the City of East Point Office of Government Operations to be a hotspot land use; or 
(4)  Land development activities that are smaller than the minimum applicability criteria set forth in subsections (1) and (2) above if such activities are part of a larger common plan of development, even though multiple, separate and distinct land development activities may take place at different times on different schedules. 
(b)  The following activities are exempt from this article: 
(1)  Individual single-family or duplex residential lots that are not part of a subdivision or phased development project; 
(2)  Additions or modifications to existing single-family or duplex residential structures; 
(3)  Agricultural or silvicultural land management activities within areas zoned for these activities; and 
(4)  Repairs to any stormwater management facility or practice deemed necessary by the city office of government operations. 
Sec. 10-11004. - Designation of article administrator. 
The City of East Point Office of Government Operations, or its designee, is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article. 
Sec. 10-11005. - Compatibility with other regulations. 
The requirements of this article are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
Sec. 10-11006. - Severability. 
If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article shall be adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article. 
Sec. 10-11007. - Stormwater design manual. 
The city office of government operations will utilize the policy, criteria and information including technical specifications and standards in the latest edition of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual and any relevant local addenda for the proper implementation of the requirements of this article. The manual may be updated and expanded periodically, based on improvements in science, engineering, monitoring and local maintenance experience. 
Sec. 10-11008. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the following meanings, except where the context indicates a different meaning is intended:] 
Applicant means a person submitting a post-development stormwater management application and plan for approval. 
Channel means a natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water. 
Conservation easement means an agreement between a land owner and the City of East Point or other government agency or land trust that permanently protects open space or greenspace on the owner's land by limiting the amount and type of development that can take place, but continues to leave the remainder of the fee interest in private ownership. 
Detention means the temporary storage of stormwater runoff in a stormwater management facility for the purpose of controlling the peak discharge. 
Detention facility means a detention basin or structure designed for the detention of stormwater runoff and gradual release of stored water at controlled rates. 
Developer means a person who undertakes land development activities. 
Development means a land development or land development project. 
Drainage easement means an easement appurtenant or attached to a tract or parcel of land allowing the owner of adjacent tracts or other persons to discharge stormwater runoff onto the tract or parcel of land subject to the drainage easement. 
Erosion and sedimentation control plan means a plan that is designed to minimize the accelerated erosion and sediment runoff at a site during land disturbance activities. 
Extended detention means the detention of stormwater runoff for an extended period, typically 24 hours or greater. 
Extreme flood protection means measures taken to prevent adverse impacts from large low-frequency storm events with a return frequency of 100 years or more. 
Flooding means a volume of surface water that is too great to be confined within the banks or walls of a conveyance or stream channel and that overflows onto adjacent lands. 
Greenspace or open space means permanently protected areas of the site that are preserved in a natural state. 
Hotspot means an area where the use of the land has the potential to generate highly contaminated runoff, with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those typically found in stormwater. 
Hydrologic soil group (HSG) means a natural resource conservation service classification system in which soils are categorized into four runoff potential groups. The groups range from group A soils, with high permeability and little runoff produced, to group D soils, which have low permeability rates and produce much more runoff. 
Impervious cover means a surface composed of any material that significantly impedes or prevents the natural infiltration of water into soil. Impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, rooftops, buildings, streets and roads, and any concrete or asphalt surface. 
Industrial stormwater permit means a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit issued to an industry or group of industries which regulates the pollutant levels associated with industrial stormwater discharges or specifies on-site pollution control strategies. 
Infiltration means the process of percolating stormwater runoff into the subsoil. 
Inspection and maintenance agreement means a written agreement providing for the long-term inspection and maintenance of stormwater management facilities and practices on a site or with respect to a land development project, which when properly recorded in the deed records constitutes a restriction on the title to a site or other land involved in a land development project. 
Jurisdictional wetland means an area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation. 
Land development means any land change, including, but not limited to, clearing, digging, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, construction, paving, and any other installation of impervious cover. 
Land development activities means those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land development. 
Land development project means a discrete land development undertaking. 
New development means a land development activity on a previously undeveloped site. 
Nonpoint source pollution means a form of water pollution that does not originate from a discrete point such as a sewage treatment plant or industrial discharge, but involves the transport of pollutants such as sediment, fertilizers, pesticides, heavy metals, oil, grease, bacteria, organic materials and other contaminants from land to surface water and groundwater via mechanisms such as precipitation, stormwater runoff, and leaching. Nonpoint source pollution is a by-product of land use practices such as agricultural, silvicultural, mining, construction, subsurface disposal and urban runoff sources. 
Nonstructural stormwater management practice or nonstructural practice means any natural or planted vegetation or other nonstructural component of the stormwater management plan that provides for or enhances stormwater quantity and/or quality control or other stormwater management benefits, and includes, but is not limited to, riparian buffers, open and greenspace areas, overland flow filtration areas, natural depressions, and vegetated channels. 
Office of government operations is a division of the City of east point which includes the departments of public works, public utilities, solid waste, fleet management, and buildings and grounds, and is located at 3130 South Martin, Suite 600, East Point, Georgia. 
Off-site facility means a stormwater management facility located outside the boundaries of the site. 
On-site facility means a stormwater management facility located within the boundaries of the site. 
Overbank flood protection means measures taken to prevent an increase in the frequency and magnitude of out-of-bank flooding (i.e. flow events that exceed the capacity of the channel and enter the floodplain), and that are intended to protect downstream properties from flooding for the 2-year through 25-year frequency storm events. 
Owner means the legal or beneficial owner of a site, including but not limited to, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of the site. 
Permit means the permit issued by the office of government operations to the applicant which is required for undertaking any land development activity. 
Person means, except to the extent exempted from this article, any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Post-development refers to the time period, or the conditions that may reasonably be expected or anticipated to exist, after completion of the land development activity on a site as the context may require. 
Pre-development refers to the time period, or the conditions that exist, on a site prior to the commencement of a land development project and at the time that plans for the land development of a site are approved by the plan approving authority. Where phased development or plan approval occurs (preliminary grading, roads and utilities, etc.), the existing conditions at the time prior to the first item being approved or permitted shall establish pre-development conditions. 
Project means a land development project. 
Redevelopment means a land development project on a previously developed site, but excludes ordinary maintenance activities, remodeling of existing buildings, resurfacing of paved areas, and exterior changes or improvements which do not materially increase or concentrate stormwater runoff, or cause additional nonpoint source pollution. 
Regional stormwater management facility or regional facility means stormwater management facilities designed to control stormwater runoff from multiple properties, where the owners or developers of the individual properties may assist in the financing of the facility, and the requirement for on-site controls is either eliminated or reduced. 
Runoff means stormwater runoff. 
Site means the parcel of land being developed, or the portion thereof on which the land development project is located. 
Stormwater better site design means nonstructural site design approaches and techniques that can reduce a site's impact on the watershed and can provide for nonstructural stormwater management. Stormwater better site design includes conserving and protecting natural areas and greenspace, reducing impervious cover and using natural features for stormwater management. 
Stormwater management means the collection, conveyance, storage, treatment and disposal of stormwater runoff in a manner intended to prevent increased flood damage, streambank channel erosion, habitat degradation and water quality degradation, and to enhance and promote the public health, safety and general welfare. 
Stormwater management facility means any infrastructure that controls or conveys stormwater runoff. 
Stormwater management measure means any stormwater management facility or nonstructural stormwater practice. 
Stormwater management plan means a document describing how existing runoff characteristics will be affected by a land development project and containing measures for complying with the provisions of this article. 
Stormwater management system means the entire set of structural and nonstructural stormwater management facilities and practices that are used to capture, convey and control the quantity and quality of the stormwater runoff from a site. 
Stormwater retrofit means a stormwater management practice designed for a currently developed site that previously had either no stormwater management practice in place or a practice inadequate to meet the stormwater management requirements of the site. 
Stormwater runoff means the flow of surface water resulting from precipitation. 
Structural stormwater control means a structural stormwater management facility or device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow of such runoff. 
Subdivision means the division of a tract or parcel of land resulting in one or more new lots or building sites for the purpose, whether immediately or in the future, of sale, other transfer of ownership or land development, and includes divisions of land resulting from or made in connection with the layout or development of a new street or roadway or a change in an existing street or roadway. 
Secs. 10-11009—10-11020. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 10-11021. - Permit application requirements. 
(a)  No owner or developer shall perform any land development activities without first meeting the requirements of this article prior to commencing the proposed activity. 
(b)  Unless specifically exempted by this article, any owner or developer proposing a land development activity shall submit to the city office of government operations a permit application on a form provided by the office of government operations for that purpose. 
(c)  Unless otherwise exempted by this article, a permit application shall be accompanied by the following items in order to be considered: 
(1)  Stormwater concept plan and consultation meeting certification in accordance with section 10-11022. 
(2)  Stormwater management plan in accordance with section 10-11023; 
(3)  Inspection and maintenance agreement in accordance with section 10-11024, if applicable; 
(4)  Performance bond in accordance with section 10-11025, if applicable; and 
(5)  Permit application and plan review fees in accordance with section 10-11026. 
Sec. 10-11022. - Stormwater concept plan and consultation meeting. 
(a)  Before any stormwater management permit application is submitted, it is recommended that the land owner or developer request, through the planning and zoning department, a consultation meeting on a concept plan for the post-development stormwater management system to be utilized in the proposed land development project. This consultation meeting should take place at the time of the preliminary plan of subdivision or other early step in the development process. The purpose of this meeting is to discuss the post-development stormwater management measures necessary for the proposed project, as well as to discuss and assess constraints, opportunities and potential ideas for stormwater management designs before the formal site design engineering is commenced. 
(b)  To accomplish this goal the following information should be included in the concept plan which should be submitted in advance of the meeting: 
(1)  Existing conditions/proposed site plans. Existing conditions and proposed site layout sketch plans, which illustrate at a minimum: existing and proposed topography; perennial and intermittent streams; mapping of predominant soils from soil surveys (when available); boundaries of existing predominant vegetation and proposed limits of clearing and grading; and location of existing and proposed roads, buildings, parking areas and other impervious surfaces. 
(2)  Natural resources inventory. A written or graphic inventory of the natural resources at the site and surrounding area as it exists prior to the commencement of the project. This description should include a discussion of soil conditions, forest cover, topography, wetlands, and other native vegetative areas on the site, as well as the location and boundaries of other natural feature protection and conservation areas such as wetlands, lakes, ponds, floodplains, stream buffers and other setbacks (e.g., drinking water well setbacks, septic setbacks, etc.). Particular attention should be paid to environmentally sensitive features that provide particular opportunities or constraints for development. 
(3)  Stormwater management system concept plan. A written or graphic concept plan of the proposed post-development stormwater management system including: preliminary selection and location of proposed structural stormwater controls; location of existing and proposed conveyance systems such as grass channels, swales, and storm drains; flow paths; location of floodplain/floodway limits; relationship of site to upstream and downstream properties and drainages; and preliminary location of proposed stream channel modifications, such as bridge or culvert crossings. 
(c)  Local watershed plans, the relevant county or municipal greenspace projection plan, if any, and any relevant resource protection plans will be consulted in the discussion of the concept plan. 
Sec. 10-11023. - Stormwater management plan requirements. 
(a)  The stormwater management plan shall detail how post-development stormwater runoff will be controlled or managed and how the proposed project will meet the requirements of this article, including the performance criteria set forth in Division 3 below. 
(b)  This plan shall be in accordance with the criteria established in this section and must be submitted with the stamp and signature of a professional engineer (PE) licensed in the state of Georgia, who must verify that the design of all stormwater management facilities and practices meet the submittal requirements outlined in the submittal checklist(s) found in the stormwater design manual. 
(c)  The stormwater management plan must ensure that the requirements and criteria in this article are being complied with and that opportunities are being taken to minimize adverse post-development stormwater runoff impacts from the development. The plan shall consist of maps, narrative, and supporting design calculations (hydrologic and hydraulic) for the proposed stormwater management system. The plan shall include all of the information required in the stormwater management site plan checklist found in the stormwater design manual. This includes: 
(1)  Common address and legal description of site. 
(2)  Vicinity map. 
(3)  Existing conditions hydrologic analysis. The existing condition hydrologic analysis for stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and velocities, which shall include: a topographic map of existing site conditions with the drainage basin boundaries indicated; acreage, soil types and land cover of areas for each subbasin affected by the project; all perennial and intermittent streams and other surface water features; all existing stormwater conveyances and structural control facilities; direction of flow and exits from the site; analysis of runoff provided by off-site areas upstream of the project site; and methodologies, assumptions, site parameters and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology. For redevelopment sites, predevelopment conditions shall be modeled using the guidelines established by the City of East Point for the portion of the site undergoing land development activities. 
(4)  Post-development hydrologic analysis. The post-development hydrologic analysis for stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and velocities, which shall include: a topographic map of developed site conditions with the post-development drainage basin boundaries indicated; total area of post-development impervious surfaces and other land cover areas for each subbasin affected by the project; calculations for determining the runoff volumes that need to be addressed for each subbasin for the development project to meet the post-development stormwater management performance criteria in Section 4; location and boundaries of proposed natural feature protection and conservation areas; documentation and calculations for any applicable site design credits that are being utilized; methodologies, assumptions, site parameters and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology. If the land development activity on a redevelopment site constitutes more than 50 percent of the site area for the entire site, then the performance criteria in Division 3 must be met for the stormwater runoff from the entire site. 
(5)  Stormwater management system. The description, scaled drawings and design calculations for the proposed post-development stormwater management system, which shall include: A map and/or drawing or sketch of the stormwater management facilities, including the location of nonstructural site design features and the placement of existing and proposed structural stormwater controls, including design water surface elevations, storage volumes available from zero to maximum head, location of inlet and outlets, location of bypass and discharge systems, and all orifice/restrictor sizes; a narrative describing how the selected structural stormwater controls will be appropriate and effective; cross-section and profile drawings and design details for each of the structural stormwater controls in the system, including supporting calculations to show that the facility is designed according to the applicable design criteria; a hydrologic and hydraulic analysis of the stormwater management system for all applicable design storms (including stage-storage or outlet rating curves, and inflow and outflow hydrographs); documentation and supporting calculations to show that the stormwater management system adequately meets the post-development stormwater management performance criteria in Division 3; drawings, design calculations, elevations and hydraulic grade lines for all existing and proposed stormwater conveyance elements including stormwater drains, pipes, culverts, catch basins, channels, swales and areas of overland flow; and where applicable, a narrative describing how the stormwater management system corresponds with any watershed protection plans and/or local greenspace protection plan. 
(6)  Post-development downstream analysis. A downstream peak flow analysis which includes the assumptions, results and supporting calculations to show safe passage of post-development design flows downstream. The analysis of downstream conditions in the report shall address each and every point or area along the project site's boundaries at which runoff will exit the property. The analysis shall focus on the portion of the drainage channel or watercourse immediately downstream from the project. This area shall extend downstream from the project to a point in the drainage basin where the project area is ten percent of the total basin area. In calculating runoff volumes and discharge rates, consideration may need to be given to any planned future upstream land use changes. The analysis shall be in accordance with the stormwater design manual. 
(7)  Construction-phase erosion and sedimentation control plan. An erosion and sedimentation control plan in accordance with the City of East Point's Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Ordinance [10-10004 et seq.] or NPDES permit for construction activities. The plan shall also include information on the sequence/phasing of construction and temporary stabilization measures and temporary structures that will be converted into permanent stormwater controls. 
(8)  Landscaping and open space plan. A detailed landscaping and vegetation plan describing the woody and herbaceous vegetation that will be used within and adjacent to stormwater management facilities and practices. Such plan must be developed in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, Volume 2, Appendix F, "Landscaping and Aesthetics Guidance," as well as the City's zoning and subdivision regulations pertaining to the acceptable use of landscaping materials, as currently in effect and as may be amended in the future. In the event that requirements of the cited authorities are in conflict, the most restrictive shall apply. The landscaping plan must also include: the arrangement of planted areas, natural and greenspace areas and other landscaped features on the site plan; information necessary to construct the landscaping elements shown on the plan drawings; descriptions and standards for the methods, materials and vegetation that are to be used in the construction; density of plantings; descriptions of the stabilization and management techniques used to establish vegetation; and a description of who will be responsible for ongoing maintenance of vegetation for the stormwater management facility and what practices will be employed to ensure that adequate vegetative cover is preserved. 
(9)  Operations and maintenance plan. Detailed description of ongoing operations and maintenance procedures for stormwater management facilities and practices to ensure their continued function as designed and constructed or preserved. These plans will identify the parts or components of a stormwater management facility or practice that need to be regularly or periodically inspected and maintained, and the equipment and skills or training necessary. The plan shall include an inspection and maintenance schedule, maintenance tasks, responsible parties for maintenance, funding, access and safety issues. Provisions for the periodic review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the maintenance program and the need for revisions or additional maintenance procedures shall be included in the plan. 
(10)  Maintenance access easements. The applicant must ensure access from public right-of-way to stormwater management facilities and practices requiring regular maintenance at the site for the purpose of inspection and repair by securing all the maintenance access easements needed on a permanent basis. Such access shall be sufficient for all necessary equipment for maintenance activities. Upon final inspection and approval, a plat or document indicating that such easements exist shall be recorded and shall remain in effect even with the transfer of title of the property. 
(11)  Inspection and maintenance agreements. Unless an on-site stormwater management facility or practice is dedicated to and accepted by the city office of government operations as provided in section 10-11024 below, the applicant must execute an easement and an inspection and maintenance agreement binding on all subsequent owners of land served by an on-site stormwater management facility or practice in accordance section 10-11024. The city will not unilaterally accept responsibility for maintenance of on-site stormwater management facilities. Any dedication and acceptance must be properly recorded in county records. 
(12)  Evidence of acquisition of applicable local and non-local permits. The applicant shall certify and provide documentation to the city office of government operations that all other applicable environmental permits have been acquired for the site prior to approval of the stormwater management plan. 
Sec. 10-11024. - Stormwater management inspection and maintenance agreements. 
(a)  Prior to the issuance of any permit for a land development activity requiring a stormwater management facility or practice hereunder and for which the city office of government operations requires ongoing maintenance, the applicant or owner of the site must, unless an on-site stormwater management facility or practice is dedicated to and accepted by the office of government operations, execute an inspection and maintenance agreement, and/or a conservation easement, if applicable, that shall be binding on all subsequent owners of the site. 
(b)  The inspection and maintenance agreement, if applicable, must be approved by the office of government operations prior to plan approval, and recorded in the deed records upon final plat approval. 
(c)  The inspection and maintenance agreement shall identify by name or official title the person(s) responsible for carrying out the inspection and maintenance. Responsibility for the operation and maintenance of the stormwater management facility or practice, unless assumed by a governmental agency, shall remain with the property owner and shall pass to any successor owner. If portions of the land are sold or otherwise transferred, legally binding arrangements shall be made to pass the inspection and maintenance responsibility to the appropriate successors in title. These arrangements shall designate for each portion of the site, the person to be permanently responsible for its inspection and maintenance. 
(d)  As part of the inspection and maintenance agreement, a schedule shall be developed for when and how often routine inspection and maintenance will occur to ensure proper function of the stormwater management facility or practice. The agreement shall also include plans for annual inspections to ensure proper performance of the facility between scheduled maintenance and shall also include remedies for the default thereof. 
(e)  In addition to enforcing the terms of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the office of government operations may also enforce all of the provisions for ongoing inspection and maintenance in Division 5 of this article. 
(f)  The city office of government operations, in lieu of an inspection and maintenance agreement, may accept dedication of any existing or future stormwater management facility for maintenance, provided such facility meets all the requirements of this article and includes adequate and perpetual access and sufficient area, by easement or otherwise, for inspection and regular maintenance. 
Sec. 10-11025. - Performance and maintenance bonds. 
For the purpose of guaranteeing performance of construction and/or maintenance obligations set forth herein, the City of East Point may provide for the filing of a surety bond with the city clerk which shall cover the total estimated cost of the construction and/or maintenance as determined by the city engineer for a minimum period of four years after the completion of the development or redevelopment. Such bond shall have sureties satisfactory to the city guaranteeing the completion of construction and/or performance of maintenance obligations within the time specified, and shall address any deficiencies in the stormwater management system of the development or redevelopment, including repairing and addressing any damage to public or private property resulting from inadequate stormwater management controls. The developer shall remain responsible for maintenance of the stormwater management system during the duration of the bond. Such bond shall be mandatory for all new developments over five acres in size permitted after the effective date of this article. The city shall have the discretion to require a longer term, to the extent permitted under Georgia law. 
Sec. 10-11026. - Application procedure. 
(a)  Applications for land development permits shall be filed with the City of East Point Planning and Zoning Department. 
(b)  Permit applications shall include the items set forth in section 10-11021 above (two copies of the stormwater management plan and the inspection maintenance agreement, if applicable, shall be included). 
(c)  The city office of government operations shall inform the applicant whether the application, stormwater management plan and inspection and maintenance agreement are approved or disapproved. 
(d)  If either the permit application, stormwater management plan or inspection and maintenance agreement are disapproved, the office of government operations shall notify the applicant of such fact in writing. The applicant may then revise any item not meeting the requirements hereof and resubmit the same, in which event subsection (c) above and this subparagraph shall apply to such resubmittal. 
(e)  Upon a finding by the office of government operations that the permit application, stormwater management plan and inspection and maintenance agreement, if applicable, meet the requirements of this article, the office of government operations may issue a permit for the land development project, provided all other legal requirements for the issuance of such permit have been met. 
(f)  Notwithstanding the issuance of the permit, in conducting the land development project, the applicant or other responsible person shall be subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  The applicant shall comply with all applicable requirements of the approved plan and this article and shall certify that all land clearing, construction, land development and drainage will be done according to the approved plan; 
(2)  The land development project shall be conducted only within the area specified in the approved plan; 
(3)  The office of government operations shall be allowed to conduct periodic inspections of the project; 
(4)  No changes may be made to an approved plan without review and written approval by the office of government operations; and 
(5)  Upon completion of the project, the applicant or other responsible person shall submit the engineer's report and certificate and as-built plans required by section 10-11063. 
Sec. 10-11027. - Application review fees. 
The fee for review of any stormwater management application shall be based on the fee structure established by the city office of government operations and shall be made prior to the issuance of any building permit for the development. 
Sec. 10-11028. - Modifications for off-site facilities. 
(a)  The stormwater management plan for each land development project shall provide for stormwater management measures located on the site of the project, unless provisions are made to manage stormwater by an off-site or regional facility. The off-site or regional facility must be located on property legally dedicated for the purpose, must be designed and adequately sized to provide a level of stormwater quantity and quality control that is equal to or greater than that which would be afforded by on-site practices and there must be a legally-obligated entity responsible for long-term operation and maintenance of the off-site or regional stormwater facility. In addition, on-site measures shall be implemented, where necessary, to protect upstream and downstream properties and drainage channels from the site to the off-site facility. 
(b)  A stormwater management plan must be submitted to the city office of government operations which shows the adequacy of the off-site or regional facility. 
(c)  To be eligible for a modification, the applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city office of government operations that the use of an off-site or regional facility will not result in the following impacts to upstream or downstream areas: 
(1)  Increased threat of flood damage to public health, life, and property; 
(2)  Deterioration of existing culverts, bridges, dams, and other structures; 
(3)  Accelerated streambank or streambed erosion or siltation; 
(4)  Degradation of in-stream biological functions or habitat; or 
(5)  Water quality impairment in violation of State water quality standards, and/or violation of any state or federal regulations. 
Secs. 10-11029—10-11040. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - POST-DEVELOPMENT STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PERFORMANCE CRITERIA 
The following performance criteria shall be applicable to all stormwater management plans, unless otherwise provided for in this article. 

Sec. 10-11041. - Water quality. 
All stormwater runoff generated from a site shall be adequately treated before discharge. It will be presumed that a stormwater management system complies with this requirement if: 
(1)  It is sized to treat the prescribed water quality treatment volume from the site, as defined in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; 
(2)  Appropriate structural stormwater controls or nonstructural practices are selected, designed, constructed or preserved, and maintained according to the specific criteria in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; and 
(3)  Runoff from hotspot land uses and activities identified by the city office of government operations are adequately treated and addressed through the use of appropriate structural stormwater controls, nonstructural practices and pollution prevention practices. 
Sec. 10-11042. - Stream channel protection. 
Protection of stream channels from bank and bed erosion and degradation shall be provided by using all of the following approaches: 
(1)  Preservation, restoration and/or reforestation (with native vegetation) of the applicable stream buffer; 
(2)  Twenty-four hour extended detention storage of the one-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event; 
(3)  Erosion prevention measures such as energy dissipation and velocity control. 
Sec. 10-11043. - Overbank flooding protection. 
(a)  Downstream overbank flood and property protection shall be provided by controlling (attenuating) the post-development peak discharge rate to the pre-development rate for the 25-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event. If control of the one year, 24-hour storm under section 10-11043 is exempted, then peak discharge rate attenuation of the two year through the 25-year return frequency storm event must be provided. 
(b)  Based on information presented by the developer to the office of government operations, the office may adjust or waive this requirement for sites where the post-development downstream analysis shows that uncontrolled post-development conditions will not increase downstream peak flows, or that meeting the requirement will cause greater peak flow downstream impacts than the uncontrolled post-development conditions. 
Sec. 10-11044. - Extreme flooding protection. 
(a)  Extreme flood and public safety protection shall be provided by controlling and safely conveying the 100-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event such that flooding is not exacerbated. 
(b)  Based on information presented by the developer to the office of government operations, the office may adjust or waive this requirement for sites where the post-development downstream analysis shows that uncontrolled post-development conditions will not increase downstream peak flows, or that meeting the requirement will cause greater peak flow downstream impacts than the uncontrolled post-development conditions. 
Sec. 10-11045. - Structural stormwater controls. 
(a)  All structural stormwater management facilities shall be selected and designed using the appropriate criteria from the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. All structural stormwater controls must be designed appropriately to meet their intended function. For other structural stormwater controls not included in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, or for which pollutant removal rates have not been provided, the effectiveness and pollutant removal of the structural control must be documented through prior studies, literature reviews, or other means and receive approval from the city office of government operations before being included in the design of a stormwater management system. In addition, if hydrologic or topographic conditions, or land use activities warrant greater control than that provided by the minimum control requirements, the city office of government operations may impose additional requirements deemed necessary to protect upstream and downstream properties and aquatic resources from damage due to increased volume, frequency, and rate of stormwater runoff or increased nonpoint source pollution loads created on the site in question. 
(b)  Applicants shall consult the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual for guidance on the factors that determine site design feasibility when selecting and locating a structural stormwater control. 
Sec. 10-11046. - Stormwater credits for nonstructural measures. 
The use of one or more site design measures by the applicant may allow for a reduction in the water quality treatment volume required under section 10-11045. The applicant may, if approved by the city office of government operations, take credit for the use of stormwater better site design practices and reduce the water quality volume requirement. For each potential credit, there is a minimum set of criteria and requirements which identify the conditions or circumstances under which the credit may be applied. The site design practices that qualify for this credit and the criteria and procedures for applying and calculating the credits are included in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
Sec. 10-11047. - Drainage system guidelines. 
Stormwater conveyance facilities, which may include but are not limited to culverts, stormwater drainage pipes, catch basins, drop inlets, junction boxes, headwalls, gutter, swales, channels, ditches, and energy dissipaters shall be provided when necessary for the protection of public right-of-way and private properties adjoining project sites and/or public right-of-ways. Stormwater conveyance facilities that are designed to carry runoff from more than one parcel, existing or proposed, shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Methods to calculate stormwater flows shall be in accordance with the stormwater design manual; 
(2)  All culverts, pipe systems and open channel flow systems shall be sized in accordance with the stormwater management plan using the methods included in the stormwater design manual; and 
(3)  Design and construction of stormwater conveyance facilities shall be in accordance with the criteria and specifications found in the stormwater design manual. 
Sec. 10-11048. - Dam design guidelines. 
Any land disturbing activity that involves a site which proposes a dam shall comply with the Georgia Safe Dams Act and Rules for Dam Safety as applicable. 
Secs. 10-11049—10-11060. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - CONSTRUCTION INSPECTIONS OF POST-DEVELOPMENT STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SYSTEM 

Sec. 10-11061. - Inspections to ensure plan compliance during construction. 
(a)  Periodic inspections of the stormwater management system construction shall be conducted by the staff of the city office of government operations or conducted and certified by a professional engineer who has been approved by the office of government operations. Construction inspections shall utilize the approved stormwater management plan for establishing compliance. 
(b)  All inspections shall be documented with written reports that contain the following information: 
(1)  The date and location of the inspection; 
(2)  Whether construction is in compliance with the approved stormwater management plan; 
(3)  Variations from the approved construction specifications; and 
(4)  Any other variations or violations of the conditions of the approved stormwater management plan. 
(c)  If any violations are found, the applicant shall be notified in writing of the nature of the violation and the required corrective actions. 
Sec. 10-11062. - Final inspection and as built plans. 
Upon completion of a project, and before a certificate of occupancy shall be granted, the applicant is responsible for certifying that the completed project is in accordance with the approved stormwater management plan. All applicants are required to submit actual "as built" plans for any stormwater management facilities or practices after final construction is completed. The plan must show the final design specifications for all stormwater management facilities and practices and must be certified by a professional engineer. A final inspection by the city office of government operations is required before the release of any performance securities can occur. 
Secs. 10-11063—10-11070. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - ONGOING INSPECTION AND MAINTENANCE OF STORMWATER FACILITIES AND PRACTICES 

Sec. 10-11071. - Long-term maintenance inspection of stormwater facilities and practices. 
(a)  Stormwater management facilities and practices included in a stormwater management plan which are subject to an inspection and maintenance agreement must undergo ongoing inspections to document maintenance and repair needs and ensure compliance with the requirements of the agreement, the plan and this article. 
(b)  A stormwater management facility or practice shall be inspected on a periodic basis by the responsible person in accordance with the approved inspection and maintenance agreement. In the event that the stormwater management facility has not been maintained and/or becomes a danger to public safety or public health, the city office of government operations shall notify the person responsible for carrying out the maintenance plan by registered or certified mail to the person specified in the inspection and maintenance agreement. The notice shall specify the measures needed to comply with the agreement and the plan and shall specify the time within which such measures shall be completed. If the responsible person fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the office of government operations, may correct the violation as provided in section 10-11074 hereof. 
(c)  Inspection programs by the city office of government operations may be established on any reasonable basis, including but not limited to: routine inspections; random inspections; inspections based upon complaints or other notice of possible violations; and joint inspections with other agencies inspecting under environmental or safety laws. Inspections may include, but are not limited to: reviewing maintenance and repair records; sampling discharges, surface water, groundwater, and material or water in stormwater management facilities; and evaluating the condition of stormwater management facilities and practices. 
Sec. 10-11072. - Right-of-entry for inspection. 
The terms of the inspection and maintenance agreement shall provide for the city office of government operations to enter the property at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner for the purpose of inspection. This includes the right to enter a property when it has a reasonable basis to believe that a violation of this article is occurring or has occurred and to enter when necessary for abatement of a public nuisance or correction of a violation of this article. 
Sec. 10-11073. - Records of maintenance activities. 
Parties responsible for the operation and maintenance of a stormwater management facility shall provide records of all maintenance and repairs to the city office of government operations upon request. 
Sec. 10-11074. - Failure to maintain. 
If a responsible person fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the city office of government operations, after 30 days written notice (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours notice shall be sufficient), may correct a violation of the design standards or maintenance requirements by performing the necessary work to place the facility or practice in proper working condition. The city office of government operations may assess the owner(s) of the facility for the cost of repair work which shall be a lien on the property, and may be placed on the ad valorum tax bill for such property and collected in the ordinary manner for such taxes. 
Secs. 10-11075—10-11080. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 10-11081. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this article or the requirements of an approved stormwater management plan or permit may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this division. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
Sec. 10-11082. - Notice of violation. 
(a)  If the city office of government operations determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved stormwater management plan or the provisions of this article, it shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this article without having first secured a permit therefore, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. 
(b)  The notice of violation shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
(2)  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
(3)  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
(4)  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the stormwater management plan or this article and the date for the completion of such remedial action; and 
(5)  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed. 
Sec. 10-11083. - Penalties. 
In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the city office of government operations shall notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten days (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the city office of government operations may take any one or more of the following actions or impose any one or more of the following penalties. 
(1)  Stop work order. The city office of government operations may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
(2)  Withhold certificate of occupancy. The city point office of government operations may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
(3)  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The office of government operations may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the land development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated upon such conditions as the office of government operations may deem necessary to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
(4)  Civil penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days, or such greater period as the office of government operations shall deem appropriate (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours notice shall be sufficient), the office of government operations may impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(5)  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this article, the city office of government operations may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in municipal court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 60 days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
Sec. 10-11084. - Administrative appeal. 
Any person aggrieved by a decision or determination of the city office of government operations shall appeal in writing within 30 days after the issuance of such decision or determination to the mayor and city council or their designee and shall be entitled to a hearing within 45 days of receipt of the written appeal. 
Sec. 10-11085. - Judicial review. 
Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of the office of government operations, after exhausting all administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal de novo to the Superior Court of Fulton County. 
Secs. 10-11086—10-11100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE B. - ILLICIT DISCHARGES AND ILLEGAL CONNECTIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-11101. - Findings. 
It is hereby determined that: 
(1)  Discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system that are not composed entirely of stormwater runoff contribute to increased nonpoint source pollution and degradation of receiving waters. 
(2)  These non-stormwater discharges occur due to spills, dumping and improper connections to the municipal separate storm sewer system from residential, industrial, commercial or institutional establishments. 
(3)  These non-stormwater discharges not only impact waterways individually, but geographically dispersed, small volume non-stormwater discharges can have cumulative impacts on receiving waters. 
(4)  The impacts of these discharges adversely affect public health and safety, drinking water supplies, recreation, fish and other aquatic life, property values and other uses of lands and waters. 
(5)  These impacts can be minimized through the regulation of spills, dumping and discharges into the municipal separate storm sewer system. 
(6)  Localities in the State of Georgia are required to comply with a number of state and federal laws, regulations and permits which require a locality to address the impacts of stormwater runoff quality and nonpoint source pollution due to improper non-stormwater discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system. 
(7)  Therefore, the City of East Point adopts this article to prohibit such non-stormwater discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system. It is determined that the regulation of spills, improper dumping and discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system is in the public interest and will prevent threats to public health and safety, and the environment. 
Sec. 10-11102. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety, environment and general welfare through the regulation of non-stormwater discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system to the maximum extent practicable as required by Federal law. This article establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the municipal separate storm sewer system in order to comply with requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process. The objectives of this article are to: 
(1)  Regulate the contribution of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system by any person; 
(2)  Prohibit illicit discharges and illegal connections to the municipal separate storm sewer system; 
(3)  Prevent non-stormwater discharges, generated as a result of spills, inappropriate dumping or disposal, to the municipal separate storm sewer system; and 
(4)  To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance, monitoring and enforcement procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this article. 
Sec. 10-11103. - Applicability. 
The provisions of this article shall apply throughout the City of East Point. 
Sec. 10-11104. - Compatibility with other regulations. 
The requirements of this article are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
Sec. 10-11105. - Severability. 
If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article shall be adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article. 
Sec. 10-11106. - Responsibility for administration. 
The City of East Point Office of Government Operations shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this article. 
Sec. 10-11107. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the following meanings, except where the context indicates a different meaning is intended:] 
Accidental discharge means a discharge prohibited by this article which occurs by chance and without planning or thought prior to occurrence. 
Clean Water Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
Construction activity means activities subject to the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act or NPDES General Construction Permits. These include construction projects resulting in land disturbance. Such activities include but are not limited to clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition. 
Illicit discharge means any direct or indirect non-stormwater discharge to the municipal separate storm sewer system, except as exempted in Division 2 of this article. 
Illegal connection means either of the following: 
(1)  Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illicit discharge to enter the storm drain system including but not limited to any conveyances which allow any non-stormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain system, regardless of whether such pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance has been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency; or 
(2)  Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance connected to the municipal separate storm sewer system which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency. 
Industrial activity means activities subject to NPDES Industrial Permits as defined in 40 CFR Section 122.26(b)(14). 
National pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) storm water discharge permit means a permit issued by the Georgia EPD under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC § 1342(b) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis. 
Municipal separate storm sewer system means any facility designed or used for collecting and/or conveying stormwater, including but not limited to any roads with drainage systems, highways, municipal streets, curbs, gutters, inlets, catch basins, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, structural stormwater controls, ditches, swales, natural and man-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures, and which is: 
(1)  Owned or maintained by the City of East Point; 
(2)  Not a combined sewer; and 
(3)  Not part of a publicly-owned treatment works. 
Non-stormwater discharge means any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
Person means, except to the extent exempted from this article, any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the State, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Pollutant means anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; petroleum hydrocarbons; automotive fluids; cooking grease; detergents (biodegradable or otherwise); degreasers; cleaning chemicals; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; liquid and solid wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; concrete and cement; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind. 
Pollution means the contamination or other alteration of any water's physical, chemical or biological properties by the addition of any constituent and includes but is not limited to, a change in temperature, taste, color, turbidity, or odor of such waters, or the discharge of any liquid, gaseous, solid, radioactive, or other substance into any such waters as will or is likely to create a nuisance or render such waters harmful, detrimental or injurious to the public health, safety, welfare, or environment, or to domestic, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational, or other legitimate beneficial uses, or to livestock, wild animals, birds, fish or other aquatic life. 
Premises mean any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface and subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the State of Georgia which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single person. 
Stormwater runoff or stormwater means any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation. 
Structural stormwater control means a structural stormwater management facility or device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow. 
Secs. 10-11108—10-11120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PROHIBITIONS 

Sec. 10-11121. - Prohibition of illicit discharges. 
(a)  No person shall throw, drain, or otherwise discharge, cause, or allow others under its control to throw, drain, or otherwise discharge into the municipal separate storm sewer system any pollutants or waters containing any pollutants, other than stormwater. 
(b)  The following discharges are exempt from the prohibition provision above: 
(1)  Water line flushing performed by a government agency, other potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream flows, rising ground water, ground water infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped ground water, foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows, and any other water source not containing pollutants; 
(2)  Discharges or flows from fire fighting, and other discharges specified in writing by the city as being necessary to protect public health and safety; 
(3)  The prohibition provision above shall not apply to any non-stormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit or order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the State and the Federal Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the municipal separate storm sewer system. 
Sec. 10-11102. - Prohibition of illegal connections. 
(a)  The construction, connection, use, maintenance or continued existence of any illegal connection to the municipal separate storm sewer system is prohibited. 
(1)  This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illegal connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
(2)  A person violates this article if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the municipal separate storm sewer system, or allows such a connection to continue. 
(3)  Improper connections in violation of this article must be disconnected and redirected, if necessary, to an approved onsite wastewater management system or the sanitary sewer system upon approval of the city office of government operations. 
(4)  Any drain or conveyance that has not been documented in plans, maps or equivalent, and which may be connected to the storm sewer system, shall be located by the owner or occupant of that property upon receipt of written notice of violation from the office of government operations requiring that such locating be completed. Such notice will specify a reasonable time period within which the location of the drain or conveyance is to be completed, that the drain or conveyance be identified as storm sewer, sanitary sewer or other, and that the outfall location or point of connection to the storm sewer system, sanitary sewer system or other discharge point be identified. Results of these investigations are to be documented and provided to the office of government operations. 
Secs. 10-11123—10-11130. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - INDUSTRIAL OR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY DISCHARGES 

Sec. 10-11131. - Compliance with permit. 
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the city office of government operations prior to allowing discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system. 
Secs. 10-11132—10-11140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - ACCESS AND INSPECTION OF PROPERTIES AND FACILITIES 

Sec. 10-11141. - Right of entry. 
The City of East Point Office of Government Operations shall be permitted to enter and inspect properties and facilities at reasonable times as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this article. The office of government operations shall provide property owners with written notice at least 24 hours prior to such entry and/or inspection, except where the city has reason to believe that conditions may present an imminent danger to human health or the environment, or otherwise jeopardize the public's safety. 
(1)  If a property or facility has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the owner or operator shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of the office of government operations. 
(2)  The owner or operator shall allow the office of government operations ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, photography, videotaping, examination and copying of any records that are required under the conditions of a NPDES permit to discharge stormwater. 
(3)  The office of government operations shall have the right to set up on any property or facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the office of government operations to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of flow discharges. 
(4)  The office of government operations may require the owner or operator to install monitoring equipment and perform monitoring as necessary, and make the monitoring data available to the office of government operations. This sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the owner or operator at his/her own expense. All devices used to measure flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy. 
(5)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the property or facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the owner or operator at the written or oral request of the office of government operations and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the owner or operator. 
(6)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the office of government Operations access to a facility is a violation of this article. 
(7)  If the office of government operations has been refused access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and the office of government operations is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this article or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, environment and welfare of the community, then the office of government operations may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction. 
Secs. 10-11142—10-11150. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - NOTIFICATION OF ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGES AND SPILLS 

Sec. 10-11151. - Notification required. 
(a)  Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility, activity or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility, activity or operation has information of any known or suspected release of pollutants or non-stormwater discharges from that facility or operation which are resulting or may result in illicit discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the municipal separate storm sewer system, State Waters, or Waters of the U.S., said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release so as to minimize the effects of the discharge. 
(b)  Said person shall notify the office of government operations in person, by phone, or by facsimile no later than 24 hours after a discharge or spill of the nature, quantity and time of occurrence of the discharge. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the city office of government operations within three business days of the phone or in person notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years. Said person shall also take immediate steps to ensure no recurrence of the discharge or spill. 
(c)  In the event of such a release of hazardous materials, emergency response agencies and/or other appropriate agencies shall be immediately notified. 
(d)  Failure to provide notification of a release as provided above is a violation of this article. 
Secs. 10-11152—10-11160. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - VIOLATIONS, ENFORCEMENT, PENALTIES AND APPEALS 

Sec. 10-11161. - Violations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this article. Any person who has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this article may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section or may be restrained by injunction or otherwise abated in a manner provided by law. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
(b)  In the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, the city office of government operations is authorized to enter upon the subject private property, without giving prior notice, to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. The office of government operations is authorized to seek costs of the abatement as outlined in this article. 
Sec. 10-11162. - Notice of violation. 
Whenever the city office of government operations finds that a violation of this article has occurred, the office of government operations may order compliance by written notice of violation. 
(1)  The notice of violation shall contain: 
a.  The name and address of the alleged violator; 
b.  The address when available or a description of the building, structure or land upon which the violation is occurring, or has occurred; 
c.  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
d.  A description of the remedial measures necessary to restore compliance with this article and a time schedule for the completion of such remedial action; and 
e.  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed. 
(2)  Such notice may require without limitation: 
a.  The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting; 
b.  The elimination of illicit discharges and illegal connections; 
c.  That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist; 
d.  The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; 
e.  Payment of costs to cover administrative and abatement costs; and 
f.  The implementation of pollution prevention practices. 
Sec. 10-11163. - Penalties. 
In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed in accordance with this section. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the city office of government operations shall notify the owner of the property and/or other alleged violator in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten days (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the property owner or other alleged violator fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the office of government operations may take any one or more of the following actions or impose any one or more of the following penalties. 
(1)  Abatement. If the office of government operations concludes that abatement is necessary or appropriate, then representatives of the city office of government operations may enter upon the subject private property and are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the government agency or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above. Within 30 days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property shall be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. If the amount due is not paid within 30 days after receipt of the notice, the charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment. 
(2)  Civil penalties. In the event the alleged violator fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days (or such greater period as the office of government operations shall deem appropriate) (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours notice shall be sufficient), the office of government operations may impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(3)  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this article, the office of government operations may issue a citation to the alleged violator requiring such person to appear in municipal court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 60 days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
Sec. 10-11164. - Violations deemed a public nuisance. 
In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this article is a threat to public health, safety, welfare, and environment and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief as provided by law. 
Sec. 10-11165. - Remedies not exclusive. 
The remedies listed in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law and the city office of government operations may seek cumulative remedies. 
Sec. 10-11166. - Attorneys' fees and other costs. 
The City of East Point Office of Government Operations may recover attorneys' fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement of this article, including sampling and monitoring expenses. 
Sec. 10-11167. - Administrative appeal. 
Any person aggrieved by a decision or determination of the city office of government operations shall appeal in writing within 30 days after the issuance of such decision or determination to the mayor and city council or their designee and shall be entitled to a hearing within 45 days of receipt of the written appeal. 
Sec. 10-11168. - Judicial review. 
Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of the city office of government operations, after exhausting all administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal de novo to the Superior Court of Fulton County. 
Chapter 12 - STREAM BUFFER PROTECTION 
ARTICLE A. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-12001. - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the "City of East Point Stream Buffer Protection Ordinance." 
Sec. 10-12002. - Findings. 
Whereas, the City of East Point finds that buffers adjacent to streams provide numerous benefits including: 
(1)  Protecting, restoring and maintaining the chemical, physical and biological integrity of streams and their water resources; 
(2)  Removing pollutants delivered in urban stormwater; 
(3)  Reducing erosion and controlling sedimentation; 
(4)  Protecting and stabilizing stream banks; 
(5)  Providing for infiltration of stormwater runoff; 
(6)  Maintaining base flow of streams; 
(7)  Contributing organic matter that is a source of food and energy for the aquatic ecosystem; 
(8)  Providing tree canopy to shade streams and promote desirable aquatic habitat; 
(9)  Providing riparian wildlife habitat; 
(10)  Furnishing scenic value and recreational opportunity; 
(11)  Providing opportunities for the protection and restoration of greenspace. 
Sec. 10-12003. - Purposes. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to protect the public health, safety, environment and general welfare; to minimize public and private losses due to erosion, siltation and water pollution; and to maintain stream water quality by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Create buffer zones along the streams of the City of East Point for the protection of water resources, and 
(2)  Minimize land development within such buffers by establishing buffer zone requirements and by requiring authorization for any such activities. 
Sec. 10-12004. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply: 
Buffer means, with respect to a stream, a natural or enhanced vegetated area (established by Section 5.1.1 below), lying adjacent to the stream. 
Impervious cover means any manmade paved, hardened or structural surface regardless of material. Impervious cover includes but is not limited to rooftops, buildings, streets, roads, decks, swimming pools and any concrete or asphalt. 
Land development means any land change, including but not limited to clearing, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, construction, paving and any other installation of impervious cover. 
Land development activity means those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land development. 
Land disturbance means any land or vegetation change, including, but not limited to, clearing, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, that do not involve construction, paving or any other installation of impervious cover. 
Land disturbance activity means those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land disturbance. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding, which would have at least a one percent probability of flooding occurrence in any calendar year based on the basin being fully developed as shown on the current land use plan; i.e., the regulatory flood. 
Parcel means any plot, lot or acreage shown as a unit on the latest county tax assessment records. 
Permit means the permit issued by the City of East Point for undertaking any land development activity. 
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the State, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Protection area, or stream protection area means, with respect to a stream, the combined areas of all required buffers and setbacks applicable to such stream. 
Riparian means belonging or related to the bank of a river, stream, lake, pond or impoundment. 
Setback means, with respect to a stream, the area established by subsection 10-13021(2) extending beyond any buffer applicable to the stream. 
Stream means any stream, beginning at: 
(1)  The location of a spring, seep, or groundwater outflow that sustains streamflow; or 
(2)  A point in the stream channel with a drainage area of 25 acres or more; or 
(3)  Where evidence indicates the presence of a stream in a drainage area of other than 25 acres, the city may require field studies to verify the existence of a stream. 
Stream bank means the sloping land that contains the stream channel and the normal flows of the stream. 
Stream channel means the portion of a watercourse that contains the base flow of the stream. 
Watershed means the land area that drains into a particular stream. 
Sec. 10-12005. - Applicability. 
(a)  This chapter shall apply to all land development activity on property containing a stream protection area as defined in section 10-12004. Any land development activity within a buffer established hereunder or any impervious cover within a setback established hereunder is prohibited unless a variance is granted pursuant to section 10-12022 below. After the effective date of this chapter, it shall apply to new subdividing and platting activities. 
(b)  These requirements are in addition to, and do not replace or supersede, any other applicable buffer requirements established under state law and neither approval nor exemption from these requirements constitutes approval or exemption from buffer requirements established under state law or from other applicable local, state or federal regulations. 
Sec. 10-12006. - Grandfather provisions. 
This chapter shall not apply to the following activities: 
(1)  Work consisting of the repair or maintenance of any lawful use of land that is zoned and approved for such use on or before the effective date of this ordinance. 
(2)  Existing development and on-going land disturbance activities including but not limited to existing agriculture, silviculture, landscaping, gardening and lawn maintenance, except that new development or land disturbance activities on such properties will be subject to all applicable buffer requirements. 
(3)  Any land development activity that is under construction, fully approved for development, scheduled for permit approval or has been submitted for approval as of the effective date of this ordinance. 
(4)  Land development activity that has not been submitted for approval, but that is part of a larger master development plan, such as for an office park or other phased development that has been previously approved within two years of the effective date of this chapter. 
Sec. 10-12007. - Exemptions. 
The following specific activities are exempt from this chapter. Exemption of these activities does not constitute an exemption for any other activity proposed on a property. 
(1)  Activities for the purpose of building one of the following: 
a.  A stream crossing by a driveway, transportation route or utility line; 
b.  Public water supply intake or public wastewater outfall structures; 
c.  Intrusions necessary to provide access to a property; 
d.  Public access facilities that must be on the water including boat ramps, docks, foot trails leading directly to the river or stream, fishing platforms and overlooks; 
e.  Unpaved foot trails and paths; 
f.  Activities to restore and enhance stream bank stability, vegetation, water quality and/or aquatic habitat, so long as native vegetation and bioengineering techniques are used. 
(2)  Public sewer line easements paralleling the stream, except that all easements (permanent and construction) and land disturbance should be at least 25 feet from the top of the bank. This includes such impervious cover as is necessary for the operation and maintenance of the utility, including but not limited to manholes, vents and valve structures. This exemption shall not be construed as allowing the construction of roads, bike paths or other transportation routes in such easements, regardless of paving material, except for access for the uses specifically cited in subsection (1) above. 
(3)  Land development activities within a right-of-way existing at the time this chapter takes effect or approved under the terms of this chapter. 
(4)  Within an easement of any utility existing at the time this chapter takes effect or approved under the terms of this chapter, land disturbance activities and such impervious cover as is necessary for the operation and maintenance of the utility, including but not limited to manholes, vents and valve structures. 
(5)  Emergency work necessary to preserve life or property. However, when emergency work is performed under this section, the person performing it shall report such work to the City of East Point Office of Government Operations on the next business day after commencement of the work. Within ten days thereafter, the person shall apply for a permit and perform such work within such time period as may be determined by the city office of government operations to be reasonably necessary to correct any impairment such emergency work may have caused to the water conveyance capacity, stability or water quality of the protection area. 
(6)  Forestry and silviculture activities on land that is zoned for forestry, silvicultural or agricultural uses and are not incidental to other land development activity. If such activity results in land disturbance in the buffer that would otherwise be prohibited, then no other land disturbing activity other than normal forest management practices will be allowed on the entire property for three years after the end of the activities that intruded on the buffer. 
Sec. 10-12008. - Reserved. 
Sec. 10-12009. - Severability. 
If any article, section, subsection, paragraph, clause, phrase or provision of this ordinance shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect or invalidate the remaining portions of this chapter. 
Sec. 10-12010. - Repeal of existing ordinances. 
All ordinances and parts of ordinances or rules and regulations in conflict herewith are hereby repealed. 
Secs. 10-12011—10-12020. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE B. - LAND DEVELOPMENT AND OTHER REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 10-12021. - Buffer and setback requirements. 
All land development activity subject to this chapter shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  An undisturbed natural vegetative buffer shall be maintained for 50 feet, measured horizontally, on both banks (as applicable) of the stream as measured from the top of the stream bank. The land forming the bank is also considered part of the buffer for purposes of this chapter. 
(2)  An additional setback shall be maintained for 25 feet, measured horizontally, beyond the undisturbed natural vegetative buffer, in which all impervious cover shall be prohibited. Grading, filling and earthmoving shall be minimized within the setback. 
(3)  No septic tanks or septic tank drain fields shall be permitted within the buffer or the setback. 
Sec. 10-12022. - Variance procedures. 
Variances from the above buffer and setback requirements may be granted in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)  Where a parcel was platted prior to the effective date of this chapter, and its shape, topography or other existing physical condition prevents land development consistent with this chapter, and the Department of Planning and Zoning finds and determines that the requirements of this chapter prohibit the otherwise lawful use of the property by the owner, the planning and zoning commission of the city may grant a variance from the buffer and setback requirements hereunder, provided such variance requires mitigation measures to offset the effects of any proposed land development on the parcel. 
(2)  Except as provided above, the planning and zoning commission of the city shall grant no variance from any provision of this ordinance without first conducting a public hearing on the application for variance and authorizing the granting of the variance by an affirmative vote of the planning and zoning commission. The city shall give public notice of each such public hearing in a newspaper of general circulation within the city. The city shall require that the applicant post a sign giving notice of the proposed variance and the public hearing. The sign shall be of a size and posted in such a location on the property as to be clearly visible from the primary adjacent road right-of-way. 
Variances will be considered only in the following cases: 
a.  When a property's shape, topography or other physical conditions existing at the time of the adoption of this ordinance prevents land development unless a buffer variance is granted. 
b.  Unusual circumstances when strict adherence to the minimal buffer requirements in the ordinance would create an extreme hardship. 
Variances will not be considered when, following adoption of this chapter, actions of any property owner of a given property have created conditions of a hardship on that property. 
(3)  At a minimum, a variance request shall include the following information: 
a.  A site map that includes locations of all streams, wetlands, floodplain boundaries and other natural features, as determined by field survey; 
b.  A description of the shape, size, topography, slope, soils, vegetation and other physical characteristics of the property; 
c.  A detailed site plan that shows the locations of all existing and proposed structures and other impervious cover, the limits of all existing and proposed land disturbance, both inside and outside the buffer and setback. The exact area of the buffer to be affected shall be accurately and clearly indicated; 
d.  Documentation of unusual hardship should the buffer be maintained; 
e.  At least one alternative plan, which does not include a buffer or setback intrusion, or an explanation of why such a site plan is not possible; 
f.  A calculation of the total area and length of the proposed intrusion; 
g.  A stormwater management site plan, if applicable; and, 
h.  Proposed mitigation, if any, for the intrusion. If no mitigation is proposed, the request must include an explanation of why none is being proposed. 
(4)  The following factors will be considered in determining whether to issue a variance: 
a.  The shape, size, topography, slope, soils, vegetation and other physical characteristics of the property; 
b.  The locations of all streams on the property, including along property boundaries; 
c.  The location and extent of the proposed buffer or setback intrusion; 
d.  Whether alternative designs are possible which require less intrusion or no intrusion; 
e.  The long-term and construction water-quality impacts of the proposed variance; and 
f.  Whether issuance of the variance is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment. 
Sec. 10-12023. - Compatibility with other buffer regulations and requirements. 
The requirements of this chapter should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this ordinance imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence. 
Sec. 10-12024. - Additional information requirements for development on buffer zone properties. 
(a)  Any permit applications for property requiring buffers and setbacks hereunder must include the following: 
(1)  A site plan showing: 
a.  The location of all streams on the property; 
b.  Limits of required stream buffers and setbacks on the property; 
c.  Buffer zone topography with contour lines at no greater than five-foot contour intervals; 
d.  Delineation of forested and open areas in the buffer zone; and 
e.  Detailed plans of all proposed land development in the buffer and of all proposed impervious cover within the setback. 
(2)  A description of all proposed land development within the buffer and setback; and 
(3)  Any other documentation that the city office of government operations and department of planning and zoning may reasonably deem necessary for review of the application and to insure that the buffer zone ordinance is addressed in the approval process. 
(b)  All buffer and setback areas must be recorded on the final plat of the property following plan approval. 
Sec. 10-12025. - Responsibility. 
Neither the issuance of a development permit nor compliance with the conditions thereof, nor with the provisions of this ordinance shall relieve any person from any responsibility otherwise imposed by law for damage to persons or property; nor shall the issuance of any permit hereunder serve to impose any liability upon the City of East Point, its officers or employees, for injury or damage to persons or property. 
Sec. 10-13026. - Inspection. 
(a)  The city office of government operations or the department of planning and zoning may cause inspections of the work in the buffer or setback to be made periodically during the course thereof and shall make a final inspection following completion of the work. The permittee shall assist the city office of government operations and department of planning and zoning in making such inspections. The city shall have the authority to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out its duties as prescribed in this ordinance, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable time upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigating and inspecting the sites of any land development activities within the protection area. 
(b)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent who requests entry for purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out official duties. 
Secs. 10-12027—10-12040. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE C. - VIOLATIONS, ENFORCEMENT, PENALTIES AND APPEALS 

Sec. 10-12041. - Violations. 
Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this chapter or the requirements of an approved site plan or permit may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
Sec. 10-12042. - Notice of violation. 
(a)  If the city office of government operations or the department of planning and zoning determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved site plan or the provisions of this chapter, it shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this ordinance without having first secured the appropriate permit therefore, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. 
(b)  The notice of violation shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
(2)  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
(3)  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
(4)  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the approved site plan or this ordinance and the date for the completion of such remedial action; and 
(5)  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed. 
Sec. 10-12043. - Penalties. 
In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the city office of government operations or the department of planning and zoning shall notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten days (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the city office of government operations or the department of planning and zoning may take any one or more of the following actions or impose any one or more of the following penalties. 
(1)  Stop work order. The city office of government operations may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
(2)  Withhold certificate of occupancy. The city department of planning and zoning may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
(3)  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The city office of government operations or the department of planning and zoning may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the land development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the office of government operations or the department of planning and zoning may deem necessary) to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
(4)  Civil penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days (or such greater period as the office of government operations or the department of planning and zoning shall deem appropriate) (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours notice shall be sufficient), the office of government operations or the department of planning and zoning may impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(5)  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this chapter, the city office of government operations or the department of planning and zoning may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in municipal court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 60 days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
Sec. 10-12044. - Administrative appeal. 
Any person aggrieved by a decision or determination of the city office of government operations or the department of planning and zoning shall appeal in writing within 30 days after the issuance of such decision or determination to the mayor and city council or their designee and shall be entitled to a hearing within 45 days of receipt of the written appeal. 
Sec. 10-12045. - Judicial review. 
Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of the city office of government operations or the department of planning and zoning, after exhausting all administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal de novo to the Superior Court of Fulton County. 
Chapter 13 - ENTERPRISE ZONES 

Sec. 10-13001. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the following meanings, except where the context indicates a different meaning is intended: 
(a)  Ad valorem tax shall mean property taxes levied for state, county, or municipal operating purposes but does not include property taxes imposed by school districts or property taxes imposed for obligation debt. 
(b)  Business enterprise means any business which is engaged primarily in manufacturing, warehousing and distribution, processing, telecommunications, tourism, and research and development industries. 
(c)  Enterprise zone means the geographic area designated in section 10-13003. 
(d)  Full-time job equivalent means a job or jobs with no predetermined end date, with a regular work week of 30 hours or more, and with the same benefits provided to similar employees. 
(e)  Low income and moderate income individual means a person who is currently: 
(1)  Unemployed or unemployed for three of the six months prior to the date of hire; 
(2)  Homeless; 
(3)  A resident of public housing; 
(4)  Receiving temporary assistance to needy families or who has received temporary assistance for needy families at any time during the 18 months previous to the date of hire; 
(5)  A participant in the Job Training Partnership Act or who has participated in the Job Training Partnership Act at any time during the 18 months previous to the date of hire; 
(6)  A participant in a job opportunity where basic skills are required or who has participated in such a job opportunity at any time during the 18 months previous to the date of hire; 
(7)  Receiving supplemental social security income; or 
(8)  Receiving food stamps. 
(f)  New job means employment for an individual created within an enterprise zone by a new or expanded qualified business or service enterprise at the time of the initial staffing of such new or expanded enterprise. 
(g)  Qualified or qualifying business means an employer that meets the requirements of O.C.G.A. Section 36-88-1, et seq. (including O.C.G.A. Section 36-88-4) and subsection 10-12004(b); 
(h)  Qualified or qualifying service enterprise means an entity that meets the requirements of subsection 10-13004(b) and O.C.G.A. Section 36-88-1, et seq., and which is engaged primarily in finance, insurance, and real estate activity or activities listed under the Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) Codes 60 through 67 according to the Federal Office of Management and Budget Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1987 edition. 
(Ord. No. 1153-98, § 1, 3-17-98) 
Sec. 10-13002. - Purpose and scope. 
The City of East Point's Mayor and City Council finds and determines that there is need for revitalization in certain areas of the City of East Point, Georgia. Revitalization will improve geographic areas within the City of East Point which are suffering from disinvestment, underdevelopment, and economic decline and will encourage private businesses to reinvest and rehabilitate such areas. This chapter should be liberally construed to accomplish these purposes. 
Sec. 10-13003. - Criteria and boundaries of enterprise zone. 
The mayor and city council of East Point, Georgia has determined that the area contained in the enterprise zone described below satisfies at least three of the four criteria specified in O.C.G.A. Section 36-88-6. 
More specifically, it is determined that there is evidence of adverse economic conditions brought about by significant job dislocation within the area delineated below, there is evidence of general distress within the area other than poverty and unemployment, and there is evidence of underdevelopment within the area showing that the level of development in the nominated area is at least 20 percent lower than development activity within the City of East Point as a whole. The enterprise zone created herein, upon approval of Fulton County, Georgia shall have the following geographic boundaries: 
(1)  Beginning at the intersection of the right-of-ways of Norman Berry Drive and Cleveland Avenue thence running northeasterly along the southerly right-of-way of Cleveland Avenue approximately 248 feet to a point; thence running easterly along the southerly right-of-way of Cleveland Avenue approximately 642 feet to a point at the southwestern intersection of Cleveland Avenue and Sylvan Road; thence running southerly along the westerly right-of-way of Sylvan Road a distance of approximately 1,385 feet to a point; thence running southwesterly a distance of approximately 62 feet to a point, said point being on the city limit line for the City of East Point; thence running westerly approximately 250 feet to a point, said point being the intersection of the City of East Point city limits and Central Avenue; thence running northwesterly along the northern right-of-way of Central Avenue a distance of approximately 448 feet to a point, said point being the northeasterly intersection of Central Avenue and Norman Berry Drive; thence running northerly along the easterly right-of-way of Norman Berry Drive approximately 1,337 feet more or less to a point at the intersection of Norman Berry and Cleveland Avenue said point being the true point of beginning. 
(2)  Beginning at the northeasterly intersection of Central Avenue and Norman Berry Drive; thence running southeasterly along the northern right of way of Central Avenue a distance of approximately 448 feet to a point; thence southerly a distance of approximately 138 feet to the northern right of way of Willingham Drive; thence northeasterly along said right of way a distance of approximately 450 feet to the intersection of the right of way of Norman Berry Drive; thence northerly along the right of way of Norman Berry Drive a distance of approximately 140 feet to the point of beginning. 
Sec. 10-13004. - Qualifications and incentives; qualifying business. 
(a)  The mayor and city council of East Point, in order to encourage revitalization within the designated enterprise zone, make exemptions from municipal ad valorem taxes available to qualifying businesses and service enterprises within the enterprise zone in accordance with the following schedule: 
(1)  One hundred percent of the municipal ad valorem taxes due on the qualifying business or service enterprise shall be exempt for the first five years; 
(2)  Eighty percent of the municipal ad valorem taxes due on the qualifying business or service enterprise shall be exempt for the next two years; 
(3)  Sixty percent of the municipal ad valorem taxes due on the qualifying business or service enterprise shall be exempt for the next year; 
(4)  Forty percent of the municipal ad valorem taxes due on the qualifying business or service enterprise shall be exempt for the next year; and 
(5)  Twenty percent of the municipal ad valorem taxes due on the qualifying business or service enterprise shall be exempt last (tenth) year. 
(b)  A qualifying business or service enterprise is an enterprise which increased employment by five or more new full-time job equivalents in area designated as an enterprise zone and which provides additional economic stimulus in such zone. The quality and quantity shall be determined, on a case-by-case basis, by the mayor and city council of East Point, Georgia. Such business or service may be new, an expansion project for an existing business or service enterprise, reinvestment of an existing business or service enterprise, or a successor to such business or service enterprise. At no time shall this chapter be construed to apply to business or service enterprise existing at the time of enactment of this chapter unless such business or service enterprise qualifies under subsection 10-13004(d). Whenever possible, ten percent of such new employees shall be low income or moderate income individuals. 
(c)  For a qualifying business or service enterprise within the enterprise zone designated herein, the schedule provided in paragraph (a) of this section shall begin the calendar year after which said enterprise is designated as a "qualifying business or service enterprise" by the Mayor and City Council of East Point and the Fulton County Board of Commissioners. Nothing contained in the ordinance shall be construed as giving any qualifying business or service enterprise or property owner a vested right to be designated as a qualifying business or service enterprise. A minimum of five new jobs must be created and maintained for a qualifying business or service enterprise to maintain eligibility for the tax exemption provided for in this chapter. Evidence of the creation and maintenance of all new jobs within the enterprise zone shall be submitted to East Point city clerk by the qualifying business or service enterprise annually. 
(d)  If on or after the effective date of this chapter, a project within the designated enterprise zone consists of rehabilitation of an existing structure and the value of the improvement exceeds the value of the land by a ratio of five to one, then the exemption schedule in paragraph (a) of this section shall apply whether or not the rehabilitation project is carried out by a qualifying business or service enterprise. The tax exemptions pursuant to this paragraph shall begin the year directly following designation of the project by the mayor and city council of East Point and the Fulton County Board of Commissioners as a qualifying project under this paragraph. This designation shall not be requested until completion of the rehabilitation project. 
(e)  In no event shall the value of the ad valorem tax exemptions granted within the city as a whole exceed ten percent of the value of the property tax digest of the city of East Point. 
Sec. 10-13005. - Terms of duration. 
The area designated as an enterprise zone shall remain in existence for ten years from the first day of the year following the effective date of this chapter. Ad valorem tax exemptions available to a qualified business or service enterprise in the enterprise zone herein created shall remain in effect for the full ten-year period established in subsection 10-13004(a) of this chapter, regardless of the termination of the designation of the area as an enterprise zone. 
Sec. 10-13006. - Administration. 
The Planning and Zoning together with the Fulton County Department of Planning and Economic Development and the Office of the Tax Commissioner of Fulton County shall administer and enforce this chapter for the purpose of determining the applicability of the exemptions provided herein. 
Sec. 10-13007. - Application. 
(a)  An enterprise desiring designation as a "qualifying business or service enterprise" under this chapter must apply to the Planning and Zoning Department the Fulton County Department of Planning and Economic Development. The application shall be accompanied by the following items: 
(1)  A description of the business(es) conducted by the applicant at the subject location within the enterprise zone; 
(2)  Documented evidence reflecting the number of full-time equivalents created and maintained by the applicant at the subject location within the enterprise zone as of the date of application, as compared to the number of such full-time job equivalents existing as of the effective date of this chapter; 
(3)  The name and address of each employee occupying each new full-time job at the subject location within the enterprise zone, and a determination of whether each such employee was a low income or moderate income individual as of the date of hire of the employee for the new full-time job equivalent; 
(4)  A description and documentation of any economic stimulus provided within the enterprise zone by the applicant. 
(b)  For enterprises applying for exemptions under subsection 10-13004(d), the application to the Planning and Zoning Department the Fulton County Department of Planning and Economic Development should be accompanied by the following: 
(1)  A description of the business(es) conducted by the applicant at the subject location within the enterprise zone; 
(2)  Documentation reflecting expenses of rehabilitation of the existing structure; 
(3)  An appraisal or appraisals reflecting the value of the structure both before and after the rehabilitation; 
(4)  An appraisal or appraisals reflecting the value of the accompanying tract or parcel of land both before and after rehabilitation of the structure; 
(5)  Photographic documentation of the structure before and after rehabilitation. 
Sec. 10-13008. - Separate business locations. 
Where a business is operated at more than one site or location, only the site within the enterprise zone shall be eligible for the tax exemptions provided in this chapter. 
Sec. 10-13009. - Record of exemption to be maintained. 
Any tax exemption provided by this chapter shall be recorded and documented at the address for which tax exemptions were approved. Such documentation shall be timely exhibited to any authorized enforcement officer of the City of East Point or Fulton County when so requested. 
Sec. 10-13010. - Severability. 
In the event any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter shall be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall in no manner affect the other sections, subsections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases of this chapter which shall remain in full force and effect as if that portion so adjudged invalid or unconstitutional not originally a part thereof. The mayor and city council of East Point, Georgia, hereby declare that they would have passed the remaining parts of this chapter if it had known that such portion thereof would be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional. 
Sec. 10-13011. - Liability. 
Neither the approval or denial of an application under this chapter shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law or impose any liability upon the City of East Point or Fulton County for damage to any person or property. 
Sec. 10-13012. - Effective date. 
This ordinance shall become effective 30 days following its adoption by the Mayor and City Council of East Point, Georgia and upon approval by the Fulton County Board of Commissioners. 
Chapter 14 - OVERLAY DISTRICTS 
ARTICLE A. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-14001. - Overlay District authority. 
Sec. 10-14002. - Purpose and intent. 
The City Council of East Point hereby declares it to be the purpose and intent of this resolution to establish a uniform procedure for providing for the protection, enhancement, preservation, unity of design, and use of places, sites, buildings, structures, streets, neighborhoods, and landscape features in the Main Street Architectural Overlay District in accordance with the provisions herein. 
This resolution is adopted as part of a strategy designed to promote health, safety, order, prosperity, and general welfare of the citizens of East Point through the regulation of design, aesthetics, location, bulk, size of buildings and structures, and the density and distribution of population. 
This resolution also seeks to reduce congestion on the streets; to provide safety from fire, flood and other dangers; provide adequate light and open space; protect the natural environment and address other public requirements, in order to provide sustainable development that involves the simultaneous pursuit of economic prosperity, environmental protection and social equality. 
This resolution seeks, among other things, to promote accepted design principles in areas of new development and redevelopment, to raise the level of community understanding and expectations for quality in the built environment, to protect and enhance local aesthetic and functional qualities, and to stimulate business and promote economic development. 
In consideration of the character of the Main Street Architectural Overlay District, these regulations are to monitor the suitability for certain uses, construction and design, prevent functional and visual disunity, promote desirable conditions for community and commerce and protect property against blight and depreciation 
Sec. 10-14003. - Definitions. 
Words not defined herein shall be construed to have the meaning given in Article A of Chapter II of City of East Point Zoning Ordinance, or, by Webster's Eleventh New Collegiate Dictionary. The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory, and the words "may" and "should" are permissive. As used in this resolution, the following terms shall be defined as follows: 
Appearance. The outward aspect that is visible to the public. 
Appropriate. Fitting to the context of a site, neighborhood or community. 
Architectural concept. The basic aesthetic idea of a structure, or group of structures, including the site, signs, buildings and landscape development that produces the architectural character. 
Architectural feature. A significant element of a structure or site. 
Attractive. Having qualities that arouse satisfaction and pleasure in numerous, but not necessarily all, observers. 
Building. A building is a structure created to shelter any form of human activity, including but not limited to, a house, store, barn, church, hotel. 
Certificate of endorsement (COE). A document evidencing support of a material change in the appearance of a property located within an overlay district by the person or board designated within an overlay district. 
Cohesiveness. Unity of composition among elements of a structure or among structures, and their landscape development. 
Compatibility. Harmony in appearance of architectural features in the same vicinity. 
Designation or designated. A decision by The City Council of East Point, Georgia, wherein a property or district is declared an overlay district. 
District. A geographically definable area urban or rural, small or large - possessing a significant concentration, linkage, or continuity of sites buildings, structures, and/or objects united by past events or aesthetically by plan or physical development. 
External design feature. The general arrangement of any portion of structures or landscaping, including the type, and texture of the materials, the type of roof, windows, doors, lights, signs, and fixtures of portions which are open to the public view. 
Exterior architectural features. The architectural style, general design and general arrangement of the exterior of a structure and site, including but not limited to the kind or texture of the building material and the type and style of all windows, doors, signs, facade, landscaping and other architectural fixtures, features, details, or elements relative thereto. 
Geographic area. Land area subject to overlay district regulations. 
Harmony. A quality that represents an attractive arrangement of parts, as in an arrangement of various architectural elements. 
Landscape. Plant materials, topography and other physical elements combined in relation to one another and to structures including pavement. 
Logic of design. Widely accepted principles and criteria in the solution of design problems. 
Main Street board. A panel which, when appointed by the City Council, consists of nine members appointed to consider applications within a specific overlay district. 
Material change in appearance. A change in a structure or a parking lot within an overlay district that exceeds ordinary maintenance or repair (defined below), and requires either a sign permit, building permit or land disturbance permit such as, but not limited to: 
(1)  The erection, alteration, restoration, addition or removal of any structure (including signs) or parking lot; 
(2)  Relocation of a sign or building; 
(3)  Commencement of excavation; or 
(4)  A change in the location of advertising visible from the public right-of-way. 
Ordinary maintenance or repair. Exempt from inclusion in "Material Change in Appearance" defined above. Ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior of any structure, parking lot or sign in or on an overlay district property to correct deterioration, decay or damage, or to sustain the existing form, and that does not involve a material change in outer design, material, or appearance thereof. Painting, reroofing, resurfacing, replacement of a broken sign face and other similar types of ordinary maintenance shall be deemed ordinary maintenance and repair. 
Overlay district. A geographically definable area, possessing a significant concentration or linkage of sites, buildings, structures, objects or landscapes, including the adjacent area necessary for the proper treatment thereof, united by plan and/or physical development. An overlay district shall further mean an area designated by the East Point City Council as such. 
Overlay property. An individual site, structure, object or landscape, including the adjacent area necessary for the proper continuity thereof, contained within an overlay district. 
Proportion. Balanced relationship of parts of a building, signs and other structures, and landscape to each other and to the whole. 
Scale. Proportional relationships of the size of parts to one another and to humans. 
Street hardware. Objects other than buildings that are part of the streetscape. Examples are: street light fixtures, utility poles, traffic lights and their fixtures, benches, litter containers, planting containers, fire hydrants, etc. 
Streetscape. The appearance and organization along a street of buildings, paving, plantings, street hardware and miscellaneous structures. 
Sec. 10-14004. - Certificates of endorsement. 
Approval of alterations or new construction. Applicants for an East Point land disturbance permit, sign permit or building permit shall obtain a certificate of endorsement (COE) for applicable properties. 
Guidelines and criteria for certificates of endorsement. Issuance of certificates of endorsement shall be based on the criteria of the City of East Point Zoning Ordinance along with other criteria adopted by the City Council. 
Submission of plans. An application for a COE shall be accompanied by such drawings, photographs, material samples or plans as may be required pursuant to the overlay district provisions. 
Interior alterations. Review of applications for endorsement shall not consider interiors or exterior features which are not visible from a public street. 
Issuance of a certificate of endorsement. 
(a)  A COE may be issued when the proposed material change(s) in the appearance or arrangement of the elements of the project is consistent with the overlay district provisions. 
(b)  A copy of each final COE shall be maintained in the Department of Planning and Zoning. 
Appeals. Appeals are to the Planning and Zoning Commission. Any appeal of a decision of the Planning and Zoning Commission is to Fulton County Superior Court. 
Deadline for consideration of application for COE. The Main Street Board shall consider a completed application for a COE within 15 days after the filing thereof by the owner or occupant of an overlay district property. If the application has not been acted upon within 15 days, and the application shall be considered to be approved as submitted. 
Relationship of this article to other zoning provisions. The adoption of an ordinance designating an overlay district, is an amendment to the existing Zoning Ordinance. Designation of an overlay district shall be shown as such on the official zoning maps of East Point, Georgia. 
Sec. 10-14005. - Maintenance of properties building code and zoning provisions. 
Ordinary maintenance or repair. Ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior feature visible from a public street in or on an overlay district property to correct deterioration, decay or damage, or to sustain the existing form, and that does not involve a change in design, material, or outer appearance thereof, does not require a building, sign, or land disturbance permit. 
Failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. The owner or owners, or the owner's agent, of each designated overlay district property or site, shall keep in good repair all of the exterior portions of such property and site and all interior portions thereof which, if not maintained, may cause or tend to cause the exterior portion of such property or site to deteriorate, decay or become damaged or otherwise to fall into a state of disrepair. The Director of Planning and Zoning shall be responsible for the enforcement of the ordinary maintenance or repair provisions contained within this section. 
Affirmation of existing building codes and zoning. Nothing in this resolution shall be construed to exempt property and business owners from complying with other existing city regulations whenever this article does not apply. This resolution is an amendment to the Zoning Ordinance and all other provisions of the Zoning Ordinance shall remain in effect unless provisions in the overlay district conflict with other provisions of the Zoning Ordinance, in which case, the stricter provisions shall apply. 
Sec. 10-14006. - Interpretation, violations, enforcement and penalty provisions. 
Violations. This article shall be governed by Chapter II, Article F, section 10-2172 of this ordinance. 
Enforcement. This article shall be governed by section 10-2232 of this ordinance. 
Penalty. Violation of this ordinance shall be punished as provided for by section 10-2173. 
Severability. In the event that any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this resolution shall be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall in no manner affect the other sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases of this article which shall remain in full force and effect, as if the section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase so declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional were not originally a part thereof. 
Conflicts. If the provisions of this article conflict with this resolution, or other ordinances, resolutions or regulations, the provisions of this article shall govern or prevail to the extent of the conflict. 
Interpretation. This article shall be governed by section 10-2230 of this ordinance. 
ARTICLE B. - DOWNTOWN OVERLAY DISTRICT 

Sec. 10-14007. - Downtown Architectural Overlay District use regulations. 
The Downtown Architectural Overlay District applies to all properties zoned "CR" Commercial Redevelopment as illustrated on the attached map. Within the Downtown Architectural Overlay District ("the District"), land and structures shall be used in accordance with the standards underlying the district. Whenever provisions of this article conflict with any other Article in the East Point Zoning Ordinance and Development Regulations or any other East Point ordinances, regulations, or resolutions, these standards shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 016-10, § 1, 10-18-10) 
Sec. 10-14007.1. - Exhibit A. Downtown Architectural Overlay District Map. 

(Ord. No. 017-11, § 1, 8-1-11) 
Sec. 10-14008. - Downtown architectural review board. 
(a)  The Downtown Architectural Review Board ("the Board") shall review all plans for development in the District for compliance with the standards herein and shall make recommendations to the Department of Planning and Zoning prior to the approval of the Land Disturbance Permit or Building Permit. 
(b)  The Board shall consist of nine members, with one member nominated by each council member and the Mayor, and approved by the City Council. Nominees need not be residents of the ward represented by the nominating council member. Members shall serve a term to run concurrent with the appointing council member's term. 
(c)  Members of the Board must have either maintained a primary residence for at least one year in the City of East Point or have owned a business open for at least one year located within the Downtown Architectural Overlay District. In addition, Board Members should possess demonstrated knowledge, training and/or experience in at least one of the following areas: Architecture, landscape architecture, planning, zoning, real estate development, economic development, or related fields. 
(d)  Members of the Board will elect a Chairman, Vice Chairman, Secretary and Treasurer. Meetings will be conducted in accordance with the Robert's Rules of Order Newly Revised when not in conflict with the adopted bylaws of the Board. 
(Ord. No. 016-10, § 1, 10-18-10) 
Sec. 10-14009. - Transitional yards between uses. 
(a)  Transitional uses. Where a lot in this district abuts a lot in any residential district at the side along the same street frontage, and without an intervening street, such lot within this district, or the first 100 feet on such lot if it is wider than 100 feet, shall not be used for a service station. 
(b)  Transitional yards. 
(1)  Side yard: Commercial buildings adjacent to an residential district which shall not be used for the purpose of parking, paving, loading, servicing or any other activity and shall be planted and maintained as a landscaped strip. 
(2)  Rear yard: There shall be a rear yard of 20 feet when adjacent to a residential, district which shall not be used for the purpose of parking, paving, loading, servicing or any other activity and shall be planted and maintained as a landscaped strip. 
(3)  Screening: Where a lot in a CR district abuts a lot in a residential district on the side or rear lot lines without an intervening street, permanent privacy fencing or screening not less than six feet in height shall be provided and shall be maintained in good condition. 
(4)  Redevelopment: Any property wherein the principal building is removed for the purpose of the redevelopment shall be redeveloped in accordance with the requirements of this section, and any paving or other accessory structural element within any required transitional yard shall be removed and buffers provided as required herein. 
(Ord. No. 016-10, § 1, 10-18-10) 
Sec. 10-14010. - Design review process. 
The Downtown Architectural Review Board ("the Board") will insure that the purpose and meaning of the Downtown Architectural Overlay District is clearly represented. This will be achieved by providing guidance and recommendations on developments that are governed by Overlay regulations. 
(a)  Applications for a land disturbance permit and/or building permit shall be submitted to the Department of Planning and Zoning for properties within the Downtown Architectural Overlay District and shall be reviewed by the Board. 
(b)  The Board's overlay district meetings shall be advertised in the Overlay District geographic area. 
(c)  The Board review shall initially take place during the plan review process within the Department of Planning and Zoning. 
(d)  Buildings, site, structures, landscaping, and any other items relating to development of the site shall be reviewed for conformity with the standards established in this article. 
(e)  The Board may recommend that an applicant request a variance to allow for adjustments to these standards. 
(f)  A public record shall be kept of all Board meetings and of the Board's resolutions, proceedings, findings and recommendations. Such record shall be maintained in such a place and manner as to allow public access. 
(g)  Nonconforming lots, uses, and structures shall come into compliance with these regulations pursuant to Article B, section 10-2017 Nonconforming lots, uses and structures, East Point Zoning Ordinance and Development Regulations. 
(Ord. No. 016-10, § 1, 10-18-10) 
Sec. 10-14011. - Development standards. 
This section establishes standards for elements of the overall site and of the buildings which affect the character of the district such as landscaping, fencing, building size, orientation, scale, setback, parking, building design, building material, building components, signs, and color. 
Sec. 10-14012. - Landscaping. 
Landscaping should be compatible in form, style and design with the natural setting and informal landscaping present in the area and on site before development. Landscaping should also be used as a buffer to screen a development from adjacent residential uses. 
(a)  Streetscape and landscape strips: 
(1)  All properties shall provide a minimum ten foot-wide strip along all public street. The ten foot-wide strip shall be planted with a minimum two and one-half to three-inch caliper overstory tree. Additional overstory trees are encouraged. The ten-foot wide strip may be developed either: 
a.  With hardscape elements such as plaza, planters, benches, fountains and tables in addition to the required overstory trees, or 
b.  With landscape elements consisting of 60 percent coverage in trees and shrubs and 40 percent coverage in grass and ground cover, or 
c.  With a combination of both landscape and hardscape elements. 
(2)  Trees shall be planted in the center of the landscape strip at a maximum distance of every 30 feet. 
(3)  Specimen trees, as described in the Tree Protection and Landscaping Ordinance, located within the minimum front yard shall be preserved. 
(4)  A minimum five foot wide strip shall be planted with grass or sod between the back of curb and the sidewalk. 
Sec. 10-14013. - Screening and fencing. 
Landscaping and fencing materials should be used to minimize visual and noise impact of parking, loading areas, and accessory site features. 
(a)  All loading areas shall be screened from view of any public street either: (1) a minimum six foot high opaque fence matching the material of the building or (2) a 15 foot wide landscape strip planted with a continuous hedge of evergreen shrubs. Shrubs shall be moderately growing, be a minimum height of three and one-half to four feet at time of planting, and reach a height of six feet within two years of planting. 
(b)  All parking areas shall be screened from view of any public street by: (1) a 15 foot wide landscape strip planted to buffer standards or (2) a berm planted with a continuous hedge or evergreen shrubs. Plants shall be a minimum height of three and one-half to four feet at time of planting, and such plants (in the case of option (2) above, the berm and the planting combined) shall reach a height of six feet within two years of planting. 
(c)  Refuse areas (dumpsters) shall be placed in the least visible location from public streets and shall be enclosed on three sides with opaque walls of the same exterior wall material used for the building. The remaining side shall be a self closing gate made from noncombustible materials. Opaque walls shall be a minimum of 12 inches higher than the dumpster. 
(d)  Fencing material and height: 
(1)  Allowed fencing material shall be ornamental metal in yards adjacent to a public street. 
(2)  Fences shall not exceed four feet from finished grade. 
(e)  Chain link fencing, except as required along detention/retention ponds, is prohibited. 
Sec. 10-14014. - Pedestrian safety. 
Construction of sidewalks and pedestrian amenities should encourage and promote walking to a development and within a development. The placement of sidewalks and pedestrian amenities should contribute to the sense of place of the community. Sidewalks shall be constructed along public road frontages and at least a five foot landscape strip shall be planted between the roadway or curb and the sidewalk. The sidewalk shall be set back from the back of curb the maximum distance allowable within the right of way. 
Mandatory Requirements - Pedestrian Path Design Standards 
(a)  Proposed developments shall have a pedestrian network. 
(b)  Paths shall comply with any applicable Americans with Disabilities Act standards for slope, width, texture, level differences, and ramps. 
(c)  Paths shall be a minimum of five feet in width. 
(d)  Paths shall be clearly identified (through painting, signage, texture change). 
(e)  In order to facilitate travel, paths shall not be obstructed by any object or structure. 
(f)  Paths shall be designed to minimize direct auto-pedestrian interaction. 
(g)  Paths shall be connected to signalized crosswalks, where applicable. 
(h)  Paths shall be a direct and convenient route between points of origin (such as a bus stop) and destination (such as a shop, bank, etc.) with the following exception: sidewalks and paths may meander to protect and maintain mature trees and other permitted landscape features. Meandering sidewalks are discouraged. 
(i)  Internal walkways (paths) shall be constructed connecting the public sidewalks along the street to the main entrance of the principal use of the property. 
(j)  Pedestrian paths shall be colored/textured walkways or sidewalks. 
Encouraged Elements - Pedestrian Paths and Public Spaces 
(a)  To increase safety, grade separation is encouraged between pedestrian paths and motor vehicle access areas. 
(b)  Paths are encouraged to be built alongside interesting and inviting features. Street furniture is encouraged to be located adjacent to any path. Street furniture includes, but is not limited to, benches, pedestrian scale lighting, trash receptacles, and mailboxes. 
(c)  Community public spaces that promote gathering and have a park like design with streetscape and hardscape elements are encouraged. 
(d)  Paths are allowed to perpendicularly cross landscape strips. 
(e)  Granite curbing is preferred over other types of curbing. 
Sec. 10-14015. - Site lighting for parking lots, pedestrian paths, and public entrances. 
Lighting should be ample enough for safety and night viewing. 
(a)  Parking lot lighting shall meet the following minimum standards: 
(1)  Light posts shall not exceed a height of 20 feet from finished grade. 
(2)  Light posts shall have curved arms to focus light downward. Up to two arms are permitted on a single post. 
(3)  Parking lot light fixtures shall have the light cut off below 90 degrees and the beam shall be cut off at 75 degrees. 
(4)  Allowable post arm style shall be Shepherd's Crook. 
(b)  Pedestrian lighting shall meet the following minimum standards: 
(1)  Light posts shall not exceed a height of 15 feet from finished grade. 
(2)  Allowable post styles are pole-top, bollard, and Shepherd's Crook. 
(c)  Posts shall include a taper, either in their transition downward from post to decorative shaft (base), or upward to ballast housing, or both. 
(d)  Prohibited styles: Shoe box and cobra styles. 
(e)  Building mounted lights fixtures shall have a 45 degree light cut off. 
(f)  All exterior lighting in publicly accessible locations shall be architecturally decorative with a historic style. 
(g)  Neon lighting is prohibited. 
(h)  Light housings and posts shall be a dark color/material and be non-reflective. 
(i)  Exterior lighting shall not exceed two foot candles. 
Sec. 10-14016. - Building size, orientation, setback, height, scale and parking. 
The design and layout of a development should build upon and complement the design of the current district as opposed to creating a new one. The size, orientation, setback and scale of buildings are integral elements in the district. A building's orientation and placement should complement and relate to adjacent buildings, structures and properties. The placement of buildings should create and informal grouping and relationship between them as opposed to being orderly and uniform. The visual impact of parking should be minimized by placing it to the rear and by screening. 
(a)  Orientation: 
(1)  All buildings shall be oriented to a public street. An entrance to a building should be located on the side of the building facing a public street. 
(2)  Driveways shall be perpendicular to the street. 
(b)  Scale: 
(1)  For every 40 feet of building length on a single face, there shall be a variation in the exterior. This exterior variation shall be accomplished through the following means: 
a.  For each 40 feet of building exterior wall, the building exterior and roof shall be offset by a minimum of ten feet. Overhangs and roof lines shall follow the building's location. 
b.  For each 40 feet of building exterior wall, there shall be a change in details, or patters or materials. 
(c)  Parking: 
(1)  Parking shall be shared among users with a common development. Parking shall be reduced according to the shared parking standards established in Article E of the East Point Zoning Ordinance. Additional reduction in the number of parking spaces is encouraged. 
(2)  All parking spaces built, which exceed the minimum number required by the East Point Zoning Ordinance, shall be constructed of pervious material. 
(3)  If an internal street is developed for use by the general public, one row of parallel parking is allowed between the street and the curb. 
Sec. 10-14017. - Building and other structure design. 
Construction of buildings shall complement the Victorian, Arts and Crafts and American Craftsman architectural periods. Buildings shall reflect a specific style and not mix elements of different styles. The design and architectural elements of the buildings should be compatible to those of the area. 
(a)  Buildings 
(1)  Buildings shall have main street characteristics. 
(2)  Drive-thru and drive-in facilities for eating and drinking establishments are prohibited. 
(b)  Building colors 
(1)  Paint colors shall be chosen from the range of traditional colors on the acceptable colors listed below. 
(Ord. No. 015-12, § 1, 10-15-12) 


Sec. 10-14018. - Severability. 
In the event that any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this article shall be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall in no manner affect the sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases of this article, which shall remain in full force and effect, as if the section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase so declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional were not originally a part thereof. 

ARTICLE C. - CLEVELAND AVENUE OVERLAY DISTRICT 

Sec. 10-14019. - Intention. 
The purpose of the design guidelines is to promote future development that is consistent with the Cleveland Avenue Corridor Masterplan. Generally, these design guidelines are intended to support local and regional development goals that promote alternative transportation, mix of uses, pedestrian environments, traffic calming, active living, and greenspace. 
Additionally, providing safe and comfortable environments for people involves incorporating CPTED (Crime Prevention Through Environmental Design) strategies designed to provide 'eyes on the street' and to remove opportunities for crime inherent in the building or site design. 
These guidelines are intended to be implemented as an Overlay District based on the Cleveland Avenue Corridor Overlay District Map. Overlay Districts are supplemental to the zoning district classifications established in the City of East Point's Municipal Code. All development and building permits for lots located within any overlay district shall meet all of the requirements of the base zoning district in which they are located and in addition, shall meet all of the requirements of the overlay district applicable to the particular parcel. Where there are conflicts between overlay district regulation and other regulations contained in this Code, the overlay regulation shall govern. Where the overlay district regulation is equally restrictive with other regulations in the Code, the overlay district regulation shall govern. 
The following guidelines are organized into two major classifications: 
Sec. 10-14019.1. - Exhibit B. Cleveland Avenue Overlay District Map. 

(Ord. No. 017-11, § 3, 8-1-11) 
Sec. 10-14020. - Public framework. 
The public framework consists of 1) Street Features; 2) Parks and Trails; 3) Gateways and is generally comprised of elements that are accessible to the public and located within the public right-of-way. 
Sec. 10-14021. - Private framework. 
The private framework consists of six major development types: 1) single-family residential; 2) townhomes; 3) apartments (multi-family); 4) retail/mixed-use; 5) office; 6) 'big-box'. 
All new development, or redevelopment that exceeds 50 percent of property value or 50 percent of site that is being redeveloped, within the overlay district must establish sidewalk zones, street trees, streetlights, crosswalks, street features, and street furniture according to the guidelines of the overlay. See 'Street Features: Specifications' as well as Site Diagrams within each Private Framework section for details. 
Sec. 10-14022. - Public framework. 
(a)  Street features. The street is the primary public domain and front door for private development. Careful consideration of the design of the following street features is important for enhancing the experiential quality of the corridor: Medians, Crosswalks, Bulb-outs, Wayfinding, Lighting, Traffic Circles, Street Paving, Sidewalks, Street Furniture, Public Art, Plazas, Utilities, Street Trees and Plantings. 
(b)  Parks and trail systems. Parks and trail systems promote both active and passive recreation throughout the corridor. They provide opportunities for physical activity and allow users to appreciate the natural environment. The design guidelines provide recommendations for the following: Pocket Parks, Linear Parks, Neighborhood Parks, Trail Systems. 
(c)  Gateways. Gateways provide opportunities for pedestrian amenities, such as bus shelters, and create focal points for neighborhood or district entrances. There are three types of public gateways: City Gateways, District Gateways, Neighborhood Gateways. 


Sec. 10-14023. - Definitions. 
(1)  Bulb-out - Where possible, bulb-outs allow shorter distances for pedestrians to cross major streets. Parallel parking is located behind bulb-out. 
(2)  Clear zone - Public area in the front setback that makes up the active sidewalk. 
(3)  Crosswalk - Visual and textural variation at crosswalks distinguish pedestrian crossings and enhance experience. 
(4)  Furniture zone - Area between back of curb and property line that contains street trees, street lighting, bike racks, newspaper stands, benches, and utilities. 
(5)  Planted median - Sod, groundcover, as well as ornamental trees (where median width is great enough), are planted to add visual interest, slow traffic, and provide a refuge zone for pedestrian crossing along the boulevard. 
(6)  Ramp - Handicap accessible ramps are located where crosswalks meet curbs. ADA compliant detectable warning pavers should be installed at front of ramping area. 
(7)  Street light - Street lighting adds visibility and safety and is interspersed with pedestrian scale lighting. The pattern adds to continuity of the boulevard. 
(8)  Street trees - Broad canopy trees for shade and continuity, should be trimmed to 7' clear height and kept from conflict with overhead lines. 
(9)  Supplemental zone - Generally referred to as front yard, within private property. Provides an opportunity for a public zone for dining areas or outdoor plazas. 


Sec. 10-14024. - Guidelines. 
(a)  Medians: 
Purpose. Medians allow for space between traffic in opposite directions to ensure safety of drivers and pedestrians. Medians also provide a place for public art or gardens. 
(b)  Application: 
(1)  Should be well defined with a curb. 
(2)  A continuous pattern of trees or landscape should tie each median together visually. 
(3)  The medians may also include other elements such as fountains, artwork or gardens. 
(c)  Crosswalks, curbs and curb ramps: 
Purpose. Crosswalks, curbs and curb ramps allow pedestrians to safely cross the street while also providing for proper street drainage. 
Application. All crosswalks will be prominently defined and adhere to ADA standards by use of one or more of the following: 
(1)  Pavers or textured and painted asphalt that imitates pavers. 
(2)  Raised crosswalks. 
(3)  Electrical crossing signals. 
(4)  If the crosswalk is not raised, a curb ramp down to street level must be created in accordance with ADA standards. 
(5)  All areas that have a sidewalk must also have a curb. 
(6)  Curbs shall allow proper drainage while at the same time delineate the street from adjacent elements such as the sidewalks and medians. 
(7)  Curbs shall be no higher than 6" to allow people to easily step up or down when necessary. 
Bulb-outs and on street parking: 
Purpose. Bulb-outs (curb extensions) are encouraged at intersections to reduce pedestrian crossing distance and to discourage speeding through intersections. 
Application 
(1)  Bulb-outs can be used to separate and define on-street parking areas as well as provide opportunities for landscaping. 
(2)  Mid-block curb extensions allow for safer mid-block crossing for pedestrians. 
Lighting: 
Purpose. Proper illumination provides for a safe visibility for vehicles and pedestrians in dim or dark conditions. Lighting is a key element in safety and perception of safety for pedestrians. CEPTED (Crime Prevention through Environmental Design) guidelines suggest that proper lighting is a key component of crime prevention. In addition, lighting may highlight special street features such as trees, art, or fountains for an enhanced visual experience. 
Application 
Street lighting: 
(1)  Shall aesthetically complement the design of the street features and surrounding development. 
(2)  Shall be at a pedestrian scale as well as service vehicles. 
(3)  Should complement the architecture and scale of the redeveloped Cleveland Avenue corridor. 
(4)  Shall be located at the same distance from the street edge along the length of the street. 
(5)  Shall be integrated with all other streetscape elements including trees, benches and paving. 
(6)  Luminaries shall be translucent or glare free. 
(7)  All areas adjacent to residential zones shall use diffusers and refractors. 
(8)  Light poles shall be a minimum of 15 feet away from street trees. 
Preferred fixture: Generation Series Avenue, Light Fixture by McGraw-Edison 
Special effects lighting 
(1)  White string lighting in trees or the up-lighting of trees are permitted and encouraged in the street furniture zone. 
(2)  Light fixtures shall blend in with the surroundings. 
(3)  Light fixtures shall be placed in the street furniture zone. 
(4)  Light fixtures shall be waterproof. 
(5)  Light fixtures shall not interfere with the vision of the pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
Traffic circles: 
Purpose. Traffic circles allow for traffic calming without stopping the flow of traffic. Traffic circles also provide a place to feature public art, fountains, monuments or landscaping. 
Application. 
(1)  The traffic circle should naturally cause the traffic to slow without the use of traffic lights. 
(2)  Traffic circles should be clearly and simply designed. 
(3)  Traffic circles may employ paving to delineate it from the rest of the street. 
(4)  The center of the traffic circle should feature art and/or be landscaped/ hardscaped. 
Street paving: 
Purpose. Allows for smooth driving surfaces while simultaneously delineating areas for pedestrian use. 
Application. 
(1)  Along the busiest pedestrian routes, special street paving may be employed in part or sum. 
(2)  Pavers should be of the same design and color throughout the corridor. Stamped concrete may be used as a substitute for pavers. 
(3)  In general, they should not be raised above street level (except for raised crosswalks). 
(4)  The area of special paving should be clearly delineated by borders. 
Sidewalks: 
Purpose. Sidewalks allow for pedestrian access along the corridor and to the various uses in the corridor. Sidewalks also provide a place where the public and private interact and transition from one to another through such venues as outdoor dining, bus stops, etc. 
Application. To provide a smooth transition, sidewalks within 20 feet of a residential district shall taper to five feet wide. Residential, mixed-use, business or commercial district sidewalks shall be divided into three zones: 
Supplemental zone - This zone (also known as a front yard) is adjacent to the primary building elevations and may be zero—25 feet wide. Uses for the supplemental zone include outdoor eating areas, potted plants, or store/business amenities such as sandwich boards. Clear zone - This zone is adjacent to the supplemental zone and shall be between five—15 feet. The zone shall remain open at all times for pedestrian circulation. Street furniture zone (or Planting Strip in residential areas) - This zone is adjacent to the curb and shall provide a place for all street furniture. 

Street furniture: 
Purpose. The street furniture zone provides a place for the varying public uses of the corridor such as bicycle parking, seating, bus shelters, trash receptacles, newspaper racks and bollards. 
Application 
Bicycle racks 
(1)  Permanently affixed in prominent locations throughout the corridor to encourage bicycle use. 
(2)  Shall be placed so that all bicycles are completely in the street furniture zone. 
(3)  Shall be well-designed and rust proof. 
(4)  Minimum of one bicycle space for every 20 automobile spaces. 
Bike Rack by BRP Enterprises 
Seating, benches 
(1)  Should be grouped as much as possible and located along identified pedestrian nodes. 
(2)  Planters designed for seating along the edge are permitted. 
(3)  Should be well designed to blend in with other surroundings. 
(4)  Benches should be free from advertising signage. 
(5)  Seating for open air eating shall be placed in the supplemental zone and should be designed to blend well with the surroundings. 
(6)  Umbrellas for open air eating may only bear the name of the café or restaurant. 
Six-foot Bench by Sitescapes 
Bus shelters 
(1)  Bus shelter locations shall be coordinated with mass transit stops and placed within the street furniture zone. 
(2)  Bus shelter design should be complementary to other street furniture elements and utilize glass for visibility. 
(3)  Bus shelters should be free from advertising or designed to allow minimal advertising that does not interfere with visibility or detract from aesthetics. 
Trash receptacles 
(1)  Shall be placed by every seating area and significant gathering places. 
(2)  Shall be permanently affixed. 
(3)  Shall have a top to keep contents relatively dry. 
(4)  Restaurants with outdoor seating shall provide additional trash receptacles near seating. 
(5)  These shall not be permanent, but shall not be easily moved. 
Trash Receptacle by BRP Enterprises 
Bollards 
(1)  Should be designed to complement the streetscape. 
(2)  Shall allow parked car doors to be fully opened without obstructing the swing by being set back from the curb. 
(3)  May be chained together for the safety of the pedestrian. 
(4)  Removable bollards shall be used for admittance of service vehicles along primary elevations. 
Bollard/Bike Rack: Elements Bollard by BRP Enterprises 
Newspaper racks 
(1)  Should be grouped together. 
(2)  Shall not compromise the safety of vehicles by obstructing the view. 
(3)  Shall be completely in the street furniture zone. 
(4)  Should complement other street furniture elements. 
Public art: 
Purpose. Public art is used to activate spaces in the public realm and transform them into markers or destinations. 
Application 
(1)  Should tie into the history of East Point or specifically Cleveland Avenue. 
(2)  When possible, should come from a local artist. 
(3)  May include water, seating, planting, decorative architectural elements or plaza space. 
(4)  Shall not impair pedestrian circulation or vehicular traffic. 
(5)  Shall be well crafted and made of durable weatherproof materials. 
(6)  Shall be consistent with the redevelopment plan. 
(7)  Shall be appropriate for all ages. 
Plazas: 
Purpose. A plaza is a public gathering place that typically serves a building or group of buildings. A plaza can also act as a district gateway or center and provides opportunities for everyday activity as well as special events. 
Application 
(1)  Plazas shall be accessible to all pedestrians and ADA compliant. 
(2)  Plazas shall be constructed to provide for the safety of the users through use of windows and doors into the plaza as well as street frontage where appropriate. 
(3)  Plazas shall be properly lit to provide for the safety of the users. 
(4)  Plazas are encouraged to include public art, fountains, moveable furniture, and landscaping. 

Utilities: 
Purpose. Utilities provide for the safe and efficient use of the corridor. 
Application 
(1)  All electrical wiring shall be underground. 
(2)  Utility boxes, meters, manhole covers and fire hydrants shall coordinate with street furniture. 
Street trees: 
Purpose. Street trees provide for the physical and physiological health of the community and environment. Street trees also identify and delineate areas within the corridor. 
Application 
(1)  Trees shall be planted in the street furniture zone. 
(2)  Trees shall be planted a distance of 40' apart. 
(3)  Trees shall be a minimum of 15 feet away from light poles. 
(4)  Tree planting pits shall be used in all high pedestrian traffic areas. 
(5)  Tree planting pits should have an outlet to allow for special lighting such as string lights or up lighting. 
(6)  If overhead power lines remain, street trees shall be planted that will not interfere with the power lines, either through chosen species or placement. 
(7)  Tree grate of five by 12 feet in special plazas. 
(8)  Tree grates shall be made of ductile iron and be factory painted. They shall allow for tree growth. 
(9)  Recommended street trees species include: Allee Elm, Dynasty Elm, Zelkova, October Glory Red Maple, Legacy Sugar Maple, Shumard Oak 
Recommended street tree species: Allee Elm, Dynasty Elm, Zelkova, October Glory Red Maple, Legacy Sugar Maple, Shumard Oak 
Landscaping and planters: 
Purpose. Landscaping and planters promote a healthy environment for the community and enhance the aesthetics of the corridor. 
Application 
(1)  May be in the street furniture zone. 
(2)  An individual business may put planting pots or removable planters in their supplemental zone. 
(3)  Should be used frequently around seating areas but shall not interfere with circulation. 
(4)  In warm weather they should be filled with plants, and not left empty or with only soil. 
Sec. 10-14025. - Parks and trails. 
(a)  Guidelines 
(b)  Pocket Parks: 
Purpose. Pocket parks provide a connection while utilizing only a small area of space. They are appropriate where development is dense but there is still a need for a natural environment. They provide a place to sit and eat lunch or a place to exercise or revitalize. 
Application 
(1)  Elements may include trees, plantings, seating, exercise circuit equipment, playground equipment, water features, etc. 
(2)  Must be accessible to the public right of way through pedestrian circulation. 
(3)  Should be open to all users and face a public right of way. 
(4)  Pocket parks should be well lit, but incorporate 'dark sky' friendly lighting to avoid spill over into adjacent properties. 
(c)  Linear parks: 
Purpose. Linear parks are established to provide opportunities for recreation and connections between and within districts. Linear parks are often established in medians or along edges of streets and provide a pleasant alternative to typical sidewalk circulation by including green elements and more pedestrian amenities. 
Application 
(1)  Elements may include trees, plantings, seating, exercise circuit equipment, playground equipment, water features, etc. 
(2)  Must be accessible to the public right of way through pedestrian circulation. 
(3)  Should face a public right of way. 
(4)  May be established where other development is not feasible due to topology or other constraints. 
(d)  Neighborhood parks: 
Purpose. Neighborhood parks provide a local place to congregate and recreate. They also contribute to a neighborhood's identity. 
Application 
(1)  All new neighborhoods should provide a park or access to another neighborhood park. 
(2)  All parks shall follow all safety codes for all equipment. 
(3)  Parks shall be properly lit for evening use and/or be closed off after dark. 
(e)  Trail systems: 
Purpose. The trail system highlights the natural environment and promotes active recreational uses such as bicycling, walking or jogging throughout the corridor. 
Application 
(1)  The trail system shall follow all state codes for building and maintaining trails adjacent to streambeds. 
(2)  No motor vehicles of any kind are permitted on the trail system, with the exception of maintenance vehicles. 
(3)  Way-finding is the only type of signage permitted on the trail. 
(4)  The design of the trail will minimize impacts on the natural environment. 
(5)  The design of the trail incorporates amenities such as rest areas, picnic areas, and water fountains. 

Sec. 10-14026. - Gateways. 
(a)  Guidelines. Gateways help to define the boundaries of neighborhoods or districts. They convey the identity and character of a community. The gateways in the Cleveland Avenue corridor project will: 
(1)  Visually identify neighborhoods, districts, or city limits. 
(2)  Exhibit the natural attributes of the area. 
(3)  Provide opportunities for pedestrian amenities, signage, public art, and landscape features. 
(b)  City gateway: 
Purpose. Define city limits and establish identity for the corridor. 
Application 
(1)  City gateways may use, but are not limited to, trees, landscaping, art, signage, paving or other elements in their design. 
(2)  City gateways must be maintained by the city. 
(3)  If the gateway is accessible, it must comply with ADA. 
(c)  District gateways: 
Purpose. District Gateways create focal points for district entrances and provide opportunities for pedestrian amenities such as bus shelters and seating. District gateways provide a place to highlight the unique character of the district. 
Application 
(1)  All district gateways must be approved by the Planning Department. 
(2)  District gateways may use, but are not limited to, trees, landscaping, art, signage, paving or other elements in their design. 
(3)  District gateways must be maintained by the city or a business organization. 
(4)  If the gateway is accessible, it must comply with ADA. 

(d)  Neighborhood gateways: 
Purpose. Neighborhood gateways should reflect the distinctiveness of each neighborhood and also fit into the larger context of the District or City. Neighborhood gateways convey to the user the unique place they are entering. 
Application 
(1)  All neighborhood gateways must be approved by the Planning Department. 
(2)  Neighborhood gateways may use, but are not limited to, trees, landscaping, art, signage, paving or other elements in their design. 
(3)  Neighborhood gateways must be maintained by the City or neighborhood organization. 
(4)  If the gateway is accessible, it must comply with ADA. 
Sec. 10-14027. - Private framework. 
Single Family 
(a)  Site guidelines 
Purpose: The site guidelines for single-family provide a framework for design of detached dwelling units of a moderate density with a minimum lot area of 7500 SF and a minimum frontage of 50'. The site design guideline for the single-family residential district sets up a uniformity which allows for diversity in building and site type. The guideline encourages appropriate interaction between the public and private domain. It outlines proper use of the lot with respect to the sidewalks and accessibility, gates and fencing, yard setbacks, vehicular access, and accessory buildings. 


(b)  Sidewalks and accessibility: 
Purpose. Sidewalks in residential areas provide a safe and comfortable walking surface for pedestrians. Sidewalks promote pedestrian activity and connect residences to nearby recreation and services. 
Application 
(1)  Residential right-of-ways shall include sidewalks with a minimum clear zone of five feet. 
(2)  All sidewalks at intersections shall comply with ADA regulations. 
(3)  Sidewalks shall have a continuous planting strip of three to five feet in width. 
(4)  Entrance shall be connected to the sidewalk. 
(c)  Gates and fencing: 
Purpose. Gates and fencing establish boundaries between public, semi-public, and private areas. Fencing can also be used as privacy screening between residences or between different land uses. 
Application 
(1)  Front yard: Fences and walls located within the front yard setback area shall not exceed four in height. 
(2)  Side and rear yard: Fences and walls located along side and rear yards shall not exceed 6' in height. 
(3)  Should be constructed of ornamental metal, ornamental masonry, wood, and other ornamental materials. No chain link fencing in front or side yard areas. 
(4)  The top edge of a fence must be along a line that is either horizontal or substantially parallel to grade. 
(d)  Yard setbacks: 
Purpose. The yard setbacks allow for uniform spacing within the single family district, emphasize the public and private boundaries, and create visual continuity in the neighborhood. 
Application 
(1)  Front yard setback 30 foot min. Rear yard setback 20 foot min. 
(2)  Setbacks for infill or renovations should generally fall within the average range of existing setbacks on both sides of the street. 
(3)  Side yard setback eight foot minimum, 20 foot maximum. 
(4)  Corner lot side yard setback 15 foot minimum. 
(e)  Vehicular access: 
Purpose. Vehicular access within the single-family development provides connection to private parking. 
Application 
Parking and driveways 
(1)  Minimum driveway width of nine feet, minimum shared driveway width of 12 feet. 
(2)  Rear access through alleyway is encouraged. 
(3)  Shared driveways are permitted with approval of the Planning and Zoning Department. 
(4)  Driveways shall be paved. 
Alleyway 
(1)  Ten feet - 18 feet with shared/ on street parking and lighting. 
(f)  Accessory buildings: 
(1)  Side, rear loaded garages or sheds. 
(2)  Garages shall not face the public right-of-way with the exception of garages located in the rear yard. 
(3)  Carports shall not be allowed in the front yard zone and when utilized in the side yard, must extend from the principal structure as an architectural feature. 
(4)  Stand-alone carports are prohibited in the front and side yard zones. 
(g)  Building guidelines 
Purpose. The Single Family Residential design guideline allows for individual architectural expression within the corridor while still maintaining compatible design throughout the complex. The guideline promotes quality materials and appropriate architecture within the Cleveland Avenue corridor. Architecturally, the Single Family Residential guidelines evoke a feeling of community through the use of such elements as porch and entrance, fenestration and corners, material and color, scale and massing, and building numbers. 

(h)  Porch and entrance: 
(1)  A front entrance or porch should not be permanently or fully enclosed. 
(2)  Detailing on front entrances and porches should be typical of the style and period of the residence. 
(i)  Fenestration and corners: 
(1)  Elements around windows, such as balconies, shutters and sills, are permitted. 
(2)  All sides with street frontages should include similar features as the front elevation. 
(j)  Material and color: 
(1)  High level of craftsmanship for all details and finish. 
(2)  All exterior cladding shall be quality building materials. Plain CMU, sheet metal 
(3)  and other non-traditional façade materials are not permitted. No vinyl siding. 
(4)  When remodeling historic structures, care should be taken to match original materials and finishes. 
(k)  Scale and massing: 
(1)  Roofs may have dormers, gables, or similar variations in roof planes in order to break up the roof mass. 
(2)  Generally, roofs should have a pitch that is consistent with and supportive of local architectural styles. 
(3)  Scale and mass of an addition shall maintain that of the original structure. 
(4)  Infill or remodeled structures will not visually overwhelm neighboring structures. 
(l)  Building numbers: 
(1)  Clearly visible from the sidewalk. 
(2)  Minimum of six inches in height. 
Sec. 10-14028. - Townhomes. 
(a)  Site guidelines 
Purpose: The site guidelines for townhomes provide a framework for design of attached dwelling units of a moderate density with a minimum lot area of 1875 SF and a minimum frontage of 25 feet. The site design guideline for townhomes establishes a consistent delineation between the public and private realms. It provides a framework for denser development while still recognizing the needs of the individual homeowner. The townhome guideline promotes safety within the development while maintaining the residential feel of the development. It takes into account sidewalks and accessibility, gates and fencing, yard setbacks, vehicular access, and accessory buildings. 


(b)  Sidewalks and accessibility: 
Purpose. Provide safe and comfortable pedestrian circulation to the public sidewalk, trail systems, or on-site amenities. 
Application 
(1)  Continuous clear zone of five feet minimum. 
(2)  Planting strip of five feet minimum containing lighting and street trees. 
(3)  Unit entrances shall be connected to a public sidewalk or a walkway that connects to the public right of way 
(c)  Gates and fencing: 
Purpose. Gates and fencing establish boundaries between public, semi-public, and private areas. Fencing can also be used as privacy screening between residences or between different land uses. 
Application 
(1)  Front yard: Fences and walls located within the front yard setback area shall not exceed four feet in height. 
(2)  Side and rear yard: Fences and walls located along side and rear yards shall not exceed six feet in height. 
(3)  Should be constructed of ornamental metal, ornamental masonry, wood, and other ornamental materials. No chain link fencing in front or side yard areas. 
(4)  The top edge of a fence must be along a line that is either horizontal or substantially parallel to grade. 
(5)  Alley must be screened from adjacent residential properties through the use of a six-foot minimum opaque fence, wall, or other screening device approved by the Planning Department. 
(d)  Yard setbacks: 
Purpose. The yard setbacks allow for uniform spacing within the district, emphasize the public and private boundaries, and create visual continuity in the neighborhood. 
Application 
(1)  Front yard setback including stoop four feet - ten feet. 
(2)  Corner lot side yard setback five-foot minimum. 
(3)  Rear yard setback five-foot minimum. 
(e)  Vehicular access: 
Purpose. To provide for access to private parking while maintaining a front yard free from curb cuts and street facing garages, townhouse developments shall provide alleys and rear-loaded garages. 
Application 
Parking and driveways 
(1)  Interior or exterior parking garage. 
(2)  Rear access to driveway through alley. 
(3)  One parking space per units of 1,200 square feet or less and two spaces per units greater than 1,200 square feet. 
Alleyway 
(1)  Ten feet - 18 feet with shared/on-street parking. 
(f)  Accessory building: 
(1)  Detached garages or sheds permitted in rear yards. 
(g)  Building guidelines 
Purpose. The design guidelines for townhomes are meant to create an attractive and inviting development. The design of the homes should encourage neighborly activity within a close community but still allow for privacy and diversity. The guideline will ensure quality construction and craftsman standards for these elements; stoop and entrance, fenestration and corners, material and color, scale and massing and building numbers. 

(h)  Stoop and entrance: 
(1)  A front entrance or stoop should not be permanently or fully enclosed. 
(i)  Fenestration and corners: 
(1)  Elements around windows, such as balconies, shutters and sills, are permitted. 
(2)  All sides with street frontages should include similar features as the front elevation. 
(j)  Material and color: 
(1)  High level of craftsmanship for all details and finishes. 
(2)  Color should be architecturally appropriate and not detract from adjacent properties. 
(3)  All exterior cladding shall be quality building materials. Plain CMU, sheet metal and other non traditional façade materials are not permitted. No vinyl siding. 
(k)  Scale and massing: 
(1)  Two - three story. 
(2)  On corner units, the secondary elevation shall attain a similar level of detail as the primary elevation. 
(3)  There shall be no more than ten attached units contained within one structure. 
(l)  Building numbers: 
(1)  Clearly visible from the sidewalk. 
(2)  Minimum of six feet in height. 
Sec. 10-14029. - Multi-family. 
(a)  Site guidelines 
Purpose . The site guidelines provide a framework for design of multi-family dwelling units of a medium to high density that is consistent with the goals of the Cleveland Avenue Corridor Masterplan. The site guidelines promote street orientation and pedestrian circulation on and off site. 


(b)  Sidewalks and accessibility: 
Purpose. Provide safe and comfortable pedestrian circulation to the public sidewalk, trail systems, or on-site amenities. 
Application 
(1)  Minimum continuous clear zone of five feet. 
(2)  Minimum five feet planting strip of five feet containing lighting and street trees. 
(3)  Multiple entrances connected to public sidewalk. 
(4)  Site must include interior sidewalk that serves parking lot and building. 
(c)  Gates and fencing: 
Purpose. Gates and fencing establish boundaries between public, semi-public, and private areas. Fencing can also be used as privacy screening between residences or between different land uses. 
Application 
(1)  Front yard: Fences and walls located within the front yard setback area shall not exceed four feet in height. 
(2)  Side and rear yard: Fences and walls located along side and rear yards shall not exceed six feet in height. 
(3)  Should be constructed of ornamental metal, ornamental masonry, wood, and other ornamental materials. No chain link fencing in front or side yard areas. 
(4)  The top edge of a fence must be along a line that is either horizontal or substantially parallel to grade. 
(d)  Yard setbacks: 
Purpose. The yard setback allows the building to be visually connected with the public realm and still maintain its private character. 
Application 
•  Front setback or supplemental zone six—25 feet. 
•  Side setback of six feet. 
(e)  Vias: 
Purpose. Vias connect pedestrians to parking, site amenities, or other building entrances and can encourage outdoor activity on the site. 
Application 
(1)  Use specially designed elements including paving, lighting, landscape and street furniture. 
(f)  Screening and buffering: 
Purpose. 
(1)  Screening and buffering maintains the attractiveness of the building while providing for its functionality. 
Application 
(1)  Areas for outdoor storage, truck parking, trash collection or compaction, loading, or other such uses shall not be visible from public or private rights-of-way and shall not be located within 20 feet of any public street or sidewalk. 
(2)  Where parking abuts a street, a decorative masonry wall, evergreen hedge screen of 30—42 inches in height and a minimum of 12 inches in width shall be established in a eight-foot minimum planted buffer. 
(3)  A 20 foot landscaped area is required when adjacent to single-family zones. In addition, where property abuts a single-family or townhouse zone, a six-foot - seven-foot privacy/screening fence or wall shall be constructed. 
(g)  Landscaping: 
Purpose. Landscaping enhances the experiential quality of the corridor by providing a balance of natural greenscape against building and hardscape elements. In addition, landscape can be used to define and improve the aesthetics of boundaries, gateways, entrances, and special site features. 
Application 
(1)  Twenty-five percent of site must be covered with greenscape or special permeable paving materials, however, impervious public plazas may count towards five percent of this requirement. Up to 30 percent of the greenspace requirement may be comprised of approved permeable paving materials. 
(2)  Landscape design should include a variety of deciduous, evergreen trees, shrubs and flowering plant species well suited to the local climate. 
(3)  Where feasible, existing healthy trees on the site of greater than six inches DBH should be incorporated into the required landscaping of the site. 
(4)  Landscape should be designed so that 80 percent coverage occurs within five years. 
(h)  Parking: 
Application 
(1)  One parking space per units of 1,000 square feet or less and 1½ space per unit greater than 1,000 square feet. 
(2)  Parking must be to the side or rear of the primary elevation and must not break the plane of the primary elevation. 
(3)  Parking decks and garages are permitted, but must use well designed architectural elements that are compatible with the adjacent structure on all elevations that face either public right of ways or other buildings. They should appear to be a horizontally storied building. 
(4)  There shall be a pedestrian walkway which connects the surface parking lot to the public sidewalk. 
(5)  One two foot by six foot minimum bicycle parking space per 20 parking spaces. 
(6)  Parking areas must be evenly lit and equal to one-half footcandle of light minimum. In addition, there shall be no light spillage onto adjacent residential properties. Light fixtures must be fully shielded when adjacent to residential properties. 
(7)  Light spillage onto adjacent properties shall be reduced by a cut-off luminaire with a maximum of 90 degrees illumination. 
(8)  There shall be a continuous landscape buffer with a minimum of eight feet between parking areas and the street. An eight-foot buffer shall be established where parking abuts other property lines. 
(9)  Parking lots with 50 or more spaces shall be divided into separate areas with minimum landscaping of ten feet. Walkways may cut through the landscaping. 
(11)  A credit for shared parking in mixed-use developments for up to 25 percent of the required spaces shall be allowed with approval from the Planning and Zoning Department. 
(12)  One driveway for each development is permitted with the exception of properties with more than one front yard which may have two driveways. 
(13)  A minimum of seven percent of the parking lot must be landscaped. 
(14)  One landscaped median and one large canopy tree must be included for every seven parking spaces. 
(i)  Building guidelines 
Purpose. Building guidelines provide elements that allow for a multi-family residence which has a human scale and sensibility to its design. 

(j)  Entrances: 
(1)  Entrances shall be connected to the sidewalk and street. 
(2)  Entrances shall be landscaped. 
(3)  Awnings, signs, or recessed entrances shall be integrated into the design of the building. 
(k)  Fenestration: 
(1)  Opaque, smoked and reflective glass should be used for accents only. 
(2)  All multi-family developments within commercial districts shall follow retail/mixed use guidelines for ground level fenestration. 
(l)  Corners: 
(1)  All sides with street frontages shall offer similar treatments as the front elevation. 
(m)  Material and color: 
(1)  All façades shall be constructed of quality exterior grade materials such as, but not limited to, wood, and masonry. Colors should not detract from nearby structures. 
(2)  Predominant exterior building materials as well as accents shall not include the following: smooth face CMU, metal siding, vinyl siding. 
(n)  Scale and massing: 
(1)  The height of the buildings may be up to 45 feet. 
(2)  Large blank walls are not permitted. 
(3)  Setbacks in the façade creating architectural interest or courtyards are encouraged. 
(4)  Delineating elements which separate the ground level from the upper level are encouraged. 
Sec. 10-14030. - Office. 
(a)  Site guidelines 
Purpose. The office site guideline creates an interface between the public and private realm, which simultaneously serves the corridor, and individual business. The site guideline establishes consistent lot usage throughout which contributes to the uniformity and aesthetic appeal of the streetscape. The guideline will consider sidewalks and accessibility, front yard, vias, landscaping, screening and buffering and parking. 


(b)  Sidewalks and accessibility: 
Purpose. Sidewalks ease pedestrian circulation to the amenities in the development as well as the whole corridor. 
Application 
(1)  Continuous clear zone of ten feet as minimum. 
(2)  Planting strip of five feet minimum containing lighting and street trees. 
(3)  Building Entrance connected to sidewalk. 
(4)  Site must include interior sidewalk that serves parking lot and building. 
(c)  Yard setbacks: 
Purpose. The yard setback allows the building to be visually connected with the public realm and still maintain its private character. 
Application 
(1)  Front yard (supplemental zone) setback 25 feet max. 
(2)  Side setback of six feet. 
(3)  No structures over 12 inches in width and 36 inches in height may be placed within the sight triangle. 
(d)  Vias: 
Purpose. Vias connect pedestrians to parking, site amenities, or other building entrances, and can encourage outdoor activity on the site. 
Application 
(1)  Be visually connected to the buildings through storefront windows and or entrances or restaurant seating. 
(2)  May allow enough room for open-air restaurant seating. 
(3)  Use specially designed elements including paving, lighting, landscape and street furniture. 
(e)  Landscaping: 
Purpose. Landscaping enhances the experiential quality of the corridor by providing a balance of natural greenscape against building and hardscape elements. 
Application 
(1)  Twenty-five percent of site must be covered with landscape or permeable paving materials. Up to 30 percent of the greenspace requirement may be comprised of approved permeable paving materials. 
(2)  Landscape should be designed so that 80 percent coverage occurs within five years. 
(3)  Landscape design should include a variety of deciduous, evergreen trees, shrubs and flowering plant species well suited to the local climate. 
(4)  Where feasible, existing healthy trees on the site of greater than six feet DBH should be incorporated into the required landscaping of the site. 
(5)  All office developments shall include at least one public plaza or greenspace that includes amenities such as benches, fountains, seating areas, etc. that has direct access to the public sidewalk network. 
(f)  Screening and buffering: 
Purpose. Screening and buffering maintains the attractiveness of the building while providing for its functionality. 
Application 
(1)  A 25 foot landscaped area must buffer buildings adjacent to residential zones. In addition where property abuts a residential zone, a six foot - seven foot privacy/ screening fence or wall shall be constructed. 
(2)  Areas for outdoor storage, truck parking, trash collection or compaction, loading, or other such uses shall not be visible from public or private rights-of-way and shall not be located within 20 feet of any public street or sidewalk. 
(3)  No chain link fencing. 
(4)  Where parking abuts a street, a decorative masonry wall or evergreen hedge screen of 30 inches—42 inches in height and a minimum of 12 inches in width shall be established in an eight-foot minimum planted buffer. 
(g)  Parking: 
Application 
(1)  One parking space per 300 square feet. 
(2)  Parking must be to the side or rear of the primary elevation and must not break the plane of the primary elevation. 
(3)  Parking decks and garages are permitted, but must use architectural elements that are compatible with the adjacent structure on all elevations that face either public right of ways or other buildings. They should appear to be a horizontally storied building with active ground level uses. 
(4)  A pedestrian walkway must connect the parking lot to the public sidewalk. 
(5)  Parking areas must be evenly lit and equal to one-half footcandle of light. In addition, there shall be no light spillage onto adjacent residential properties. Light fixtures must be fully shielded when adjacent to residential properties. 
(6)  Light spillage onto adjacent residential properties shall be reduced by a cut-off luminaire with a maximum of 90 degrees illumination. 
(7)  There shall be a continuous landscape buffer with a minimum of eight feet between parking areas and the street. An eight-foot buffer shall be established where parking abuts other property lines. 
(8)  Parking lots with 50 or more spaces shall be divided into separate areas with minimum ten-foot landscape strip. Walkways may cut through the landscaping. 
(9)  One driveway for each development is permitted. Properties with more than one front yard may have two driveways. Joint curb cuts are encouraged. 
(10)  One large canopy tree and a planted median should be planted for every seven parking spaces, within interior and perimeter planting areas. 
(11)  A minimum of seven percent of the parking lot must be landscaped. 
(12)  One two foot by six foot minimum bicycle parking space per 20 parking spaces. 
(h)  Building guidelines 
Purpose. The building guidelines provide elements that allow for an office development which has a human scale and sensibility to its design. 

(i)  Entrances: 
Purpose. The pedestrian entrance to the building shall portray the business identity while maintaining an inviting scale to the pedestrian. Awnings or canopies may be used for this purpose. 
Application 
(1)  All buildings shall have their principle entrance on the primary elevation and shall provide a direct connection to the sidewalk and street. 
(2)  Restaurants may have a series of doors that open to provide open air dining. 
(3)  Awnings, signs, or recessed entrances shall be integrated into the design of the building. 
(4)  Recessed entrances must not exceed 50 percent of the storefront width nor ten feet in depth. 
(5)  Service entrances or loading docks shall be designed to have minimum impact on the primary elevation. Wherever possible, they shall not be located on the primary elevation. 
(j)  Fenestration: 
Purpose. The proportions and design of building openings are integral in connecting the building to the pedestrian. The windows should also be used for the business to communicate to the public with storefront displays that provide visual interest to the pedestrian. 
Application 
(1)  Offices shall have a minimum of 50 percent glass on the ground front elevation. 
(2)  Windows should comprise from 25 percent to 50 percent of façades higher than ground level which are visible from public right-of-ways. 
(3)  Traditional elements around windows are permitted such as balconies, shutters and sills. 
(4)  No signage shall be adhered to the windows, permanently or temporarily, except the name of the business and street address. The name and street address shall take up no more than ten percent of the window to which it is adhered. 
(5)  Opaque and smoked glass should be used for accents only. 
(k)  Corners: 
Purpose. Corners give prominence to the intersection and add architectural interest. 
Application 
(1)  Project up to one additional floor higher than adjacent buildings. 
(2)  Have awnings, balconies, or signs in keeping with the design guidelines. 
(3)  Have a higher level of detail than any other corner on the building. 
(l)  Material and color: 
Purpose. Quality is an important element of construction. Substandard materials and craftsmanship are not permitted. The greatest amount architectural detail and interest shall be at the pedestrian level. The following standards are the minimum all projects should adhere to: 
Application 
(1)  High level of craftsmanship for all details and finishes. 
(2)  Color should be architecturally appropriate and not detract from adjacent properties. 
(3)  For storefront designs, attention shall be paid to the details of the window design in order to promote a connection to the pedestrian. 
(4)  For storefront designs, attention shall be paid to the details of the window design in order to promote a connection to the pedestrian. 
(5)  Predominant exterior building materials as well as accents shall not include the following: smooth face CMU, metal siding, vinyl siding. No stucco or synthetic stucco products (EIFS, Dryvit) shall be used on the ground level. Administrative variances may be approved if materials are historically or contextually appropriate. 
(m)  Scale and massing: 
Purpose. Attention to scale and massing is important when considering both the impact of the building from the street as well as the pedestrian experience at the sidewalk. From the street, the building should appear balanced with its surrounding context of buildings and landscape. From the sidewalk, the building should consider the human scale, particularly at the ground level where pedestrians are largely impacted. 
Application 
(1)  Major horizontal elements of adjacent buildings such as awnings, cornices, etc. on the primary elevation, shall be at the same height wherever possible. 
(2)  The height of the buildings may be up to 50 feet. 
(3)  When buildings are within 100 feet of a single-family residence, the building may be up to 35 feet in height. 
(4)  Elevations that are seen from a public right of way must have architectural interest. Large blank walls are not permitted. 
(5)  On the primary elevation, an architectural rhythm of 15 feet to 30 feet should be established. 
(6)  On the primary elevations of buildings over one story, the ground floor shall be architecturally distinguished from upper floors to form both an architectural base and to create an intimate scale for the pedestrian. 
(7)  Varied roof forms and cornices may be employed to express the uniqueness of each design. 
(8)  The roofs on corner lots should emphasize and enhance the corner. 
(n)  Awnings: 
Purpose. Awnings allow a business to further define their identity as well as provide shelter from the elements to pedestrians. They add design interest to the streetscape, protect displays from over- exposure to the sun, and help cool the building. 
Application 
(1)  Awnings or projecting signs above seven feet may be permitted into the right of way so long as they do not interfere with trees, utilities, transit shelters or other street furnishings. 
(2)  Awnings, signs, or recessed entrances shall be integrated into the design of the building. 
(3)  Awnings shall have a framed opening. They should be architecturally consistent with the rest of the building. 
(4)  Adjacent awnings or awnings along the same block should be at the same height wherever possible. 
(5)  Awnings shall not interfere with pedestrian mobility. 
(6)  Awnings shall be retractable or open sided. 
(7)  Vinyl awnings are discouraged. 
(8)  Internally lit or worn awnings are not permitted. 
(o)  Building numbers: 
Application 
(1)  Above the primary elevation entrance. 
(2)  The business name or address can be permanently adhered or painted on glass windows provided that it takes up a maximum of ten percent of the glass to which it is adhered. 
(3)  Clearly visible from the sidewalk. 
(4)  Minimum of six inches in height. 
Sec. 10-14031. - Retail/mixed-use. 
(a)  Site guidelines 
Purpose. The site guideline for retail and mixed-use buildings creates a streetscape to give the corridor a sense of place. This is imperative for the success of the corridor as a whole as well as the individual business. The guideline will address sidewalks and accessibility, front yard, vias, landscaping, screening and buffering and parking. 


(b)  Sidewalks and accessibility: 
Purpose. Sidewalks ease pedestrian circulation to the amenities in the development as well as the whole corridor. 
Application: 
(1)  Continuous clear zone of ten feet as minimum. 
(2)  Planting strip of five feet minimum containing lighting and street trees. 
(3)  Building entrance connected to sidewalk. 
(4)  Site must include interior sidewalk that serves parking lot and building. 
(c)  Yard setbacks: 
Purpose. The yard setback allows the building to be visually connected with the public realm and still maintain its private character. 
Application: 
(1)  Front yard (supplemental zone) setback zero—20 feet. 
(2)  Side yard, rear yard setback of six feet. 
(3)  No structures over 12 inches in width and 36 inches in height may be placed within the sight triangle. 
(d)  Vias: 
Purpose. Vias connect pedestrians to parking, site amenities, or other building entrances, and can encourage outdoor activity on the site. 
Application 
(1)  Be visually connected to the buildings through store front windows and or entrances or restaurant seating. 
(2)  May allow enough room for open air restaurant seating. 
(3)  Use specially designed elements including paving, lighting, landscape and street furniture. 
(e)  Landscaping: 
Purpose. Landscaping enhances the experiential quality of the corridor by providing a balance of natural greenscape against building and hardscape elements. 
Application 
(1)  Twenty-five percent of site must be covered with greenscape or special permeable paving materials, however, impervious public plazas may count towards five percent of this requirement. Up to 30 percent of the greenspace requirement may be comprised of approved permeable paving materials. 
(2)  Landscape should be designed so that 80 percent coverage occurs within five years. 
(3)  Landscape design should include a variety of deciduous, evergreen trees, shrubs and flowering plant species well suited to the local climate. 
(4)  Where feasible, existing healthy trees on the site of greater than six inches DBH should be incorporated into the required landscaping of the site. 
(5)  All mixed-use developments shall include at least one public amenity area or greenspace that includes amenities such as benches, fountains, seating areas, etc. that has direct access to the public sidewalk network. 
(f)  Screening and buffering: 
Purpose. Screening and buffering maintains the attractiveness of the building while providing for its functionality. 
Application 
(1)  A 20-foot landscaped area must buffer buildings adjacent to residential zones. In addition where property abuts a residential zone, a six foot—seven foot privacy/screening fence or wall shall be constructed. 
(2)  Areas for outdoor storage, truck parking, trash collection or compaction, loading, or other such uses shall not be visible from public or private rights-of-way and shall not be located within twenty feet of any public street or sidewalk. 
(3)  No chain link fencing. 
(4)  Where parking abuts a street, a decorative masonry wall or evergreen hedge screen of 30 inches—42 inches in height and a minimum of 12 inches in width shall be established in an eight-foot minimum planted buffer. 
(g)  Parking: 
Application 
(1)  One parking space per 300 square feet. 
(2)  Parking must be to the side or rear of the primary elevation and must not break the plane of the primary elevation. 
(3)  Parking decks and garages are permitted, but must use well designed architectural elements that are compatible with the adjacent structure on all elevations that face either public right of ways or other buildings. They should appear to be a horizontally storied building with active ground level uses. 
(4)  Joint curb-cuts are encouraged for access to adjacent lots. 
(5)  There shall be a pedestrian walkway which connects the surface parking lot to the public sidewalk. 
(6)  Parking areas must be evenly lit and equal to one-half footcandle of light. In addition, there shall be no light spillage onto adjacent residential properties. Light fixtures must be fully shielded when adjacent to residential properties. 
(7)  Light spillage onto adjacent residential properties shall be reduced by a cut-off luminaire with a maximum of 90 degrees illumination. 
(8)  There shall be a continuous landscape buffer with a minimum of eight feet between parking areas and the street. An eight-foot buffer shall be established where parking abuts other property lines. 
(9)  Parking lots with 50 or more spaces shall be divided into separate areas with 
(10)  minimum ten foot landscape strip. Walkways may cut through the landscaping. 
(11)  One driveway for each development is permitted. Properties with more than one front yard may have two driveways. 
(12)  One large canopy tree and a planted median should be planted for every seven parking spaces, within interior and perimeter planting areas. 
(13)  A minimum of seven percent of the parking lot must be landscaped. 
(14)  One two feet by six feet minimum bicycle parking space per 20 parking spaces. 
(15)  Up to 25 percent of parking may be shared in mixed-use developments upon approval of the Director of Planning and Zoning. 
(h)  Building guidelines 
Purpose. The building design guideline for retail and mixed use lays the foundation for architecturally appealing design through scale and orientation. The guideline establishes a rhythm for the buildings so they effectively communicate their use. It takes into consideration entrances, fenestration, corners, material and color, building scale and massing, awnings, outdoor dining, signage, and building numbers. 

(i)  Entrances: 
Purpose. The pedestrian entrance to the building shall portray the business identity while maintaining an inviting scale to the pedestrian. Awnings or canopies may be used for this purpose. 
Application 
(1)  All buildings shall have their principle entrance on the primary elevation and shall provide a direct connection to the sidewalk and street. 
(2)  Restaurants may have a series of doors that open to provide open air dining. 
(3)  Awnings, signs, or recessed entrances shall be integrated into the design of the building. 
(4)  Recessed entrances must not exceed 50 percent of the storefront width nor ten feet in depth. 
(5)  Service entrances or loading docks shall be designed to have minimum impact on the primary elevation. Wherever possible, they shall not be located on the primary elevation. 
(j)  Fenestration: 
Purpose. The proportions and design of building openings are integral in connecting the building to the pedestrian. The windows should also be used for the business to communicate to the public with storefront displays that provide visual interest to the pedestrian. 
Application 
(1)  All retail buildings shall have a minimum of 75 percent glass on the ground level facing public rights-of-way. Any other ground level facade that is visible from the public right-of way shall have a minimum of 50 percent. 
(2)  Windows should comprise from 25 percent to 50 percent of façades higher than ground level which are visible from public right-of-ways. 
(3)  Traditional elements around windows are permitted such as balconies, shutters and sills. 
(4)  No signage shall be adhered to the windows permanently or temporarily except the name of the business and street address. The name and street address shall take up no more than ten percent of the window to which it is adhered. 
(5)  Opaque, smoked and reflective glass should be used for accents only. 
(k)  Corners: 
Purpose. On corner lots, these corners give prominence to the intersection and add architectural interest while addressing the context. 
Application 
(1)  Project up to one additional floor higher than adjacent buildings. 
(2)  Have awnings, balconies, or signs in keeping with the design guidelines. 
(3)  Have a higher level of detail than any other corner on the building. 
(l)  Material and color: 
Purpose. Quality is an important element of construction. Substandard materials and craftsmanship are not permitted. The greatest amount architectural detail and interest shall be at the pedestrian level. The following standards are the minimum all projects should adhere to: 
Application 
(1)  High level of craftsmanship for all details and finishes. 
(2)  Color should be architecturally appropriate and not detract from adjacent properties. 
(3)  For storefront designs, attention shall be paid to the details of the window design in order to promote a connection to the pedestrian. 
(4)  Predominant exterior building materials as well as accents shall not include the following: smooth face CMU, metal siding, vinyl siding. No stucco or synthetic stucco products (EIFS, Dryvit) shall be used on the ground level. Administrative variances may be approved if materials are historically or contextually appropriate. 
(m)  Scale and massing: 
Purpose. Attention to scale and massing is important when considering both the impact of the building from the street as well as the pedestrian experience at the sidewalk. From the street, the building should appear balanced with its surrounding context of buildings and landscape. From the sidewalk, the building should consider the human scale, particularly at the ground level where pedestrians are largely impacted. 
Application 
(1)  Major horizontal elements of adjacent buildings such as awnings, cornices, etc. on the primary elevation, shall be at the same height wherever possible. 
(2)  The height of the buildings may be up to 50 feet. 
(3)  When buildings are within 100 feet of a single-family residence, the building may be up to 35 feet in height. 
(4)  Elevations that are seen from a public right of way must have architectural interest. Large blank walls are not permitted. 
(5)  On the primary elevation, an architectural rhythm of 15 feet to 30 feet should be established. 
(6)  On the primary elevations of buildings over one story, the ground floor shall be architecturally distinguished from upper floors to form both an architectural base and to create an intimate scale for the pedestrian. 
(7)  Varied roof forms and cornices may be employed to express the uniqueness of each design. 
(8)  The roofs on corner lots should emphasize and enhance the corner. 
(n)  Awnings: 
Purpose. Awnings allow a business to further define their identity as well as provide shelter from the elements to pedestrians. They add design interest to the streetscape, protect displays from over exposure to the sun, and help cool the building. 
Application 
(1)  Awnings or projecting signs above seven feet may be permitted into the right-of-way so long as they do not interfere with trees, utilities, transit shelters or other street furnishings. 
(2)  Awnings, signs, or recessed entrances shall be integrated into the design of the building. 
(3)  Awnings shall have a framed opening. They should be architecturally consistent with the rest of the building. 
(4)  Adjacent awnings or awnings along the same block should be at the same height wherever possible. 
(5)  Awnings shall not interfere with pedestrian mobility. 
(6)  Awnings shall be retractable or open sided. 
(7)  Vinyl awnings are discouraged. 
(8)  Internally lit or worn awnings are not permitted. 
(o)  Outdoor dining: 
Purpose. Outdoor dining allows restaurant patrons to enjoy the open air environment and bustle of public spaces while enjoying a meal. It also permits restaurant owners to extend their dining rooms and serve a larger capacity. 
Application 
(1)  A restaurant may set itself back from the clear zone up to 20 feet to make room for outdoor dining or plazas. 
(2)  A restaurant may extend two feet into the clear zone for small tables. 
(3)  A restaurant may install large glazed doors that can be opened to the sidewalk for outdoor dining. 
(p)  Building numbers: 
Application: 
(1)  Above the primary elevation entrance. 
(2)  The business name or address can be permanently adhered or painted on glass windows provided that it takes up a maximum of ten percent of the glass to which it is adhered. 
(3)  Clearly visible from the sidewalk. 
(4)  Minimum of six inches in height. 
Sec. 10-14032. - Big box. 
(a)  Site guidelines 
Purpose. "Big-box" retail can be defined as large-scale retailers, such as Wal-Mart, Kmart, Kroger, Target, Circuit City, or Home Depot, which occupy more than 50,000 square feet and derive their profits from high sales volumes. They may operate as stand-alone facilities, or more commonly they are located in a "power center." Because big box developments are of a larger scale, it is important that site requirements include adequate sidewalks, minimal setbacks, landscaping, screening, and buffering to enhance the pedestrian experience. The features and spaces should enhance the building and the center as integral parts of the community fabric. Pedestrian accessibility opens auto-oriented developments to the neighborhood, thereby reducing traffic impacts and enabling the development to project a friendlier, more inviting image. 


Application 
(1)  Within the development, pedestrian oriented public spaces and activities must be present. 
(2)  Two of the following, at a minimum, shall be included for each development over 50,000 SF: patio/seating areas, pedestrian plaza with seating, kiosk areas, water features, clock towers, or other amenity that adequately enhances such community and public spaces. Any such areas shall have direct access to the public sidewalk network. 
(3)  Entrances and parking lots should be configured to be functional and inviting with walkways conveniently tied to logical destinations. 
(4)  Bus stops and drop-off/pick-up points should be considered as integral parts of the configuration. 
(5)  The development may have smaller buildings at the street that screen interior parking. 
(6)  Pedestrian ways should be anchored by special design features such as towers, arcades, porticos, pedestrian light fixtures, bollards, planter walls, and other architectural elements that define circulation ways and outdoor spaces. 
(7)  If the structure is over one story, recessing upper stories is encouraged. Multiple stories and mixed-use is encouraged. 
(8)  Alternative detention/retention treatments, such as permeable paving, water features, etc. are encouraged. 
(9)  Parking reductions up to 20 percent or increases in building height up to ten feet may be granted by the Department of Planning and Zoning for mixed-uses, the use of alternative detention/retention, and/or the provision of large greenspaces, parks, or conservation areas. 
(b)  Sidewalks and accessibility: 
Purpose. Sidewalks ease pedestrian circulation to amenities and throughout the Cleveland Avenue corridor. 
Application 
(1)  Continuous clear zone of ten feet as minimum. 
(2)  Plant strip of five feet as minimum containing lighting and street trees. 
(3)  Building entrance connected to sidewalk. 
(4)  Site must include interior sidewalk that serves parking lot and building. 
(c)  Yard setbacks: 
Purpose. Generally referred to as supplemental zone, within private property. Provides an opportunity for a public zone for dining areas or outdoor plazas. 
Application 
(1)  Supplemental Zone/Front Yard zero—20 feet. 
(2)  Side Yard setback six feet. 
(3)  Rear Yard setback six feet. 
(4)  No structures over 12 inches in width and 36 inches in height may be placed within the sight triangle. 
(d)  Vias: 
Purpose. Vias connect pedestrians to parking, site amenities, or other building entrances and can encourage outdoor activity on the site. 
Application 
(1)  Be visually connected to the buildings through store front windows and or entrances or restaurant seating. 
(2)  May allow enough room for open air restaurant seating. 
(3)  Use specially designed elements including paving, lighting, landscape and street furniture. 
(e)  Landscaping: 
Purpose. Landscaping enhances the experiential quality of the corridor by providing a balance of natural greenscape against building and hardscape elements. In addition, landscape can be used to define and improve the aesthetics of boundaries, gateways, entrances, and special site features. 
Application 
(1)  Twenty-five percent of site must be covered with greenscape or special permeable paving materials; however, impervious public plazas may count towards five percent of this requirement. Up to 30 percent of the greenspace requirement may be comprised of approved permeable paving materials. 
(2)  Landscape should be designed so that 80 percent coverage occurs after five years. 
(3)  Landscape design should include a variety of deciduous, evergreen trees, shrubs and flowering plant species well suited to the local climate. 
(4)  Where feasible, existing healthy trees on the site of greater than 6" DBH should be incorporated into the required landscaping of the site. 
(f)  Screening and buffering: 
Purpose. Screening and buffering maintains the attractiveness of the building while providing for its functionality. 
Application 
(1)  A 50 foot landscaped area must buffer buildings or parking adjacent to residential zones; areas of parking must also be screened with a privacy wall or fence (minimum six feet height) when adjacent to a residential use. 
(2)  Areas for outdoor storage, truck parking, trash collection or compaction, loading, or other such uses shall not be visible from public or private rights-of-way and shall not be located within 20 feet of any public street, public, sidewalk or internal pedestrian walkways. 
(3)  No chain link fencing. 
(4)  Where parking abuts a street, a decorative masonry wall, evergreen hedge screen of 30—42 inches in height and a minimum of 12 inches in width shall be established in a eight-foot minimum planted buffer. 
(g)  Parking: 
Application 
(1)  One parking space per 300 square feet. 
(2)  Parking must be to the side or rear of the primary elevation and must not break the plane of the primary elevation. 
(3)  Parking decks and garages are permitted, but must use well designed architectural elements that are compatible with the adjacent structure on all elevations that face either public rights-of-way or other buildings. They should appear to be a horizontally storied building with active ground level uses. 
(4)  A maximum of four parking spaces for every 1,000 SF of gross leasable area is permitted. 
(5)  There shall be a pedestrian walkway which connects the surface parking lot to the public sidewalk. 
(6)  Parking areas must be evenly lit and equal to one-half footcandle of light. In addition, there shall be no light spillage onto adjacent residential properties. Light fixtures must be fully shielded when adjacent to residential properties. 
(7)  Light spillage onto adjacent residential properties shall be reduced by a cut-off luminaire with a maximum of 90 degrees illumination. 
(8)  There shall be a continuous landscape buffer with a minimum of eight feet between parking areas and the street. An eight-foot buffer shall be established where parking abuts other property lines. 
(9)  Parking lots with 50 or more spaces shall be divided into separate areas with minimum ten feet landscape strip. Walkways may cut through the landscaping. 
(10)  One driveway for each development is permitted. Properties with more than one front yard which may have two driveways. 
(11)  One large canopy tree and a planted median should be planted for every seven parking spaces, within interior and perimeter planting areas. 
(12)  A minimum of seven percent of the parking lot must be landscaped. 
(14)  One two foot by six-foot minimum bicycle parking space per 20 parking spaces. 
(h)  Building guidelines 
Purpose. Avoid monotonous expanses of large-scale development by providing guidelines that adhere to human scale. 
No single one story building or series of interior connected buildings shall contain more than 100,000 sf. No two story building or series of interior connected buildings shall contain more than 150,000 sf. 

(i)  Entrances: 
Purpose. The pedestrian entrance to the building shall portray the business identity while maintaining an inviting scale to the pedestrian. Multiple building entrances reduce walking distances from cars, facilitate pedestrian and bicycle access from public sidewalks, and provide convenience. Multiple entrances also mitigate the effect of the unbroken walls and neglected areas that often characterize building façades that face bordering land uses. Awnings or canopies may be used for this purpose. 
Application 
(1)  All sides of a principal building that directly face an abutting public or private right of way shall feature at least one customer entrance. 
(2)  Where a principal building directly faces more than two abutting public or private rights-of-way, this requirement shall apply only to two sides of the building, including the side of the building facing the primary street, and another side of the building facing a secondary street. 
(3)  Where additional stores will be located in the principal building, each such store shall have at least one exterior customer entrance, which shall conform to the above requirements. 
(4)  Each principal building on a site shall have clearly defined, highly visible customer entrances featuring: canopies, porticos, overhangs, recesses/projections, arcades, raised corniced parapets over the door, peaked roof forms, arches. 
(j)  Fenestration: 
Purpose. The proportions and design of building openings are integral in connecting the building to the pedestrian. The windows should also be used for the business to communicate to the public with storefront displays that provide visual interest to the pedestrian. 
Application 
(1)  All retail buildings shall have a minimum of 75 percent glass on the ground level facing public rights-of-way. Any other ground level facade that is visible from the public right-of way shall have a minimum of 50 percent. 
(2)  Windows should comprise from 25 percent to 50 percent of façades higher than ground level which are visible from public rights-of-way. 
(3)  Traditional elements around windows are permitted such as balconies, shutters and sills. 
(4)  No signage shall be adhered to the windows permanently or temporarily except the name of the business and street address. 
(5)  The name and street address shall take up no more than ten percent of the window to which it is adhered. 
(6)  Opaque, smoked and reflective glass should be used for accents only. 
(k)  Materials and colors: 
Purpose. Quality is an important element of construction. Substandard materials and craftsmanship are not permitted. The greatest amount architectural detail and interest shall be at the pedestrian level. 
Application 
(1)  High level of craftsmanship for all details and finishes. 
(2)  Color should be architecturally appropriate and not detract from adjacent properties. 
(3)  For storefront designs, attention shall be paid to the details of the window design in order to promote a connection to the pedestrian. 
(4)  Predominant exterior building materials as well as accents shall not include the following: smooth face CMU, metal siding, vinyl siding. No stucco shall be used on the ground level. Administrative variances may be approved if materials are historically or contextually appropriate. 
(l)  Scale and massing: 
Purpose. Attention to scale and massing is important when considering both the impact of the building from the street as well as the pedestrian experience at the sidewalk. Façades should be articulated to reduce the massive scale and the uniform, impersonal appearances of large retail buildings and provide visual interest that will be consistent with the community's identity, character, and scale. The resulting scale will ensure a greater likelihood of reuse of structure by subsequent tenants. 
Application 
(1)  No minimum width is required for outparcels provided that all applicable Code requirements can be met on the outparcel. 
(2)  Developments with façade over 100 feet in linear length shall incorporate wall projections or recesses a minimum of three-foot depth and a minimum of 20 contiguous feet within each 100 feet of facade length and shall extend over 20 percent of the façade. 
(3)  Developments shall use features such as arcades, display windows, entry areas, and awnings along at least 60 percent of the façade. 
(4)  When buildings are within 100 feet of a single-family residence, the building may be up to 35 feet in height. 
(5)  Rooflines shall be varied with a change in height every 100 linear feet in the building length. Parapets, mansard roofs, gable roofs, hip roofs, or dormers shall be used to conceal flat roofs and roof top equipment from public view. 
(6)  Building façades shall include a repeating patterns of the following at intervals of no more than 30 feet, either horizontally or vertically: color change; texture change; material module change; or expression of architectural or structural bay through a change in plane no less than 12 inches in width, such as an offset, reveal, or projecting rib. 
(m)  Secondary retail/mixed-use: 
Purpose. The presence of smaller retail stores or residential above ground level retail gives a center a "friendlier" appearance by creating variety, breaking up large expanses, and expanding the range of the site's activities. Windows and window displays of such stores should be used to contribute to the visual interest of exterior façades. The standards presented in this section are directed toward those situations where additional, smaller stores, with separate, exterior customer entrances are located in the principal buildings or development site. Additionally, residential uses can be incorporated into the development above smaller ground level retail uses. 
Application. Where principal buildings contain additional, separately owned stores, which occupy less than 50,000 square feet of gross floor area, with separate, exterior customer entrances: 
(1)  The street level façade of such stores shall be transparent between the height of three feet and eight feet above the walkway grade for no less than 60 percent of the horizontal length of the building façade of such additional stores. 
(2)  Windows shall be recessed and should include visually prominent sills, shutters, or other such forms of framing. 
(3)  Windows should comprise from 25 percent to 50 percent of façades higher than ground level which are visible from public rights-of-way. 
(4)  All retail buildings shall have a minimum of 75 percent glass on the ground level. 
(5)  Traditional elements around windows are permitted such as balconies, shutters and sills. 
(6)  No signage shall be adhered to the windows permanently or temporarily except the name of the business and street address. The name and street address shall take up no more than ten percent of the window to which it is adhered. 
(7)  Opaque, smoked and reflective glass should be used for accents only. 
(n)  Building numbers: 
Application 
(1)  Above the primary elevation entrance. 
(2)  Clearly visible from the sidewalk. 
(3)  Minimum of six inches in height. 
(4)  Creativity in the design of the number is encouraged. 
( Ord. No. 073-017, § 2, 3-20-17 ) 
ARTICLE D. - HEADLAND DELOWE OVERLAY DISTRICT 

Sec. 10-14033. - Scope of provisions. 
The regulations set forth in this chapter, or set forth elsewhere in this part when referred to in this article, are the regulations for the Headland DeLowe Overlay District. 
The regulations set forth in section 10-14033 through and including section 10-14051 shall apply to all properties located within the Headland DeLowe Overlay District. 
( Ord. No. 005-014, § 1(Exh. A), 3-3-14 ) 
Sec. 10-14034. - Intent. 
The intent of the City Council in establishing the Headland DeLowe Overlay District as a overlay district is as follows: 
(1)  Create an urban environment where people can live, work, meet and play; 
(2)  Improve aesthetics of the built environment; 
(3)  Encourage a compatible mixture of residential, commercial, cultural and recreational uses; 
(4)  Provide appropriately scaled, continuous pedestrian oriented uses and activities adjacent to sidewalks along streets with identified pedestrian needs; 
(5)  Facilitate safe, pleasant and convenient pedestrian circulation and minimize conflict between pedestrians and vehicles; 
(6)  Provide for development within this area that is compatible with existing low-density development with surrounding residential areas; 
(7)  Prevent encroachment of incompatible commercial uses; 
(8)  Ensure pedestrian-oriented building forms. 
( Ord. No. 005-014, § 1(Exh. A), 3-3-14 ) 
Sec. 10-14035. - Boundaries of district established. 
(a)  The boundaries of the Headland DeLowe Overlay District are shown on the map below, which by this reference is incorporated into and made a part of this chapter and this part. 

(b)  The Headland DeLowe Overlay district boundary is amended to include the following parcel ID numbers listed below and attached in Exhibit A (Headland DeLowe Overlay District Map): 

 
( Ord. No. 005-014, § 1(Exh. A), 3-3-14 ; Ord. No. 052-016, § 1, 3-21-16 ) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. Exh. A to Ord. No. 052-016, § 1, adopted March 21, 2016 , is not set out herein due to problems with legibility. Exh. A may be found in the office of the city clerk. 
Sec. 10-14036. - Permitted principal use and structures. 
The following regulations are specific to the Headland DeLowe Overlay District. 
(1)  Permitted principal uses: 
a.  Barber shops, beauty shops, manicure shops and similar personal service establishments. 
i.  No more than two such personal service establishments may locate within the established boundaries. 
ii.  Minimum square footage—1,500 square feet. 
b.  Commercial recreational establishments, including bowling alleys, theaters, places of assembly and similar uses with primary activities conducted within fully enclosed buildings. 
c.  Eating and drinking establishments. 
i.  No more than two establishments defined as fast casual or fast food may locate in the district. 
ii.  Alcohol service is only allowed in food service establishments 10,000 square feet or greater. 
d.  Laundry and dry cleaning collection stations limited to no more than 2,500 square feet (cleaning is done offsite). 
e.  Offices, studios, clinics (including veterinary), laboratories and similar uses, excluding: 
i.  Kennels. 
ii.  Blood donor stations. 
f.  Retail establishments. 
i.  The retail sale of malt beverages and wine is allowed in food stores with 20,000 sq. ft. or more gross leasable space. 
g.  Sales and repair establishments for home appliances, bicycles, lawnmowers, clocks and similar household goods, with exception of motorized vehicles. 
h.  Tailoring, custom dressmaking, and millinery. 
i.  No more than two gas stations. 
i.  Dispensing of motor fuel is the primary use. Convenient offerings including limited variety of groceries, household goods, and personal care items may be sold. The building may not exceed 1,500 square feet. 
2.  Vehicle service, maintenance and repair is prohibited. 
(2)  Prohibited uses: 
a.  Convenience stores. 
b.  Package stores, providing retail malt beverages, wine and/or distilled spirits. 
c.  No use or manner of operation shall be permitted which is obnoxious or offensive by reason of odor, smoke, noise, glare, fumes, gas, vibration, unusual danger of fire or explosion or interference with radio or television communication, or is otherwise incompatible with the character of the district and its relation to adjoining districts. 
d.  Pawn shops, payday loan and title loan offices are prohibited in this district. 
e.  Sale of alcoholic beverages for on premise consumption except as provided in subsection (1)c.ii. of this section. 
f.  Any use not expressly permitted in subsections 10-14036 (1) or (3). 
(3)  Administrative or special use permits. 
a.  Chapter 2, Article D of the East Point Zoning Code and Development Regulations should be consulted to determine uses and minimum standards for uses allowed by administrative or use permit. 
( Ord. No. 005-014, § 1(Exh. A), 3-3-14 ; Ord. No. 052-016, § 2, 3-21-16) 
Sec. 10-14037. - Nonconforming uses. 
If a lawful use of structure, or of a structure and lot in combination, exists at the effective date of adoption of the ordinance from which this article derives or its subsequent amendment that would not be allowed under provisions of this article as adopted or amended, the use may be continued so long as it complies with other regulations, subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  To avoid undue hardship, the lawful but nonconforming use of any structure or land at the time of the enactment of the ordinance from which this article derives or any subsequent amendment may be continued even though the use does not conform to the provisions of this article, except that the nonconforming use: 
a.  Shall not be changed to another nonconforming use. 
b.  Shall not be reestablished after its removal from the property or its discontinuance for six months or more, or unless the premises are under a continuing lease but are unoccupied by the nonconforming use, regardless of the intent of the owner or occupier to resume the nonconforming use. 
c.  Shall not be extended to occupy a greater area of land. 
d.  Shall not be extended to occupy a greater area of a building or structure unless such additional area of the building or structure existed at the time of the passage or amendment of the ordinance from which this article derives and was clearly designed to house the same use as the nonconforming use occupying the other portion of the building or structure. 
( Ord. No. 005-014, § 1(Exh. A), 3-3-14 ; Ord. No. 052-016, § 3, 3-21-16 ) 
Sec. 10-14038. - Redevelopment requirements. 
Any property wherein 25 percent or greater of the principal building is removed, renovated or destroyed by any means shall be redeveloped in accordance with the requirements of this chapter and any paving or other accessory structural elements within any required transitional yard shall be removed and buffers provided as required herein. 
All commercial sales and service shall be conducted within enclosed permanent structures and there shall be no unenclosed displays of merchandise with the exception of off-street parking and outdoor dining. 
On those façades of any structure that face a public street, the following regulations on building materials shall apply. 
(1)  Visible foundation materials: Foundations shall constitute a distinct building design element that shall contrast with the front façade siding material. Brick, stone, concrete, stucco, and architectural concrete masonry units shall be permitted. Standard, unfinished concrete block and stacked stone is prohibited. A recognizable building base shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
a.  Thicker walls, ledges, or sills; 
b.  Integrally textured, colored or patterned materials; or 
c.  Raised planters which are integral to the building façade. 
(2)  Siding/veneer: Wood and cementitous siding, brick, hard stucco and stone shall be permitted. Synthetic stone, such as pre-manufactured fiberglass, cultured stone, or glass- fiber reinforced concrete is permitted, provided it is identical in appearance and equal or greater durability to natural stone. 
(3)  At least 51 percent of the total exterior wall area of each building elevation, excluding gables, windows, doors and related trim, shall be brick, stone, cast stone, integrally-colored split-face block, concrete, stucco, wood, or architectural concrete masonry units. 
(4)  A vertical change of materials shall occur at an interior corner or shall occur within four feet of an exterior corner. 
(5)  Stone and brick used on exterior walls shall not terminate at the exterior corners. 
(6)  Openings in a brick or stone facade shall have a stone lintel, a stone or brick arch, or a brick soldier course. 
(7)  A vertical change of materials from stone or brick to another material shall occur at an interior corner or shall not occur within four feet of an exterior corner. 
(8)  A horizontal change of material from brick or stone to another material shall include a stone cap or a brick sill; the cap or sill shall project from the face of the building. 
(9)  Color schemes shall tie building elements together, relate separate outparcels within the same development, and enhance the architectural [unity] for of a building. Façade color must be low-reflecting subtle. Intense, bright or fluorescent colors are prohibited. 
(10)  All building accessories, including, but not limited to, meters, flues, vents, gutters, and utilities shall match or complement in color the permanent color of the surface from which they project. 
(11)  Any façade exceeding 30 feet in length shall include at least one change in wall plane, such as projections or recesses, having a depth of at least three percent of the entire length of the facade this projection or recess shall extend over at least 20 percent of the entire length of the façade. 
(12)  Buildings larger than 50,000 square feet shall include both pitched and flat roofs with parapets. 
(13)  All building facades shall consist of vertical building bays that are a maximum of 30 feet in width. The edges of each bay shall be defined by a vertical architectural feature that projects or recesses from the wall plane a minimum of eight inches. 
(14)  Columns, pilasters, piers, vertical changes in wall planes, or vertical changes in texture or material shall be considered vertical architectural features. 
(15)  A recognizable building top shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
a.  Cornice treatments, other than just colored "stripes" or "bands," with integrally textured materials such as stone or other masonry or differently colored materials. 
b.  Sloping roofs with eaves and bracket. 
(16)  Building walls shall be subdivided and proportioned using features such as windows, entrances, storefronts, arcades, arbors, awnings, trellises, or other similarly-scaled architectural details. These features shall cover at least 90 percent of the building front wall length and at least 60 percent of other building wall lengths. The full width of each vertical building bay that contains the previously-listed details shall be counted towards the minimum length of the building that must contain these details. 
(17)  All flat roofs shall have a parapet and a cornice on all façades or walls. Flashing at the top of a parapet shall not qualify as a cornice. Cornices shall be in proportion with the size, scale, and architectural detailing of the building. 
(18)  The height of a parapet shall be in proportion with the size, scale, and architectural detailing of the building and generally shall not exceed ten feet in height. 
(19)  Parapets shall be the primary method of screening roof-top mechanical equipment. 
(20)  Flat roofs projecting from a street-facing facade or active wall shall include a cornice; this cornice shall return back to a wall or roof or generally shall return eight feet or it shall be continuous around the entire projection. 
(21)  A parapet more than 90 feet in length shall include a change in parapet height or pitched roof height at least every 90 feet. This change in height shall align with the vertical building bays. Buildings larger than 50,000 square feet shall include both pitched and flat roofs with parapets. 
(22)  Pitched roofs shall be gable, hip, or shed configurations with overhanging eaves. 
(23)  Pitched roofs shall have a minimum slope of four feet vertical rise for every 12 feet of horizontal run; the maximum slope is limited to one foot vertical rise for every one foot of horizontal run. 
(24)  A pitched roof more than 90 feet in length shall include a change in parapet height or pitched roof height at least every 90 feet. This change in height shall align with the vertical building bays. Buildings larger than 50,000 square feet shall include both pitched and flat roofs with parapets. 
(25)  Continuous pitched rooflines greater than 90 feet in length shall include roof elements that align with the vertical building bays and roof modulation. Roof elements shall include, but shall not be limited to dormers, stepped roofs, gables, or other roof elements that add significant visual relief to the roof line. 
(26)  Exposed gutters are prohibited for use with flat roofs. 
(27)  Exposed downspouts shall only be allowed at interior corners. 
(28)  Parapets and cornices shall be continuous above a scupper. 
(29)  Gutters and downspouts shall be constructed of high quality, commercial grade metal. 
(30)  Buildings larger than 50,000 square feet shall provide at least two customer or public entrances. 
(31)  Buildings larger than 50,000 square feet shall orient customer or public entrances toward a public street. 
(32)  Each building on site, regardless of size, shall have clearly-defined, high-visible customer entrances featuring no less than three of the following: 
a.  Awnings; 
b.  Overhangs; 
c.  Recesses/projections; 
d.  Arcades; 
e.  Raised cornice parapets over the door; 
f.  Peak roof forms; 
g.  Arches; 
h.  Outdoor patios; 
i.  Display windows; 
j.  Architectural detail such as tile work and moldings integrated into the building structure and design; or 
k.  Integral planters or wing walls that incorporate landscaped areas and/or places for sitting. 
(33)  All stairwells, corridors, and other circulation components of the building shall be completely enclosed within the building envelope. 
(34)  Window panes shall be vertically proportioned. 
(35)  Window openings on brick, stone, cast stone, or synthetic stone buildings shall not be trimmed. Lintels, sills, and arches are not considered trim. Window openings without trim or moulding shall have window frames at least two inches wide when looking at the finished facade of the building. 
(36)  Windows located above the ground floor shall align with the ground floor windows, ground floor doors, and the building modulation. 
(37)  The light source for display windows shall not be visible from the exterior of the building. 
(38)  Awnings shall be no longer than a single storefront. 
(39)  The bottom of the awning shall not be higher than the top of the windows. The bottom of the awning shall be generally no higher than nine feet above the average exterior grade. 
(40)  Awnings shall fit the character and design of the building and be pedestrian-scaled. Awnings for rectangular openings shall be simple, shed shapes. 
(41)  Awnings shall be constructed of fabric or glass. Fabric awnings are encouraged; canvas awnings with a matte finish are preferred. Awnings with high gloss finish are discouraged. Illuminated, plastic awnings are prohibited. Burglar bars, steel gates and steel-roll sown curtains are prohibited on the exterior and interior of a structure except at the structure's rear. Burglar bars are prohibited on the rear if visible from a public street. 
(42)  Awning colors shall be compatible with the overall color scheme of the facade from which it projects. Solid colors or subtle striped patterns are preferred. 
(43)  Backlit awnings are prohibited. 
(44)  Building-mounted lighting may be used only to highlight specific architectural features or primary customer or building entrances. General floodlighting of building façades is not permitted. 
( Ord. No. 005-014, § 1(Exh. A), 3-3-14 ; Ord. No. 052-016, § 3, 3-21-16 ) 
Sec. 10-14039. - Transitional use and yards. 
(a)  Adjoining lot with same frontage. Where a lot in this district abuts any residential district at the side along the same street frontage, and without an intervening street, such lot within this district, shall not be used for any drive-through service window or drive-in facility. 
(b)  Transitional yards. Where this district adjoins a residential district, a minimum 20 feet is required which shall not be used for the purpose of parking, paving, loading, servicing or any other activity. Such yards shall be maintained as a landscaped strip. 
(c)  Screening. In addition to the above transitional yard requirements, permanent opaque walls six feet in height shall be provided and shall be maintained in a sightly condition. 
( Ord. No. 005-014, § 1(Exh. A), 3-3-14 ) 
Sec. 10-14040. - Sidewalks. 
Public sidewalks shall be located along all public streets and shall have minimum widths as specified herein. No sidewalk shall be less than 15 feet in width. Sidewalks shall consist of two zones: 1.) a street furniture and tree planting zone; and 2.) a clear zone. 
(1)  Street furniture and tree planting zone requirements. The street furniture and tree planting zone shall have a minimum width of five) feet. Said zone shall be located immediately adjacent to the curb and shall be continuous. Said zone shall meet the tree planting requirements of subsection 10-14041(3). In addition to the required planting of trees, this zone may also be used for the placement of street furniture, waste receptacles, fire hydrants, traffic signs, newspaper vending boxes, bus shelters, bicycle racks and similar elements in a manner that does not obstruct pedestrian access or motorist visibility. 
(2)  Clear zone requirements. The clear zone shall be a minimum width of ten feet. Said zone shall be located immediately contiguous to the street furniture and tree planting zone and shall be continuous. Said zone shall be hardscape, and shall be unobstructed for minimum width of ten feet, by any permanent or nonpermanent element. 
(3)  Street tree planting requirements. Street trees are required and shall be planted in the ground a maximum of 40 feet on center within the street furniture and tree planting zone and spaced equal distance between street lights. All newly planted trees shall be a minimum of 12 feet in height, shall have a minimum mature height of 40 feet, and shall be limbed up to a minimum height of seven feet. All plantings, planting replacements and planting removal must be submitted by a certified arborist. The area between required plantings shall either be planted with evergreen ground cover such as mondo grass or Liriope spicata. 
(4)  Paving. All paving within the street furniture and tree planting zone shall utilize six inch by six inch pavers and shall be brick or concrete. 
(5)  Nothing shall be erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow in such a manner as to impede visibility within visibility triangles at street intersections. 
(6)  No awning or canopy shall encroach into the street furniture and tree planting zone. 
(7)  Decorative pedestrian lights, where installed, shall be placed a maximum of 40 feet on center and spaced equal distance between required trees along all streets. Where installed, said lights shall be located within the street furniture and tree planting zone. All said lights shall be McGraw-Edison Luminiere Generation Cutoff (GAT-C) in black Pedestrian Light - 12'. 
(8)  All utilities shall be placed underground to allow for unobstructed use of sidewalks. 
(9)  Trash receptacles or similar elements, where installed, shall be Ashebrooke in Raven BRP Enterprises. 
( Ord. No. 005-014, § 1(Exh. A), 3-3-14 ) 
Sec. 10-14041. - Relationship of building to street. 
(1)  For the purposes of this chapter, sidewalk-level shall be defined as any floor of a building with a finished-floor elevation less than or equal to five feet above the adjacent sidewalk or less than or equal to five feet below the adjacent sidewalk. 
(2)  Building floors shall be delineated at third story above sidewalk level and lower and shall be executed through windows, belt courses, cornice lines or similar architectural detailing. 
(3)  The primary pedestrian entrance for pedestrians to access all sidewalk level uses and business establishments with street frontage: 
a.  Shall face and be visible from the street. 
b.  Shall be directly accessible and visible from the sidewalk. 
c.  Shall remain unlocked during business hours 
( Ord. No. 005-014, § 1(Exh. A), 3-3-14 ) 
Sec. 10-14042. - Signs. 
Signage shall be in accordance with Chapter 7 Signs of the East Point Zoning Code and Development Regulations. 
( Ord. No. 005-014, § 1(Exh. A), 3-3-14 ) 
Sec. 10-14043. - Lighting and storefront illumination. 
(1)  All lighting shall reduce spillage onto residentially used properties by providing cutoff luminaries which have a maximum 90-degree illumination. 
(1)  All lighting that up-lights trees, buildings or other elements, shall be located a minimum height of eight feet above the sidewalk, driveway or pedestrian area when not located within completely landscaped areas. 
( Ord. No. 005-014, § 1(Exh. A), 3-3-14 ) 
Sec. 10-14044. - Loading areas, loading dock entrances and building mechanical and accessory features. 
(1)  Loading areas: Dumpsters and loading areas shall be screened so as not to be visible from ground level or sidewalk level outdoor dining area, public sidewalk or public right-of-way. In addition, dumpsters and loading dock areas shall be enclosed with opaque walls six feet in height. 
(2)  Building mechanical and accessory features: 
a.  Shall be located to the side or rear of the principal structure and shall be in the location of least visibility from the public right-of-way. Screening with plant or fence materials shall be required if the equipment is visible from the public right-of-way. 
b.  When located on rooftops shall be incorporated in the design of the building and screened with building materials similar to the building. 
c.  Shall not be permitted between the building and the public street. 
( Ord. No. 005-014, § 1(Exh. A), 3-3-14 ) 
Sec. 10-14045. - Curb cuts. 
(1)  All sidewalk paving materials shall be continued across any intervening driveway. 
(2)  Driveways shall have a band of textured concrete adjacent to the street which is in-line with and equal in width to the street furniture zone and shall have a textured band of concrete adjacent to the sidewalk. 
(3)  No more than one curb cut shall be permitted for each development, provided that developments with more than one street frontage may have two curb cuts. 
(4)  Driveways and curb cuts shall be limited to one-way entrances a width of 12 feet or two-way entrances a width of 24 feet. 
(5)  No circular drives shall be located between any building and any public street. 
( Ord. No. 005-014, § 1(Exh. A), 3-3-14 ) 
Sec. 10-14046. - Lighting, security, and maintenance requirements for surface parking lots. 
Lighting shall be provided at all points throughout all parking facilities to equal a minimum of one-half foot candle of light. A foot candle of light is a uniformly distributed flux of one lumen on a surface of one square foot in area. Illumination levels at any point across the parking lot must not be greater than 6.0 foot-candles in the horizontal plane, and must not exceed 0.5 vertical foot-candles. Where applicable, public street lighting may be utilized to either partially or totally fulfill the lighting requirements; however, where such street lighting is removed, it shall be the responsibility of the parking facility to independently provide these required levels of illumination. 
( Ord. No. 005-014, § 1(Exh. A), 3-3-14 ) 
Sec. 10-14047. - Minimum landscaping for surface parking lots, barrier requirements. 
(1)  All required landscaped areas shall be planted with evergreen groundcover or shrubs with a maximum height of 30 inches; and 
(2)  Landscaped buffer strips along sidewalks and public rights-of-way shall have a minimum of one tree with a minimum caliper of two and one-half inches. 
( Ord. No. 005-014, § 1(Exh. A), 3-3-14 ) 
Sec. 10-14048. - Off-street parking requirements. 
In addition to the provisions of Chapter 2, Article E, which shall apply, the following parking requirements shall apply to all uses. 
(1)  One parking lot landscape island shall be provided for every ten parking spaces on site. Said landscape area shall be a minimum of ten feet in width and extend the length of the parking space. Such islands may be combined to form larger islands or public open spaces. 
(2)  A landscape island, minimum ten feet in width and extending the length of the parking field shall be provided for every fifth row of parking. 
(3)  Off-street surface parking. 
a.  Shall not be located between the building and the street without an intervening building. 
(4)  Shared parking is encouraged according to the following provisions: 
a.  The applicant has established a valid shared parking arrangement. Said shared parking spaces shall be clearly marked and signed as reserved during specified hours. An applicant shall submit the following information establishing conformance to the above criteria in order to share or transfer parking requirements and avoid conflicting parking demands: 
i.  A to-scale map indicating location of all proposed parking spaces; 
ii.  Indicate hours of business operation(s); 
iii.  Written consent of all property owners agreeing to the shared or off-site parking arrangement; 
iv.  Copies of parking leases for shared arrangements. Renewed leases shall be provided to the Department of Planning and Zoning. 
( Ord. No. 005-014, § 1(Exh. A), 3-3-14 ) 
Sec. 10-14049. - Specific regulations for storefront streets. 
(1)  Street-fronting buildings including parking decks shall meet the following sidewalk level requirements: 
a.  The length of façade without intervening fenestration or entryway shall not exceed 20 feet. 
b.  Fenestration shall be provided for a minimum of 65 percent of the length of the frontage: 
i.  Beginning at a point not more than three feet above the sidewalk, to a height no less than ten feet above the sidewalk. 
c.  Fenestration shall not utilize painted glass, reflective glass or other similarly treated opaque windows. Entrances may be counted towards fenestration requirements. 
(2)  Minimum building facade height: 24 feet along each facade visible from the public right-of-way. 
( Ord. No. 005-014, § 1(Exh. A), 3-3-14 ) 
Sec. 10-14050. - Variance. 
To apply for relief from any requirements in this article, the property owner, or his or her representatives, may file for a variance with the Planning and Zoning Commission. That variance shall be considered in conformance with the procedures and standards contained in the City Code Part 10, Planning and Zoning, Chapter 2, Article I, Appeals. 
( Ord. No. 005-014, § 1(Exh. A), 3-3-14 ) 
Sec. 10-14051. - Severability. 
In the event that any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this article shall be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall in no manner affect the sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases of this article, which shall remain in full force and effect, as if the section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase so declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional were not originally a part thereof. 
( Ord. No. 005-014, § 1(Exh. A), 3-3-14 ) 
Chapter 15 - CEMETERY PRESERVATION 

Sec. 10-15000. - Cemeteries. 
Sec. 10-15001. - Findings and intent 
The heritage and history of East Point is the legacy of its people who are now deceased. In their time, the pioneers of East Point played an integral part in making this city what it is today. Many of those who have passed on have been memorialized with resting places in cemeteries, graveyards, and burial grounds that have been abandoned, desecrated, neglected, unmarked, and are threatened by development. Such places are not a fitting tribute to East Point's honorable citizens of the past, and therefore, it is the desire of city council to provide for the preservation, protection, and maintenance of all such family and community cemeteries, graveyards, and burial grounds. 
Sec. 10-15002. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandoned cemetery means a cemetery that shows signs of neglect, including, without limitation, the unchecked growth of vegetation, repeated and unchecked acts of vandalism, or the disintegration of grave markers or boundaries and for which no person can be found who is legally responsible and financially capable of the upkeep of such cemetery. 
Archaeologist means any person who is: 
(a)  A member of or meets the criteria for membership in the Society of Professional Archaeologists and can demonstrate experience in the excavation and interpretation of human graves. 
Burial ground means an area dedicated to and used for interment of human remains. The fact that the area was used for burial purposes shall be evidence that it was set aside for burial purposes. 
Burial object means any item reasonably believed to have been intentionally placed with the human remains at the time of burial or interment or any memorial, tombstone, grave marker or shrine which may have been added subsequent to interment. Such term also means any marker (whether inscribed or not), coping, curbing, enclosure, fencing, pavement, shelter, wall, stoneware, pottery, or other grave object erected or deposited incident to or subsequent to interment. 
Caretaker means any person, business or organization that maintains and/or protects a gravesite, burial ground or cemetery. 
Cemetery means any land or structure in this state dedicated to and used or intended to be used for interment of human remains. It may be either a burial park, pioneer, primitive or church burial grounds for earth interments; or a mausoleum for vault or crypt interments or a combination of one or more thereof. 
County medical examiner means a person appointed by Fulton County pursuant to law as medical examiner. 
Descendant means a person or group of persons related to a deceased human by blood or adoption in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 19-1-1 et seq. as amended. 
Genealogist means a person who traces or studies the descent of persons or families and prepares a probative record of such descent. 
Human remains means the bodies of deceased human beings in any stage of decomposition, including cremated remains. 
Notification means to develop and implement a plan pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-72-6, et seq., as amended from time to time. 
Preserve and protect means to keep safe from destruction, peril, or other adversity and may include the placement of signs, markers, fencing, or other such appropriate features so as to identify the site as a cemetery or burial ground and so as to aid in the preservation and protection of such cemetery or burial ground. 
Sec. 10-15003. - Exemption for identification of burial grounds. 
The following persons are exempt from the requirements of this division for the purposes of identification of burial grounds by probing, magnatrometer, or such other processes recognized by the archaeological community: 
(a)  Archaeologists retained by the cemetery governing board, or family of decedents; 
(b)  Individuals retained by the cemetery owner(s) or governing organization to maintain the burial ground or cemetery; 
(c)  Individuals employed or retained by an entity licensed to provide burial services; or 
(d)  Individuals appointed, employed or retained by the family of a decedent to perform such work. 
Sec. 10-15004. - Notification of disturbed burial ground. 
(a)  Any person who knows or has reason to know that a human burial ground is being disturbed, destroyed, defaced, mutilated, removed, excavated, exposed or in which any activity is occurring without the permission of the City, cemetery owner or governing board, or family of a decedent whose remains are interred at the burial ground shall immediately notify the local law enforcement agency with jurisdiction in the area where the burial ground is located. 
(b)  Any law enforcement agency, City department, company, contractor, business, individual or other source that finds evidence or receives a report that a burial ground has been located or disturbed shall notify the Fulton County medical examiner and the Department of Planning and Zoning. 
(c)  When human remains are discovered, all land disturbing or tree removal activities that may affect the burial ground shall immediately cease and the discovering party shall notify the local law enforcement agency of the discovery. The Fulton County medical examiner and local law enforcement shall determine whether or not the grave is part of a cemetery. If it is determined that the grave is part of a cemetery, then the applicant is required to retain an archeologist to undertake efforts to identify and preserve the burial ground. If it is determined that it is not a cemetery site, then the local law enforcement agency, in conjunction with the medical examiner, shall be responsible for determining the proper disposition of the remains. No land disturbing or tree removal activity shall resume without express written approval from the Department of Planning and Zoning. 
Sec. 10-15005. - Cemetery buffer. 
Once the approximate boundaries of a burial ground a determined based upon the applicants archaeologist's report, there shall be established a protective buffer surrounding the defined burial ground of a minimum of 35 feet. In addition, the property owner shall erect a fence along the boundary of the defined burial ground in compliance with the provisions of section 10-2044. Any appeal of this determination shall be heard by the City Council. No land disturbing or tree removal activity shall resume without the party seeking an application for a land disturbance permit or tree removal permit. 
Sec. 10-15006. - Access to burial grounds. 
It shall be prohibited for any person or entity to deny reasonable access during daylight hours to a cemetery or burial ground to a family member of a decedent, members of an organization responsible for the protection and maintenance of the burial ground, or a caretaker retained by the family, property owner or organization to preserve and/or maintain the burial ground or cemetery. 
Sec. 10-15007. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)  It shall be a violation of this division to willfully disturb, destroy, deface, mutilate, remove, excavate or expose a burial place without first obtaining a permit pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-72-1, et seq., or as it may be amended from time to time. 
(b)  It shall be a violation of this division to fail to report the discovery of human remains or to notify the local authority of the disturbance of a burial ground. 
(c)  It shall be a violation of this division should any person or entity seeking a permit to disturb a burial place pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-72-1, et seq., as may be amended from time to time, and to not comply the provisions of this division. 
(d)  It shall be a violation of this division for any person or entity to fail to comply with the provisions of an approved permit. 
(e)  It shall be a violation of this division for any person or entity to conduct any activity, which is defined as an illegal activity or a crime under Georgia law or East Point Ordinance in a cemetery or burial ground. 
Sec. 10-15008. - Permit application and additional requirements. 
Any person or entity seeking a permit pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-72-4 shall comply with the provisions of that statute and the following: 
(a)  An application shall be filed with the Department of Planning and Zoning in a form to be approved by that department, but at a minimum shall include the following information: 
(1)  Evidence of ownership of the land on which the cemetery or burial ground is located in the form of a legal opinion based upon a title search. 
(2)  A report prepared by an archaeologist stating the number of graves believed to be present and their locations such as can be determined from the use of minimally invasive investigation techniques, including remote sensing methods and the use of metal probes, which activities shall not require a permit. 
(3)  A survey prepared by or under the direction of a registered surveyor showing the location and boundaries of the cemetery or burial ground based on an archaeologist's report. 
(4)  A plan prepared by a genealogist for identifying and notifying the descendants of those buried or believed to be buried in such cemetery. 
(5)  A proposal for mitigation or avoidance of the effects of the planned activity on the cemetery or burial ground. The proposal shall include, at a minimum, the following: 
a.  A 35-foot natural undisturbed buffer with a ten-foot improvement setback shall be provided around the perimeter of the outermost burial sites, as determined by an archeologist; 
b.  A temporary tree protection fence shall be installed outside the perimeter of the undisturbed buffer before any land disturbing occurs and shall remain in place until all construction is completed; 
c.  A permanent fence, four feet in height, shall be constructed along the outer perimeter of the cemetery, and the fence shall not be constructed of chain link or vinyl-clad materials. 
d.  The gate to the fence shall have a latch, and be ten feet wide; 
e.  A plaque or marker with the name of the cemetery and other historical information may be placed on the fence surrounding the burial ground; 
f.  Unrestricted daylight access shall be provided to the burial ground by a 20-foot graveled easement to the site from the nearest public road, and said easement shall be recorded with the Superior Court of Fulton County; 
g.  A maintenance plan for a burial ground, fencing and driveway shall be developed and implemented for sites located on property in which a land disturbance permit is sought; and 
h.  The location of the burial ground, as identified by the surveyor, shall be included on the recorded plat. 
(6)  If the proposal includes relocation of any human remains or burial objects, the proposal shall specify: 
a.  The method of disinterment; 
b.  The location and method of disposition of the remains; 
c.  The approximate cost of the process; and 
d.  The approximate number of graves affected. 
(b)  The application shall be submitted to the Department of Planning and Zoning for review and recommendations. 
(c)  The applicant shall be required to post the nearest public road and the burial ground not less than 30 days prior to any public hearing to be conducted by the City Council. 
(d)  The applicant shall pay for all costs incurred related to filing the application, including, but not limited to, obtaining archaeologist's reports and surveys and genealogist's plans and reports; preparing any and all plans and, upon City approval and obtaining any and all necessary permits, executing the approved plan. 
(e)  The City Council shall conduct a public hearing on the application within 60 days of the filing of the application. The City Council shall be charged with making decisions regarding the sufficiency of the application submitted as to the following: 
(1)  Notice to descendants; 
(2)  The plan for mitigation and avoidance; 
(3)  The disturbance and adverse effects on the burial ground; 
(4)  The survey of the cemetery; 
(5)  Any plans for disinterment and re-interment; and 
(6)  Thereafter, the City Council shall make a written recommendation within 15 days to the city council or Fulton County Superior Court if the matter is then pending before the court. 
(f)  Within 15 days after the City Council is satisfied that all reasonable effort has been made to notify descendants, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 36-72-6, the City Council shall schedule a second public hearing at which any interested party or citizen may appear and be given an opportunity to be heard. In addition to the notice required by O.C.G.A. § 36-72-6, notice of the public hearing shall be advertised in the legal organ of the City two weeks immediately preceding the week in which the hearing is held. 
(g)  Within 30 days after the conclusion of the public hearing, the City Council shall notify the applicant in writing of its decision. The city council shall have the authority to deny the application, with written reasons, to issue a permit adopting the application in whole or in part, or to issue a permit, which may include additional requirements to mitigate the proposed activity's adverse effects on the cemetery or burial ground, including, but not limited to, relocation of the proposed project, reservation of the cemetery or burial ground as an undeveloped area within the proposed development or use of land, and respectful disinterment and proper disposition of the human remains. 
(h)  The city council shall consider the following in making its determination: 
(1)  The presumption in favor of leaving the cemetery or burial ground undisturbed; 
(2)  The concerns and comments of any descendants of those buried in the burial ground or cemetery and any other interested parties; 
(3)  The economic and other costs of mitigation; 
(4)  The adequacy of the applicant's plans for disinterment and proper disposition of any human remains or burial objects; 
(5)  The balancing of the applicant's interest in disinterment with the public's and any descendant's interest in the value of the undisturbed cultural and natural environment; 
(6)  Any other compelling factors which the governing authority deems relevant; 
(7)  Should any applicant or descendant be dissatisfied with a decision of the City Council, he or she may file an appeal, within 30 days of such decision, in Fulton County Superior Court. Until the expiration of time for appeal as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 36-72-11, the applicant shall not begin to resume activities that comply with the permit issued by the City Council. If an appeal is filed, the applicant may begin or resume activities that comply with the permit only upon consent of the City Council and the party seeking judicial review or upon order of the reviewing court for good cause shown. 
(i)  The city archaeologist, if there is one, shall be the party responsible for inspecting and determining whether the provisions of the permit have been properly completed. If there is no city archaeologist, the applicant shall have that responsibility. 
Sec. 10-15009. - Fees. 
The fee for filing an application for a permit under this division shall be established by the City Council pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-72-10, as may be amended from time to time. 
Sec. 10-15010. - Violations and penalties; abatement of nuisance. 
(a)  Any violation of the provisions of this division by any person is hereby deemed to be a misdemeanor punishable as provided in section 1-1006. The City zoning officials, code enforcement personnel, or law enforcement officers are hereby authorized and directed, upon discovery of any violation of any provision of this division, to issue a citation for the violator to appear before the appropriate court on a day and time certain to answer to the misdemeanor charges. 
(b)  In addition to any other remedy provided in this division, the City may seek injunctive relief to cease and remove any violations of this division in the appropriate court against the appropriate person or entity. 
(c)  Any violation of this division is hereby deemed to be a continuing nuisance and may be abated by an application for injunction or other proceedings allowed by law in the appropriate court. 
ZONING CODE AND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS - COMPARATIVE TABLE 
This table gives the location within Part 10 of the City of East Point Code of Ordinances, Zoning Code and Development Regulations, of those ordinances amending this part subsequent to Ord. No. 003-09, adopted March 2, 2009. 

 