CODE OF THE CITY OF NORCROSS, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published in 2009 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 
Adopted April 13, 2009 
____________ 

> 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
NORCROSS, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Craig Newton 
Mayor 
____________ 
Andrew Hixson, Mayor Pro Tem 
David McLeroy 
Josh Bare 
Chuck Paul 
Dan Watch 
City Council 
____________ 
Rudolph Smith 
City Manager 
____________ 
J. Patrick O'Brien 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Monique Lang 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Norcross. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1998 Code, as updated through Ordinance No. 26-2008, adopted November 3, 2008. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1998 Code, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 

 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Jim Jenkins, Code Attorney, and K. Barrington, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Ms. Susan Wuerzner, City Clerk, for her cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that her efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the City of Norcross, Georgia, readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Norcross, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Norcross, Georgia. 
© Copyrighted material.  Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Norcross, Georgia. 2009. 
ORDINANCE NO. 05-2009 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF NORCROSS, GEORGIA; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL: 
Section 1. The Code entitled "The Code of the City of Norcross, Georgia," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 115, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before November 3, 2008, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 and imprisonment in the county jail and work and labor on the streets or public works of the city, whether within or without the corporate limits, not exceeding 180 days or both a fine and sentence of imprisonment and labor and all sentences may be in the alternative and fines may be imposed with the alternative of sentence to imprisonment and labor if the fines are not paid. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall continue or occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the City may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the City to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after November 3, 2008, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective ________. 
Passed and adopted by the City Council this ________ day of ________, ___. 

ATTEST: 

1st Reading: 
2nd Reading: 
Board Action 
Certificate of Adoption 
I hereby certify that the foregoing is a true copy of the ordinance passed at the regular meeting of the City Council, held on the ________ day of ________, ___. 


SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code and are considered "Omitted." 
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

 
PART I - CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS 
Subpart A - CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the Charter of the city, as adopted by 1990 Ga. Laws, page 4934. Amendments to the Charter are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

ARTICLE I. - INCORPORATION AND POWERS 

Sec. 1.11. - Incorporation. 
The City of Norcross, Georgia, in the County of Gwinnett and the inhabitants thereof shall continue to be a body politic and corporate under the name and style of the City of Norcross, Georgia. Under that name, said City shall continue to be invested with all the property which now belongs to the corporation; shall have perpetual succession; may sue and be sued; may contract and be contracted with; may acquire and hold such property, real and personal, as may be devised, bequeathed, sold, or in any manner conveyed or dedicated to or otherwise acquired by it, and from time to time may hold or invest, sell or dispose of the same; may have a common seal and alter and renew the same at will; and may exercise in conformity with this Charter all municipal powers, functions, rights, privileges and immunities of every name and nature whatsoever. 
Sec. 1.12. - Corporate boundaries. 
(a)  The boundaries of the City of Norcross shall be those existing on the effective date of the adoption of this Charter with such alterations as may be made from time to time by local law or in the manner provided by law. The current boundaries of the City of Norcross, at all times, shall be shown on a map, a written description, or any combination thereof, to be retained permanently in the office of the city clerk and to be designated, as the case may be: "Map (or Description) of the Corporate Limits of the City of Norcross, Georgia." Alterations in these boundaries shall be indicated by appropriate entries upon or additions to such map or description. Such entries or additions shall be made by and under the direction of the mayor and city council. Photographic, typed or other copies of such map or description certified by the city clerk shall be admitted as evidence in all courts and shall have the same force and effect as with the original map or description. 
(b)  The city council may provide for redrawing of any such map to reflect lawful changes in the corporate boundaries. A redrawn map shall supersede for all purposes the earlier map or maps which it is designated to replace. 
(c)  In addition to all other territory included within the corporate limits of said city, the corporate limits shall specifically include the following described right-of-way, all of which is located in Gwinnett County, Georgia: 
All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in Land Lots 212, 213, 226, 241, and 242 of the 6th District of Gwinnett County, Georgia, and being more particularly described as follows: 
The right-of-way of Beaver Ruin Road (State Route 378) beginning at Buford Highway (State Route 13) and continuing 1.732 miles to the intersection of Indian Trail Road exclusive of said intersection. Right-of-way width varies from 90 feet to 130 feet. 
All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in Land Lot 213 of the 6th District, Gwinnett County, Georgia, and being more particularly described as follows: 
To find the point of beginning, begin at the point located at the intersection of southwest right-of-way of Beaver Ruin Road (S.R. 378) with the West right-of-way of Indian Trail Road; run thence South 04 degrees 41 minutes 00 seconds East along the West right-of-way of Indian Trail Road, a distance of 152.00 feet to a point; run thence South 04 degrees 41 minutes 00 seconds East along the West right-of-way of Indian Trail Road, a distance of 26.69 feet to a point; continue thence along the west right-of-way of Indian Trail Road and following the curvature thereof, a distance of 36.35 feet to a point (said curve having a chord bearing South 05 degrees 52 minutes 09 seconds East and a chord distance of 36.35 feet); thence leaving the West right-of-way of Indian Trail Road, run South 79 degrees 43 minutes 31 seconds West, a distance of 190.76 feet to the point of beginning; from the point of beginning as thus established, run thence South 36 degrees 31 minutes 20 seconds West, a distance of 50.00 feet to a point; run thence North 53 degrees 28 minutes 40 seconds West, a distance of 112.00 feet to a point; run thence North 36 degrees 31 minutes 20 seconds East, a distance of 60.00 feet to a point; run thence South 53 degrees 28 minutes 40 seconds East, a distance of 112.00 feet to a point; run thence South 36 degrees 31 minutes 20 seconds West, a distance of 10.00 feet to the point of beginning; said tract being shown on Survey for Whisker's Tavern and The City of Norcross prepared by Q-B Engineering and Surveying, Inc., dated November 26, 1990. 
(d)  In addition to all other territory included within the corporate limits of said city, the corporate limits shall specifically include the following described right-of-way, all of which is located in Gwinnett County, Georgia: 
All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in Land Lots 271, 272, 273, and 274 of the 6th District of Gwinnett County, Georgia, and being more particularly described as follows: 
The right-of-way of Peachtree Industrial Boulevard beginning at a point 787 feet east of the intersection with Holcomb Bridge Road, said point coinciding with the east boundary of tax parcel 6-274-5, and continuing 1.43 miles through and including the intersection of said boulevard and Medlock Bridge Road. Such right-of-way varies from 200 feet to 300 feet in width. 
(e)  In addition to all other territory included within the corporate limits of said city, the corporate limits shall specifically include the following described property, all of which is located in Gwinnett County, Georgia: 
All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in Land Lots 286 and 271 of the 6th District of Gwinnett County, Georgia, and being more particularly described as follows: 
Beginning at the northwest corner of the intersection of Peachtree Industrial Boulevard and Medlock Bridge Road, said point being located in the City of Norcross, Georgia, and continuing along the westerly right-of-way of Medlock Bridge Road to the southwest corner of the intersection of Medlock Bridge Road and Spalding Drive, then continuing along the westerly right-of-way of Spalding Drive to the land lot line dividing Land Lots 285 and 286 of the 6th District, Gwinnett County, Georgia, and continuing southerly along the land lot line through the point at which the land lot line divides Land Lots 271 and 272 of the 6th District of Gwinnett County, Georgia, and continuing along the land lot line dividing Land Lots 271 and 272 to the right-of-way of Peachtree Industrial Boulevard then continuing northeasterly along the right-of-way of Peachtree Industrial Boulevard to the point of beginning at the intersection of Peachtree Industrial Boulevard and Medlock Bridge Road, less and excepting and excluding specifically Parcel 52 of Land Lot 285 of the 6th District and Parcel 95 of Land Lot 286 of the 6th District. 
(f)  In addition to all other territory included within the corporate limits of said city, the corporate limits shall specifically include the following described property, all of which is located in Gwinnett County, Georgia: 
All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in Land Lots 286 and 271 of the 6th District of Gwinnett County, Georgia, and being more particularly described as follows: 
Beginning at the northwest corner of the intersection of Peachtree Industrial Boulevard and Medlock Bridge Road - said point being located in the City of Norcross, Georgia - and continuing along the westerly right-of-way of Medlock Bridge Road to the southwest corner of the intersection of Medlock Bridge Road and Spalding Drive, then continuing along the westerly right-of-way of Spalding Drive to the Land Lots Line dividing Land Lots 285 and 286 of the 6th District, Gwinnett County Georgia and continuing southerly along the Land Lots line through the point in which the Land Lots line divides Land Lots 271 and 272 of the 6th District, Gwinnett County, and continuing the Land Lot Line dividing Land Lots 271 and 272 to the right-of-way of Peachtree Industrial Boulevard then continuing northeasterly along the right-of-way of Peachtree Industrial Boulevard to the point of beginning at the intersection of Peachtree Industrial Boulevard and Medlock Bridge Road - less and excepting and excluding specifically Parcel 52, Land Lot 285 of the 6th District and Parcel 95, Land Lot 286 of the 6th District. 
(g)  In addition to all other territory included within the corporate limits of said city, the corporate limits shall specifically include the following described property, all of which is located in Gwinnett County, Georgia: 
All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in land lots 252, 253, 274 and 275 of the 6th Land District of Gwinnett County, Georgia, which tract is more particularly described as follows: 
Beginning at a point located at the intersection of the westerly right-of-way line of Holcomb Bridge Road and the southerly right-of-way line of Atlantic Boulevard, said point being the point of beginning; Thence continuing along said westerly right-of-way line of Holcomb Bridge Road to the southerly right-of-way line of Peachtree Industrial Boulevard; Thence leaving said westerly right-of-way line of Holcomb Bridge Road and running along said southerly right-of-way line of Peachtree Industrial Boulevard to the easterly right-of-way line of Jimmy Carter Boulevard; Thence leaving said southerly right-of-way line of Peachtree Industrial Boulevard and running along said easterly right-of-way line of Jimmy Carter Boulevard to the easterly right-of-way line of Pacific Drive, said right-of-way line also being the Norcross, Georgia City Limits; Thence leaving said easterly right-of-way line of Jimmy Carter Boulevard and running along Norcross, Georgia City Limits in a meandering direction northerly and easterly to the southerly right-of-way line of Atlantic Boulevard; Thence continuing along said Norcross, Georgia City Limits and the southerly right-of-way line of Atlantic Boulevard to the westerly right-of-way line of Holcomb Bridge Road, said intersection being the point of beginning. 
(h)  In addition to all other territory included within the corporate limits of said city, the corporate limits shall specifically include the following described property, all of which is located in Gwinnett County, Georgia: 
All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in Land Lot 271 of the 6th District of Gwinnett County, Georgia. The subject parcel being annexed is described in Deed Book 24173 and Pages 0238 and 0239 from the Gwinnett County Clerk of the Superior Court. 
(i)  In addition to all other territory included within the corporate limits of said city, the corporate limits shall specifically include the following described property, all of which is located in Gwinnett County, Georgia: 
All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in Land Lot 272 of the 6th District, Gwinnett County, Georgia, and being more fully described as follows: 
Beginning at a pipe found at the Land Lot corner common to Land Lots 272, 273, 284 and 285 of aforesaid District and County thence North 82 degrees 16 minutes 17 seconds East a distance of 302.29 feet to an iron pin set on the right-of-way of a cul-de-sac of Guthridge Court, an 80-foot right-of-way; thence along said right-of-way along a curve to the left (said curve having a radius of 75.00 feet and being subtended by a chord bearing South 41 degrees 12 minutes 34 seconds East a distance of 82.75 feet) an arc distance of 87.65 feet to an iron pin set on the westerly right-of-way of said 80-foot right-of-way of Guthridge Court; thence continuing along said 80-foot right-of-way along a curve to the right (said curve having a radius of 676.20 feet and being subtended by a chord bearing South 06 degrees 10 minutes 07 seconds West a distance of 472.30 feet) an arc distance of 482.47 feet to a pipe found at the intersection of said right-of-way with the northerly right-of-way of Miller Road, an 80-foot right-of-way, and the Land Lot line common to Land Lots 272 and 273; thence departing said rights-of-way and along said Land Lot line North 31 degrees 41 minutes 45 seconds West a distance of 522.27 feet to a pipe found being the point of beginning. 
(j)  In addition to all other territory included within the corporate limits of said city, the corporate limits shall specifically include the following described property, all of which is located in Gwinnett County, Georgia: 
All that tract and parcel of land lying and being in Land Lot 286 of the 6th District of Gwinnett County, Georgia, containing 6.55 acres and being more particularly descried according to a plat of survey of Higginbotham and James Associates, Surveyors, dated December 11, 1964, as follows: 
Beginning at an iron pin on the southeast right-of-way of Medlock Bridge Road, also known as Georgia Highway No. 141, located a distance of 50 feet in a northeast direction along the southeast right-of-way of Medlock Bridge Road from the iron pin where the Land Lot Line common to Land Lots 286 and 271 of said District intersect the southeast right-of-way of Medlock Bridge Road; thence run in a northeasterly direction along the southeast right-of-way of Medlock Bridge Road a distance of 510.0 feet to an iron pin; thence run along the property of Evans North 79°43' east 864.7 feet to an iron pin; thence run along the property of Evans and along the center of a Branch south 19°18' east 130 feet to an iron pin located on the Land Lot Line common to Land Lots 271 and 
286 of said District; thence run along said Land Lot Line south 59°47' west 459 feet to an iron pin; thence run along the property of Thomas Helton south 63°03' west 668.7 feet to the point of beginning on the southeast right-of-way of Medlock Bridge Road. 
(k)  In addition to all other territory included within the corporate limits of said city, the corporate limits shall specifically include the following described property, all of which is located in Gwinnett County, Georgia: 
All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in land lot 233 of the 6th district, Gwinnett County, Georgia, and being more particularly descried as follows: 
To find the true point of beginning, commence at a point located at the intersection of Jimmy Carter Blvd. (said road having a 100-foot right-of-way) and Norcross Tucker Road (said road having an 80-foot right-of-way), said point being marked by an iron pin found located at the southwestern point of the intersection of the eastern right-of-way line of Jimmy Carter Blvd. and the western right-of-way line of Norcross Tucker Road; running thence along an arc of a curve to the left (said curve having a radius of 989.86 feet, said arc being subtended by a cord line having a magnetic bearing of north 49 degrees 26 minutes 48 seconds west and a cord length of 150.19 feet) an arc distance of 150.22 feet to an X marked in concrete; running thence north 51 degrees 39 minutes 16 seconds west a distance of 232.39 feet to a point; running thence north 88 degrees 46 minutes 4 seconds east a distance of 106.8 feet to the true point of beginning; from the true point of beginning as thus established, running thence north 9 degrees 59 minutes 16 seconds east a distance of 16.04 feet to a point; running thence north 72 degrees 20 minutes 29 seconds east a distance of 68.11 feet to a point; running thence south 51 degrees 23 minutes 3 seconds east a distance of 59.91 feet to a point; running thence south 38 degrees 36 minutes 57 seconds west a distance of 6.10 feet; running thence south 51 degrees 23 minutes 3 seconds east a distance of 4.30 feet to a point; running thence south 38 degrees 15 minutes 27 seconds west a distance of 58.07 feet to a point; running thence north 51 degrees 44 minutes 33 seconds west a distance of 37.04 feet to a point; running thence 82 degrees 2 minutes 9 seconds west a distance of 8.31 feet to a point; running thence north 51 degrees 42 minutes 42 seconds west a distance of 51.96 feet to the true point of beginning. Said property being shown as a one story frame and stucco building lying at the northwestern corner of a strip shopping center as on a survey for the Ritter Corporation dated October 12, 1988, prepared by the Solar Land Surveying Company, which plat is incorporated herein and made a part hereof by this reference. 
(l)  In addition to all other territory included within the corporate limits of said city, the corporate limits shall specifically include the following described property, all of which is located in Gwinnett County, Georgia: 
All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in Land Lot 272 of the 6th District of Gwinnett County, Georgia, and being more particularly described as follows: 
Beginning at a point on the Southerly side of Cummings Road, also called Miller Road, three hundred twenty-nine (329) feet Westerly from the intersection formed by the Southerly side of Cummings Road (also called Miller Road) and the Westerly side of Highway No. 141 (100-foot right-of-way) running thence Northwesterly along the Southerly side of Cummings Road 1,266 feet, more or less, to an iron pin found; running thence S 31°51' E a distance of 914.76 feet, more or less, to an iron pin on the Northwesterly line of Land Lot 255; running thence Northeasterly along the Northwesterly line of Land Lot 255 a distance of 911 feet, more or less, to an iron pin; running thence Northwesterly 105 feet, more or less, to the Southerly side of Cummings Road and the point of beginning; being the same property as shown and delineated on plat of survey made by A.S. Giometti and Associates, Inc., dated Feb. 6, 1963. 
(m)  In addition to all other territory included within the corporate limits of said city, the corporate limits shall specifically include the following described property, all of which is located in Gwinnett County, Georgia: 
Tract 12 
All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in Land Lots 271 and 272 of the 6th District, Gwinnett County, Georgia, and being more particularly descried as follows: 
Beginning at a right-of-way monument located at the intersection of the Westerly right-of-way line of Medlock Bridge Road and the Southerly right-of-way of Peachtree Industrial Boulevard; thence running South 82°31'35" East 112.04 feet to a right-of-way monument located on the Westerly right-of-way line of Medlock Bridge Road; thence running Southerly along the Westerly right-of-way line of Medlock Bridge Road, and following the curvature thereof, 2,435.09 feet, more or less, to a point of intersection of the Westerly right-of-way line of Medlock Bridge Road and the Northerly right-of-way line of Miller Road; thence running Northeasterly along the Northerly right-of-way line of Miller Road, and following the curvature thereof, 3,453.25 feet, more or less, to a concrete monument located at the intersection of the Southerly right-of-way line of Peachtree Industrial Boulevard and the Northerly right-of-way line of Miller Road; thence running Northeasterly along the Southerly right-of-way Line of Peachtree Industrial Boulevard, and following the curvature thereof, 3,463.53 feet, more or less to the point of beginning; plus that portion of the right-of-way of Miller Road running from Peachtree Industrial Boulevard to Medlock Bridge Road; less and except those premises located at 5390 Peachtree Industrial Boulevard, Norcross, Georgia, according to the present system of numbering in Gwinnett County, Georgia. 
(n)  In addition to all other territory included within the corporate limits of said city, the corporate limits shall specifically include the following described property, all of which is located in Gwinnett County, Georgia: 
All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in Land Lots 241 nd 242 of the 6th District of Gwinnett County, Georgia, containing .87 acres accordin to plat of survey by Miles H. Hannon, Surveyor, dated April 17, 1967, more particularly described as follows: 
Beginning at an iron pin on the westerly side of Light Circle at the original line dividing Land Lots 241 and 242 of said District: thence running south 20° 24′ west, along the western side of Light CIrcle, 101.5 feet to a corner; thence north 64° 05′ west 246.2 feet to an iron pin corner; thence north 44° 17′ east 222.7 feet to an iron pin corner; thence south 43° 24′ east 172.6 feet to a corner on the westerly side of the right-of-way of Light Circle, 49.5 feet to the point of beginning. 
(o)  In addition to all other territory included within the corporate limits of said city, the corporate limits shall specifically include the following described property, all of which is located in Gwinnett County, Georgia: 
All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in Land Lot 198, 6th District, Gwinnett County, Georgia, being more particularly described as follows: 
Beginning at an iron pin set at the intersection of the southerly right-of-way line of Goshen Springs Road (having an 80-foot wide right-of-way) and the line common to Land Lots 197 and 198; Thence leaving said Land Lot Line and continuing along said southerly right-of-way line of Goshen Springs Road, North 58°27'07" East, 268,34 feet to a ½-inch rebar found; Thence leaving said southerly right-of-way line of Goshen Springs Road and running, South 39°45'08" East, 728.27 feet to a ½-inch rebar found; Thence,· South 27°31'28" West, 54.99 feet to a point in the centerline of a creek; Thence along said centerline of a creek, South 46°14'05" West, 40.70 feet to a point; Thence, South 57°41'11" West, 45.83 feet to a point; Thence, South 47°25'46" West, 86.32 feet to a point; Thence, South 43°31'51" West, 74.91 feet to a point; Thence, South 39°42'17" West, 63.24 feet to a point; Thence, South 28°24'33" West, 44.87 feet to a point; Thence leaving said centerline of a creek and running, South 07°12'21" West, 20.22 feet to a ½-inch rebar found on said line common to Land Lots 197 and 198; Thence along said Land Lot Line, North 29°36'00" West, 853.15 feet to an iron pin set and the true POINT OF BEGINNING. 
Said tract contains 6.019 acres (262,206 square feet), more or less, as shown in a survey prepared for Advanced Disposal Services Atlanta, LLC by POINT TO POINT LAND SURVEYORS, INC. 
(1996 Ga. Laws, page 3844, § 1; 2001 Ga. Laws (Act No. 61), page 3729, § 1; 2005 Ga. Laws (Act No. 268), page 3876, § 1; Ord. No. 12-2011, § 1 (Exh. A), 10-17-2011; Ord. No. 13-2011, § 1(Exh. A), 10-17-2011; Ord. No. 14-2011, § 1(Exh. A), 10-17-2011; Ord. No. 24-2011, § 1(App. A), 12-5-2011; Ord. No. 03-2012, § 1(App. C, Exh. A), 2-6-2012; Ord. No. 04-2012, § 1(App. A), 2-6-2012; Ord. No. 05-2012, § 1(App. A), 2-6-2012; Ord. No. 11-2012, § 1(App. A), 4-2-2012; Ord. No. 15-2018 , § 1, 10-1-2018) 
Editor's note— Subsection (f) of § 1.12 was derived from an unnumbered resolution attached to Act No. 61 at p. 3731. It has been placed in this location at the discretion of the editor and the approval of the city. 
Sec. 1.13. - Powers and construction. 
(a)  In addition to all other powers herein granted, the city shall be vested with any and all powers which municipal corporations are or may hereafter be authorized or required to exercise under the present or future constitution and laws of this state as fully and completely as though they were specifically enumerated in this Charter. This city shall have all the powers of self-government not otherwise prohibited by this Charter or by general law. 
(b)  The powers of this city shall be construed liberally in favor of the city. The specific mention or failure to mention particular powers in this Charter shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general power of the city. It is the intention hereof to grant the city full power and right to exercise all governmental authority necessary for the effective operation and conduct of the city and all of its affairs. 
(c)  In construing this Charter, the following definitions shall apply: 
(1)  "Appointed officer" where used in this Charter shall mean all administrative officers, including the city clerk, city treasurer, city attorney, city accountant and city engineer. Such term shall not include members of boards, commissions or authorities. 
(2)  "City council," where used herein, shall mean the elected officers of the City of Norcross which include the mayor and five councilmembers. The mayor shall vote on all matters in the event of a tie. 
(3)  "Department head," where used herein, shall be synonymous with department directors. 
(1996 Ga. Laws, page 3666, § 1; 1997 Ga. Laws, page 3517, § 1) 
Sec. 1.14. - Powers. 
The corporate powers of the government of the City of Norcross, to be exercised by the mayor and city council, shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Air and water pollution. To regulate the emission of smoke or other exhaust which pollutes the air and to prevent the pollution of natural streams which flow within the corporate limits of the city; 
(2)  Animal regulations. To regulate and license or to prohibit the keeping or running at large of animals and fowl and to provide for the impoundment of same if in violation of any ordinance or lawful order; to provide for the disposition by sale, gift or humane destruction of animals and fowl when not redeemed as provided by ordinance; and to provide punishment for violation of ordinances enacted hereunder; 
(3)  Appropriations and expenditures. To make appropriations for the support of the government of the city; to authorize the expenditure of money for any purposes authorized by this Charter and for any purpose for which a municipality is authorized by the laws of the State of Georgia; and to provide for the payment of expenses of this city; 
(4)  Building regulations. To regulate and to license the erection and construction of buildings and all other structures; to adopt building, housing, plumbing, electrical, gas, and heating and air conditioning codes; and to regulate all housing and building trades; 
(5)  Business regulation and taxation. To levy and to provide for the collection of license fees and taxes on privileges, trades and professions; to license and regulate the same; to provide for the manner and method of payment of such licenses and taxes; and to revoke such licenses after due process for the failure to pay any city taxes or fees; 
(6)  Condemnation. To condemn property, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city, for present or future use and for any corporate purpose deemed necessary by the governing authority, utilizing procedures enumerated in O.C.G.A. title 22, or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted; 
(7)  Contracts. To enter into contracts and agreements with other governmental entities and with private persons, firms and corporations; 
(8)  Emergencies. To establish procedures for determining and proclaiming that an emergency situation exists inside or outside the city and to make and carry out all reasonable provisions deemed necessary to deal with or meet such an emergency for the protection, safety, health or well-being of the citizens of the city; 
(9)  Fire regulations. To fix and establish fire limits and from time to time extend, enlarge or restrict the same; to prescribe fire safety regulations, not inconsistent with general law relating to both fire prevention and detection and to firefighting; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof; 
(10)  Garbage fees. To levy, fix, assess and collect a garbage, refuse and trash collection and disposal and other sanitary service charge, tax or fee for such services as may be necessary for the operation of the city from all individuals, firms and corporations residing in or doing business therein; to enforce the payment of such charges, taxes or fees; and to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges; 
(11)  General health, safety and welfare. To define, regulate and prohibit any act, practice, conduct or use of property which is detrimental to the health, sanitation, cleanliness, welfare and safety of the inhabitants of the city and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(12)  Gifts. To accept or refuse gifts, donations, bequests or grants from any source for any purpose related to the powers and duties of the city and the general welfare of its citizens on such terms and conditions as the donor or grantor may impose; 
(13)  Health and sanitation. To prescribe standards of health and sanitation within the city and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(14)  Jail sentences. To provide that persons given jail sentences in the city's court may work out such sentences in any public works or on the streets, roads, drains and squares in the city; to provide for the commitment of such persons to any jail; or to provide for the commitment of such persons to any county work camp or county jail by agreement with the appropriate county officials; 
(15)  Motor vehicles. To regulate the operation of motor vehicles and exercise control over all traffic, including parking, on or off the streets, roads, alleys and walkways of the city; 
(16)  Municipal agencies and delegation of power. To create, alter or abolish departments, boards, authorities, offices, commissions and agencies of the city and to confer upon such agencies the necessary and appropriate authority for carrying out all the powers conferred upon or delegated to the same; 
(17)  Municipal debts. To appropriate and borrow money for the payment of debts of the city and to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program or venture authorized by this Charter or the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(18)  Municipal property ownership. To acquire, dispose of, and hold in trust or otherwise any real, personal or mixed property, in fee simple or lesser interest, inside or outside the property limits of the city; 
(19)  Municipal property protection. To provide for the preservation and protection of property and equipment of the city and the administration and use of same by the public; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof; 
(20)  Municipal utilities. To acquire, lease, construct, operate, maintain, sell and dispose of public utilities, including, but not limited to, a system of waterworks, sewers, and drains, sewage disposal, gasworks, electric light plants, transportation facilities and any other public utility; and to fix the taxes, charges, rates, fares, fees, assessments, regulations and penalties; and to provide for the withdrawal of service for refusal to pay the same; and to authorize the extension of water, sewerage and electrical distribution systems, and all necessary appurtenances by which said utilities are distributed, inside and outside the corporate limits of the city; and to provide utility services to persons, firms and corporations inside and outside the corporate limits of the city as provided by ordinance; 
(20.1)  Telecommunications. The City shall have the power and authority to acquire, own, hold, lease, sell, resell, build, maintain, operate and contract with respect to a telecommunications systems network in order to provide telecommunications services and similar other services, including cable television services (CATV), to establish and charge rates, fees, tolls and charges for the services, facilities or commodities furnished or made available by such undertaking; to interconnect its system or services or both with the systems or services of consumers and other providers, to use telecommunications to respond to community needs, encourage the development of information-based organizations in the City of Norcross, Georgia, to finance from time to time any such telecommunications systems through the issuance of revenue bonds as then permitted by the Constitution and the laws of the State of Georgia; and to make any contract with respect to and furnish the services of any said systems to consumers within or outside the corporate limits of the City; 
(21)  Nuisances. To define a nuisance and provide for its abatement whether on public or private property; 
(22)  Ordinances, rules and regulations. To make, establish and adopt such bylaws, ordinances, policies, and rules and regulations as shall appear necessary for the security, welfare, convenience and interest of the city and the inhabitants thereof, and for preserving the health, peace, order and good government of the city; 
(23)  Penalties. To provide penalties for violation of any ordinances adopted pursuant to the authority of this Charter and the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(24)  Planning and zoning. To provide comprehensive city planning for development by zoning, including implementation of a land use plan and enforcement of the goals and objectives in the land use plan; and to provide subdivision regulation and the like as the city council deems necessary and reasonable to ensure a safe, healthy and aesthetically pleasing community; 
(25)  Police and fire protection. To exercise the power of arrest through duly appointed policemen and to establish, operate or contract for a police and a firefighting agency; 
(26)  Public hazards; removal. To provide for the destruction and removal of any building or other structure which is or may become dangerous or detrimental to the public; 
(27)  Public improvements. To provide for the acquisition, construction, building, operation and maintenance of public ways, parks, playgrounds, recreational facilities, cemeteries, markets and market houses, public buildings, libraries, public housing, hospitals, sewers, drains, sewerage treatment, docks, parking facilities, and charitable, cultural, educational, recreational, conservation, sport, curative, corrective, detentional, penal, and medical institutions, agencies and facilities; to provide any other public improvements inside or outside the corporate limits of the city; to regulate the use of public improvements; and, for such other purposes, property may be acquired by condemnation under O.C.G.A. title 22, or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted; 
(28)  Public peace. To provide for the prevention and punishment of drunkenness, riots and public disturbances; 
(29)  Public transportation. To organize and operate such public transportation systems as are deemed beneficial; 
(30)  Public utilities and services. To grant franchises or make contracts for public utilities and public services and to prescribe the rates, fares, regulations and the standards and conditions of service applicable to the service to be provided by the franchise grantee or contractor, insofar as not in conflict with valid regulations of the Public Service Commission; 
(31)  Regulation of roadside areas. To prohibit or regulate and control the erection, removal, and maintenance of signs, billboards, trees, shrubs, fences, buildings and any and all other structures or obstructions upon or adjacent to the rights-of-way of streets and roads or within view thereof, inside or abutting the corporate limits of the city and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violation of such ordinances; 
(32)  Retirement. To provide and maintain a retirement plan for employees of the city; 
(33)  Roadways. To lay out, open, extend, widen, narrow, establish or change the grade of, abandon or close, construct, pave, curb, gutter, adorn with shade trees, or otherwise improve, maintain, repair, clean, prevent erosion of, and light the roads, alleys and walkways within the corporate limits of the city; and to negotiate and execute leases over, through and under any city property or the right-of-way of any street, road, alley and walkway or portion thereof within the corporate limits of the city for bridges, passageways or any other purpose or use between buildings on opposite sides of the street and for other bridges, overpasses and underpasses for private use at such location and to charge a rental therefor in such manner as may be provided by ordinance; and to authorize and control the construction of bridges, overpasses and underpasses within the corporate limits of the city; and to grant franchises and rights-of-way throughout the streets and roads and over the bridges and viaducts for the use of public utilities and for private use; and to require real estate owners to repair and maintain in a safe condition the sidewalks adjoining their lots or lands and to impose penalties for failure to do so; 
(34)  Sewer fees. To levy a fee, charge or sewer tax as necessary to assure the acquiring, constructing, equipping, operating, maintaining and extending of a sewage disposal plant and sewerage system; to levy on those to whom sewers and sewerage systems are made available a sewer service fee, charge or sewer tax for the availability or use of the sewers; to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges and for enforcing payment of the same; and to charge, impose and collect a sewer connection fee or fees to those connected with the system; 
(35)  Solid waste disposal. To provide for the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish and refuse and to regulate the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish and refuse by others; and to provide for the separate collection of glass, tin, aluminum, cardboard, paper and other recyclable materials and provide for the sale of all solid waste; 
(36)  Special areas of public regulation. To regulate or prohibit junk dealers, pawn shops, the manufacture, sale or transportation of intoxicating liquors, and the use and sale of firearms; to regulate the transportation, storage and use of combustible, explosive and inflammable materials, the use of lighting and heating equipment, and any other business or situation which may be dangerous to persons or property; to regulate and control the conduct of peddlers and itinerant traders, theatrical performances, exhibitions and shows of any kind, by taxation or otherwise; and to license, tax, regulate or prohibit professional fortunetelling, palmistry, adult bookstores and massage parlors; 
(37)  Special assessments. To provide for the collection of special assessments to cover the cost of any public improvements; 
(38)  Taxes, ad valorem. To levy and provide for the assessment, valuation, revaluation and collection of taxes on all property subject to taxation; 
(39)  Taxes, other. To levy and collect such other taxes as may be allowed now or in the future by law; 
(40)  Taxicabs. To regulate and license vehicles operated for hire in the city; to limit the number of such vehicles; to require the operators thereof to be licensed; to require public liability insurance on such vehicles in the amounts to be prescribed by ordinance; and to regulate the parking of such vehicles; 
(41)  Urban redevelopment. To organize and operate an urban redevelopment program; and 
(42)  Other powers. To exercise and enjoy all other powers, functions, rights, privileges and immunities necessary or desirable to promote or protect the safety, health, peace, security, good order, comfort, convenience or general welfare of the city and its inhabitants; to exercise all implied powers necessary to carry into execution all powers granted in this Charter as fully and completely as if such powers were fully stated herein; and to exercise all powers now or in the future authorized to be exercised by other municipal governments under other laws of the State of Georgia; and no listing of particular powers in this Charter shall be held to be exclusive of others, nor restrictive of general words and phrases granting powers, but shall be held to be in addition to such powers unless expressly prohibited to municipalities under the constitution or applicable laws of the State of Georgia. 
(1996 Ga. Laws, page 3666, § 2; Ord. No. 2-2002, § 1, 2-4-2002) 
Sec. 1.15. - Exercise of powers. 
All powers, functions, rights, privileges and immunities of the city, its officers, agencies or employees shall be carried into execution as provided by this Charter. If this Charter makes no provision, such powers, functions, rights, privileges and immunities shall be carried into execution as provided by ordinance of the governing authority or as provided by pertinent laws of the State of Georgia. The full faith and credit of the City of Norcross shall be behind all elected officers, appointed officers, employees, members of boards, commissions and authorities, and the city shall indemnify them, to the extent allowed by law, for all costs and judgments suffered as a result of any and all actions taken pursuant to their official capacity as officials for the City of Norcross. 
ARTICLE II. - GOVERNING BODY 

Sec. 2.10. - City council creation; composition; number; election. 
The legislative authority of the government of the City of Norcross, Georgia, except as otherwise specifically provided in this Charter, shall be vested in a city council to be composed of a mayor and five (5) councilmembers. The mayor and councilmembers shall be elected in a manner provided by article V of this Charter. 
Sec. 2.11. - City council terms and qualifications of office. 
(a)  The three members of the city council who were elected to such offices in 1989 and any person selected to fill a vacancy in any such office shall serve out their terms of office which shall expire at the first organizational meeting held in January, 1994, and upon the election and qualification of their respective successors. Those successors shall be elected at the general municipal election in 1993, shall take office at the first organizational meeting held in January, 1994, and shall serve for an initial term of office which expires at the first organizational meeting held in January, 1997. The mayor and the two members of the city council who were elected to such offices in 1992 and any person selected to fill a vacancy in any such office shall serve out their terms of office which shall expire at the first organizational meeting held in January, 1996. On and after January 1, 1995, the successor to the mayor or any member of the council whose term of office is to expire shall be elected at the general municipal election immediately preceding the expiration of such term, shall take office at the first organizational meeting in January immediately following such election, and shall serve for a term of office of two years each. The mayor and members of the council shall serve for the terms of office specified in this section and until their respective successors are elected and qualified. 
(b)  No person shall be eligible to serve as mayor or councilmember unless he shall have been a resident of the city for a period of not less than one year immediately prior to the date of the election of mayor or member of the city council and shall continue to reside therein during such person's period of service, and shall be registered and qualified to vote in municipal elections of the City of Norcross, Georgia, and unless he shall meet the qualification standards required for members of the Georgia House of Representatives, as are now or may in the future be prescribed by the Georgia Constitution. 
(1996 Ga. Laws, page 3666, § 3) 
State Law reference— Qualifications of representatives, Ga. Const. art. 3, § 2, ¶ 3. 
Sec. 2.12. - Vacancy; filling of vacancies; suspensions. 
(a)  The office of mayor or councilmember shall become vacant upon the incumbent's death, resignation, forfeiture of office or removal from office in any manner authorized by this Charter or the general laws of the State of Georgia. A vacancy in the office of mayor or councilmember shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term, if any, as provided for in article V of this Charter. 
(b)  Upon the suspension from office of mayor or councilmember in any manner authorized by the general laws of the State of Georgia, the mayor and city council or those remaining shall appoint a successor for the duration of the suspension. If the suspension becomes permanent, then the office shall become vacant and shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term, if any, as provided for in article V of this Charter. 
Sec. 2.13. - Compensation and expenses. 
The mayor and councilmembers shall receive as compensation for their services an amount prescribed by ordinance passed by the city council in conformity with the laws of the State of Georgia. The mayor and councilmembers shall be entitled to receive their expenses incurred in the performance of their duties of office. 
Sec. 2.14. - Conflicts of interest; holding other offices. 
(a)  No elected officer, appointed officer, employee, or member of a board, commission or authority of the city or any agency or political entity to which this Charter applies shall knowingly: 
(1)  Engage in any business or transaction or have a financial or other personal interest, direct or indirect, which is incompatible with the proper discharge of his official duties or which would tend to impair the independence of this judgment or action in the performance of his official duties; 
(2)  Engage in or accept private employment or render services for private interests when such employment or service is incompatible with the proper discharge of his official duties or would tend to impair the independence of his judgment or action in the performance of his official duties; 
(3)  Disclose confidential information concerning the property, government or affairs of the governmental body by which he is engaged without proper legal authorization or use such information to advance the financial or other private interest of himself or others; 
(4)  Accept any valuable gift, whether in the form of service, loan, object or promise, from any person, firm or corporation which to his knowledge is interested, directly or indirectly, in any manner whatsoever in business dealings with the governmental body by which he is engaged; provided, however, that an elected official who is a candidate for public office may accept campaign contributions and services in connection with any such campaign; 
(5)  Represent other private interests in any action or proceeding against this city or any portion of its government; and 
(6)  Vote or otherwise participate in the negotiations or in the making of any contract with any business or entity in which he has a financial interest. 
(b)  Any elected officer, appointed officer, employee, or member of a board, commission or authority of the city who shall have any private financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any contract or matter pending before or within any department of the city shall disclose such private interest to the city council. The mayor or any councilmember who has a private interest in any matter pending before the city council shall disclose such private interest and such disclosure shall be entered on the records of the city council, and he shall disqualify himself from participating in any decision or vote relating thereto. Any elected officer, appointed officer or employee or any agency or political entity to which this Charter applies who shall have any private financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any contract or matter pending before or within such entity shall disclose such private interest to the governing body of such agency or entity. 
(c)  No elected officer, appointed officer, employee, or member of a board, commission or authority of the city or any agency or entity to which this Charter applies shall use property owned by such governmental entity for personal benefit, convenience or profit, except in accordance with policies promulgated by the city council or the governing body of such agency or entity. 
(d)  Any violation of this section which occurs with the knowledge, express or implied, of a party to a contract or sale shall render said contract or sale voidable at the option of the city council. 
(e)  Except as authorized by law, neither the mayor nor any councilmember shall hold any other elective or compensated appointed office in the city or otherwise be employed by said government or any agency thereof during the term for which he was elected. No former mayor and no former councilmember shall hold any employed position in the city until one (1) year after the expiration of the term for which he was elected. 
(f)  (1)  No department director, department head, employee, or member of any board, commission or authority of the City shall continue in such position or employment upon qualifying as a candidate for nomination or election to public office in the City of Norcross, or for the Gwinnett County Board of Commissioners. 
(2)  Department directors, department heads, employees, and members of any board, commission or authority of the City shall be and are permitted to continue in such position or employment upon qualifying as a candidate for nomination or election to any public office other than in the City of Norcross or for the Gwinnett County Board of Commissioners. 
(3)  Elected officials in the City of Norcross (i.e., the Mayor and Councilmembers) shall be permitted to continue the balance of their term for which they were elected after qualifying as a candidate for nomination or election to any other elective public office (including but not limited to a different elective office in the City of Norcross other than the present office held by such elected official), so long as the term of the elective office for which such official is qualifying begins more than 30 days prior to the expiration of such official's present term of office. 
(4)  The office of any elected official in the City of Norcross shall be declared vacant upon such elected official qualifying in a general primary or general election for another elective public office if the term of office term of office for which such official is qualifying begins more than 30 days prior to the expiration of such official's present term of office. 
(5)  The elected officials of the City of Norcross shall be ineligible to hold any other elected office during the term of office for which such Mayor or Councilmember was chosen unless he or she first resigns before entering such other office. The vacancy created in any such office shall be filled as provided by Georgia Law. 
(g)  (1)  Any elected officer, appointed officer, employee, or member of a board, commission or authority of the city who knowingly conceals such financial interest or knowingly violates any of the requirements of this section applicable to his respective office or position shall be guilty of malfeasance in office or position and shall be deemed to have forfeited his office or position. 
(2)  Any elected officer, appointed officer, employee, or member of a board, commission or authority of the city who shall forfeit his office or position as described in paragraph (1) of this subsection shall be ineligible for appointment or election to or employment in a position in the city government for a period of three (3) years thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 03-2017 , § II, 10-2-2017) 
Sec. 2.15. - Inquiries and investigations. 
The mayor and city council may make inquiries and investigations into the affairs of the city and the conduct of any department, office, or agency thereof and for this purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony and require the production of evidence. Any person who fails or refuses to obey a lawful order issued in the exercise of these powers by the mayor and city council shall be punished as provided by ordinance. 
Sec. 2.16. - General power and authority of the city council. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided by law or by this Charter, the city council shall be vested with all the powers of government of the City of Norcross, Georgia, as provided by article I of this Charter. 
(b)  In addition to all other powers conferred upon it by law, the city council shall have the authority to adopt and provide for the execution of such ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations, not inconsistent with this Charter, the constitution and the laws of the State of Georgia, which it shall deem necessary, expedient, or helpful for the peace, good order, protection of life and property, health, welfare, sanitation, comfort, convenience, or well-being of the inhabitants of the City of Norcross, Georgia, and may enforce such ordinances by imposing penalties for violation thereof. 
(c)  The council may by ordinance create, change, alter, abolish or consolidate offices, agencies and departments of the city and may assign additional functions to any of the offices, agencies and departments expressly provided for by this Charter. 
Sec. 2.17. - Eminent domain. 
The city council is empowered to acquire, construct, build, operate and maintain public ways, parks, public grounds, cemeteries, markets, market houses, public buildings, libraries, sewers, drains, sewerage treatment, waterworks, electrical systems and charitable, education, recreational and sport institutions, agencies and facilities and any other public improvement inside or outside the city, and to regulate the use thereof, and for such purposes, property may be condemned utilizing procedures enumerated in O.C.G.A. title 22, subject to such amendments as shall be enacted, or any other applicable Georgia law. 
Sec. 2.18. - Organizational meeting. 
The city council shall hold an organizational meeting on or before the second Monday in January. The meeting shall be called to order by the city clerk and the oath of the office shall be administered to the newly elected members as follows: 
"I do solemnly (swear) (affirm) that I will faithfully perform the duties of (mayor) (councilmember) of the City of Norcross, Georgia, and that I will support and defend the Charter thereof as well as the constitution and laws of the State of Georgia and of the United States of America." 
Following the induction of members, one (1) councilmember shall be appointed to serve as mayor pro tempore pursuant to the procedures set forth in section 2.27 of this Charter. 
Sec. 2.19. - Regular and special meetings. 
(a)  The city council shall hold regular meetings at such times and places as prescribed by ordinance. The city council may recess any regular meeting and continue such meeting on any weekday or hour it may fix and may transact any business at such continued meeting as may be transacted at any regular meeting. Notice to the public shall be made in the manner required by law. 
(b)  Special meetings of the city council may be held on call of the mayor or three (3) members of the city council. Notice of such special meetings shall be served on all other members personally, or by telephone personally, or shall be left at their residences at least 24 hours in advance of the meeting. Such notice to councilmembers shall not be required if the mayor and all councilmembers are present when the special meeting is called. Such notice of any special meeting may be waived by a councilmember in writing before or after such a meeting and attendance at the meeting shall also constitute a waiver of notice on any business transacted in such councilmember's presence. Only the business stated in the call may be transacted at the special meeting. Any matter which requires action by the city council in less than 24 hours will be governed by the emergency provisions set forth in section 2.24 of this Charter. 
(c)  All meetings of the city council shall be public to the extent required by law. The city council may hold executive sessions privately before or after public meetings, but the ayes and nays of any balloting shall be recorded at the conclusion of such executive sessions. Notice to the public of special meetings shall be made as fully as is reasonably possible at least one day prior to such meeting. 
Sec. 2.20. - Rules of procedure. 
(a)  Unless otherwise provided by ordinance, rules of procedure for meetings of the city council shall follow Robert's Rules of Order. The city council shall provide for keeping a journal of its proceedings which shall be a public record. 
(b)  All committees and committee chairpersons of the city council shall be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the city council and shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor and city council. Following the procedures described in this Charter, the mayor and city council shall have the power to appoint a new member to any committee at any time. 
(1996 Ga. Laws, page 3666, § 4; 1997 Ga. Laws, page 3517, § 2) 
Editor's note— The rules of procedure for City Council meetings currently follows Rosenburg's Rules, as provided by Ordinance No. 25-2008, adopted by the Mayor and Council on November 3, 2008, and Ordinance No. 15-2008, adopted by the Mayor and Council on May 5, 2008. 
Sec. 2.21. - Quorum; voting. 
The mayor (or mayor pro tempore when presiding) and three (3) councilmembers shall constitute a quorum and shall be authorized to transact the business of the city council. Voting on the adoption of ordinances shall be by voice vote and the vote shall be recorded in the journal, but any member shall have the right to request a roll-call vote and such vote shall be recorded in the journal. Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, when a quorum is present, the affirmative vote of a majority of those present shall be required for the adoption of any ordinance, resolution or motion. 
Sec. 2.22. - Action requiring an ordinance. 
Acts of the city council which have the force and effect of law shall be enacted by ordinance. 
Sec. 2.23. - Ordinance form; procedure. 
(a)  Every proposed ordinance shall be introduced in writing and in the form required for final adoption. No ordinance shall contain a subject which is not expressed in its title. The enacting clause shall be "The Council of the City of Norcross, Georgia, hereby ordains…" and every ordinance shall so begin. 
(b)  An ordinance may be introduced by the mayor or any member of the city council and read at a regular or special meeting of the city council. Ordinances shall be considered and adopted or rejected by the city council in accordance with the rules which it shall establish. Upon introduction of any ordinance, the clerk shall distribute a copy to the mayor and to each councilmember and shall file a reasonable number of copies in the office of the clerk and at such other public places as the city council may designate. 
Sec. 2.24. - Emergency ordinances. 
To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property or public peace, the city council may convene on call of the mayor or three (3) councilmembers and promptly adopt one (1) or more emergency ordinances, but such ordinances may not levy taxes; grant, renew or extend a franchise; regulate the rate charged by any public utility for its services; or authorize the borrowing of money except as provided by law. An emergency ordinance shall be introduced in the form and manner prescribed for ordinances generally, except that it shall be plainly designated as an emergency ordinance and shall contain, after the enacting clause, a declaration stating that an emergency exists and describing it in clear and specific terms. An emergency ordinance may be adopted, with or without amendment, or rejected at the meeting at which it is introduced, but the affirmative vote of at least three (3) councilmembers shall be required for adoption. It shall become effective upon adoption or at such later time as it may specify. An emergency ordinance may be repealed by adoption of a repealing ordinance in the same manner specified in this section for adoption of emergency ordinances. 
Sec. 2.25. - Codes of technical regulations. 
[(a)]  The city council may adopt any standard code of technical regulations by reference thereto in an adopting ordinance. The procedure and requirements governing such adopting ordinance shall be as prescribed for ordinances generally except that: 
(1)  The requirements of subsection (b) of section 2.23 of this Charter for distribution and filing of copies of the ordinance shall be construed to include copies of any code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance; and 
(2)  A copy of each adopted code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance, shall be authenticated and recorded by the clerk pursuant to section 2.26 of this Charter. 
(b)  Copies of any adopted code of technical regulations shall be made available by the clerk for distribution or for purchase at a reasonable price. 
Sec. 2.26. - Signing; authenticating; recording; codification; printing. 
(a)  The clerk shall authenticate by his or her signature and record in full in a properly indexed book kept for that purpose all ordinances adopted by the city council. Every ordinance adopted by the city council shall be presented promptly by the clerk to the mayor. 
(b)  The city shall provide for the preparation of a general codification of all the ordinances of the city having the force and effect of law. The general codification shall be adopted by the city council by ordinance and shall be published promptly, together with all amendments thereto, with this Charter, any amendment thereto, and such codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations as the city council may specify. This compilation shall be known and cited officially as "The Code of the City of Norcross, Georgia." Copies of the code shall be furnished to all officers, departments, and agencies of the city and made available for purchase by the public at a reasonable price as fixed by the city council. 
(c)  The city council shall cause each ordinance and each amendment to this Charter to be typed or printed promptly following its adoption and the ordinance and Charter amendments shall be made available for purchase by the public at reasonable prices to be fixed by the city council. Following publication of the first Code of the City of Norcross, Georgia, and at all times thereafter, the ordinances and Charter amendments shall be typed or printed in substantially the same style as the code currently in effect and shall be suitable in form for incorporation therein. The city council shall make such further arrangements as deemed desirable with reproduction and distribution of any current changes in or additions to codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations included in the code. 
Sec. 2.27. - Mayor pro tempore. 
During the absence or disability of the mayor for any cause, the mayor pro tempore or, in such mayor pro tempore's absence or disability for any reason, any one of the councilmembers chosen by a majority vote of the city council shall be clothed with all the rights and privileges of the mayor and shall perform the duties of the office of the mayor so long as such absence or disability shall continue. Any such absence or disability shall be declared by majority vote of all councilmembers. 
(1997 Ga. Laws, page 3517, § 3) 
Sec. 2.28. - The mayor; powers and duties. 
The mayor shall be the chief elected officer of the city and as such shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  To preside at all meetings of the city council and be recognized as the official head and spokesperson of the city for service of process and ceremonial purposes; 
(2)  To vote on matters before the city council only in case of a tie; 
(3)  To sign timely, for and on behalf of the city, all contracts, ordinances, instruments, and other documents authorized by the city council and which are required to be in writing, unless otherwise directed or authorized by the city council; 
(4)  To administer oaths and to take affidavits; and 
(5)  To fulfill such other duties as authorized by the city council. 
(1997 Ga. Laws, page 3517, § 3; 2007 Ga. Laws (Act No. 213), page 4066, § 1) 
Sec. 2.29. - Selection of mayor pro tempore. 
By a majority vote, the city council shall elect a councilmember to serve as mayor pro tempore. The mayor pro tempore shall serve at the pleasure of the city council, shall continue to vote, and shall otherwise participate as a councilmember. 
(1997 Ga. Laws, page 3517, § 3) 
Sec. 2.30. - The city manager; general powers. 
The city council shall appoint a city manager for an indefinite term and shall set his or her compensation in an employment contract. The city manager shall be appointed solely on the basis of that person's executive and administrative qualifications, including relevant experience. 
(2007 Ga. Laws (Act No. 213), page 4067, § 2) 
Sec. 2.31. - Powers and duties of the city manager. 
The city manager shall be the chief executive and administrative officer of the city. The city manager shall be responsible to the city council for the administration of all city affairs placed in his or her charge by or under this Charter. The city manager shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  To appoint and, when he or she deems it necessary for the good of the city, suspend or remove all city employees and administrative officers he or she appoints, except as otherwise provided by law or personnel ordinances adopted pursuant to this Charter. The city manager may authorize any administrative officer who is subject to the city manager's direction and supervision to exercise these powers with respect to subordinates in that officer's department, office, or agency; 
(2)  To direct and supervise the administration of all departments, offices, and agencies of the city, except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by law; 
(3)  To attend all city council meetings and have the right to take part in discussion, but the city manager may not vote; 
(4)  To see that all laws, provisions of this Charter, and acts of the city council, subject to enforcement by the city manager or by officers subject to the city manager's direction and supervision, are faithfully executed; 
(5)  To prepare and submit the annual operating budget and capital budget to the city council. Once approved for the following fiscal year, any increase in the appropriations for these budgets, whether accomplished through a change in anticipated revenues or through a transfer of appropriations among departments, shall require the approval of the city council. Such amendment shall be adopted by ordinance or resolution; 
(6)  To submit to the city council a quarterly summary of the finances and administrative activities of the city, and to make available to the council and public a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the city as of the end of each fiscal year; 
(7)  To prescribe, require, publish, and implement standards of administrative management and operating procedures to be followed and adhered to by all offices, departments, boards, commissions, authorities, and other agencies of the city which are subject to the city manager's supervision; 
(8)  To act as the purchasing agent of the city; 
(9)  To make such other studies, reports, and investigations as the city council may require concerning the operations of city departments, offices, and agencies subject to the city manager's direction and supervision; 
(10)  To keep the city council fully advised as to the future needs of the city, and make such recommendations to the city council concerning the affairs of the city as he or she deems desirable; and 
(11)  To perform other such duties as are specified in this Charter or as may be required by the city council. 
(2007 Ga. Laws (Act No. 213), page 4067, § 2) 
Sec. 2.32. - Budget authority and special funds. 
The city manager shall have full authority to execute the city's annual operating budget and capital budget. Establishment of all special funds and authorization of expenditures from the special funds shall require approval of the city council. The city council shall also approve any operating or capital budget amendments requiring use of funds from the contingency special fund. 
(2007 Ga. Laws (Act No. 213), page 4067, § 2) 
Sec. 2.33. - Council's noninterference with administration. 
Except for the purpose of inquiries and investigations, the mayor and city council members shall not give orders or directions to any city employees who are subject to the direction and supervision of the city manager, either publicly or privately, directly or indirectly. 
(2007 Ga. Laws (Act No. 213), page 4067, § 2) 
Sec. 2.34. - Removal of city manager. 
The city council may remove the city manager from office in accordance with the following procedures: 
(1)  The city council shall adopt by affirmative vote of two-thirds of its members a preliminary resolution which must state the reasons for removal and may suspend the city manager from duty for a period not to exceed 45 days. A copy of the resolution shall be delivered promptly to the city manager; 
(2)  Within five days after a copy of the resolution is delivered to the city manager, he or she may file with the city council a written request for a public hearing. This hearing shall be held within 30 days after the request is filed. The city manager may file with the city council a written reply not later than five days before the hearing; and 
(3)  If the city manager has not requested a public hearing within the time specified in paragraph (2) of this section, the city council may adopt a final resolution for removal, which may be made effective immediately, by an affirmative vote of a majority of all its members. If the city manager has requested a public hearing, the city council may adopt a final resolution for removal, which may be made effective immediately, by an affirmative vote of a majority of all its members at any time after the public hearing. 
The city manager shall continue to receive his or her salary until the effective date of a final resolution of removal. 
(2007 Ga. Laws (Act No. 213), page 4067, § 2) 
Sec. 2.35. - Acting city manager. 
By letter filed with the city clerk, the city manager shall designate a qualified city administrative officer to exercise the powers and perform the duties of city manager during his or her temporary absence or disability. During such absence or disability, the city council may revoke such designation at any time and appoint another officer of the city to serve until the city manager shall return or his or her disability shall cease. 
(2007 Ga. Laws (Act No. 213), page 4067, § 2) 
ARTICLE III. - EXECUTIVE BRANCH 

Sec. 3.10. - Administrative and service departments. 
(a)  The mayor and city council by ordinance may establish, abolish, merge, or consolidate offices, positions of employment, departments, and agencies of the city, as necessary for the proper administration of the affairs and government of the city. The mayor shall recommend and the city council shall prescribe the functions and duties of existing departments, offices, and agencies or of any departments, offices, and agencies created or established by this Charter; may provide that the same person shall fill any number of offices and positions of employment; and may transfer or change the function or duties of offices, positions of employment, departments, and agencies of the city. 
(b)  The operations and responsibilities of each department now or hereafter established in the city shall be distributed among such divisions or bureaus as may be provided by ordinance of the city council. Each department shall consist of such officers, employees, and positions as may be provided by this Charter or by ordinance. There shall be a department head of each department who shall be its principal officer. Each department head shall, subject to the direction and supervision of the mayor and city council, be responsible for the administration and direction of the affairs and operations of his department. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided by this Charter, the department heads and other appointed officers of the city shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor and city council. Vacancies occurring in an appointive office shall be filled in the same manner as prescribed by this Charter for an original appointment. 
(d)  Except as otherwise provided by law, the department heads and other appointed officers of the city shall be appointed solely on the basis of their respective administrative and professional qualifications. 
(e)  All appointed officers and department heads shall receive such compensation as prescribed by ordinance of the city council. 
(1996 Ga. Laws, page 3666, § 6; 1997 Ga. Laws, page 3517, § 4) 
Sec. 3.11. - Boards, commissions and authorities. 
(a)  The city council may create by ordinance such boards, commissions and authorities to fulfill any investigative, quasi-judicial or quasi-legislative function the city council deems necessary and shall by ordinance establish the composition, period of existence, duties and powers thereof. 
(b)  All members of boards, commissions and authorities of the city shall be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the city council for such terms of office and such manner of appointment as provided by ordinance, except where other appointing authority, terms of office or manner of appointment is prescribed by this Charter or by law. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided by Charter or by law, no voting member of any board, commission or authority shall hold any elective office in the city. 
(d)  Any vacancy in the office of any member of a board, commission or authority of the city shall be filled for the unexpired term in the manner prescribed herein for the original appointment, except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by law. 
(e)  No member of any board, commission or authority shall assume office until he shall have executed and filed with the clerk of the city an oath obligating himself to perform faithfully and impartially the duties of his office, such oath to be prescribed by ordinance of the city council and administered by the mayor. 
(f)  Any member of a board, commission or authority may be removed from office by a vote of a majority of the members of the city council. 
(g)  The city council, by ordinance, may provide for the compensation and reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses of members of boards, commissions and authorities in the performance of their official duties. 
(h)  The qualifications required of members of boards, commissions and authorities shall be prescribed by ordinance. 
(i)  Except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by law, each board, commission or authority of the city government shall elect one (1) of its members as chairman and one (1) member as vice chairman for terms of one (1) year, and may elect as its secretary an employee of the city. Each board, commission or authority of the city government may establish (after approval by the mayor and councilmembers) such bylaws, rules and regulations, not inconsistent with this Charter, an ordinance of the city, or law, as it deems appropriate and necessary for the conduct of its affairs. Copies of such bylaws, rules and regulations shall be filed with the clerk of the city. 
Sec. 3.12. - City clerk. 
The city manager shall appoint a city clerk who shall not be a council member. The city clerk shall be custodian of the official city seal, maintain city council records required by this Charter, and perform such other duties as may be required by the mayor and city council. 
(2007 Ga. Laws (Act No. 213), page 4069, § 3) 
Sec. 3.13. - City treasurer. 
The city manager shall appoint a city treasurer to collect all taxes, licenses, fees, and other moneys belonging to the city subject to the provisions of this Charter and the ordinances of the city, and to enforce all laws of Georgia relating to the collection of delinquent taxes and sale or foreclosure for nonpayment of taxes to the city. The city treasurer shall also be responsible for the general duties of a treasurer and fiscal officer. The city clerk and city treasurer shall not be the same person. 
(2007 Ga. Laws (Act No. 213), page 4069, § 3) 
Sec. 3.14. - City attorney. 
The mayor and city council shall appoint a city attorney, together with such assistant city attorneys, as may be authorized by ordinance. The city council shall provide for the payment of such attorney or attorneys for services rendered to the city. The city attorney shall be responsible for representing and defending the city in all litigation in which the city is a party, may be the prosecuting officer in the municipal court, shall attend the meetings of the city council as directed, shall advise the mayor, city council and other officers and employees of the city concerning legal aspects of the city's affairs, and shall perform such other duties as may be required of him by virtue of his position as city attorney. 
Sec. 3.15. - City accountant. 
The mayor may appoint and the city council shall confirm a city accountant to perform the duties of an accountant. 
Sec. 3.16. - City auditor. 
The city manager shall contract with confirmation of the city council an outside firm to perform the duties of a city auditor. 
(2007 Ga. Laws (Act No. 213), page 4070, § 4) 
Sec. 3.17. - Human resources. 
(a)  Human resources manager. The city manager shall appoint a human resources manager who shall be responsible for policies and practices related to the equitable treatment of city employees. 
(b)  The city position classification and pay plan. The human resources manager shall be responsible for the preparation of a position classification and pay plan which shall be submitted to the city manager and then to the city council for approval. Such plan shall apply to all employees of the city and any of its agencies, departments, boards, commissions, or authorities. When a pay plan has been adopted, the city council shall not increase or decrease the salary range applicable to any position except by amendment of such pay plan. The city manager shall apply the pay plan to city employees. For purposes of this section, all elected city officials are not city employees. 
(c)  Employee rules and regulations. The city manager shall present to the city council for approval rules and regulations consistent with this Charter concerning: 
(1)  The method of employee selection and probationary periods of employment; 
(2)  The administration of a position classification and pay plan, methods of promotion and applications of service ratings thereto, and transfer of employees within the classification plan; 
(3)  Hours of work, vacation, sick leave, and other leaves of absence, overtime pay, and the order and manner in which layoffs shall be effected; 
(4)  Such dismissal hearings as due process may require; and 
(5)  Such other personnel notice as may be necessary to provide for adequate and systematic handling of personnel affairs. 
(1997 Ga. Laws, page 3517, § 5; 2007 Ga. Laws (Act No. 213), page 4070, § 4) 
Sec. 3.18. - Appointment of elected officials. 
No person holding an elective office in the City of Norcross shall be eligible for appointment as a city employee during the term of office for which he or she was elected or within two years after the expiration of his or her term of office. 
(2007 Ga. Laws (Act No. 213), page 4070, § 4) 
ARTICLE IV. - MUNICIPAL COURT 

Sec. 4.10. - Creation. 
There is established a court to be known as the Municipal Court of the City of Norcross, which shall have jurisdiction and authority to try offenses against the laws and ordinances of said city and to punish for a violation of the same. Such court shall have the power and authority to enforce its judgments by the imposition of such penalties as may be provided by law; to punish witnesses for nonattendance, and to punish also any person who may counsel or advise, aid, encourage or persuade another whose testimony is desired or material in any proceeding before said court to go or move beyond the reach of the process of the court; to try all offenses within the territorial limits of the city constituting traffic cases which under the laws of Georgia are placed within the jurisdiction of municipal courts to the extent of and in accordance with the provisions of such laws and all law subsequently enacted amendatory thereof. 
Sec. 4.11. - Chief judge; associate judge; solicitor. 
(a)  The municipal court shall be presided over by a chief judge and such part-time, full-time, or standby judges as shall be provided by ordinance. The method of selection and terms of such judges shall be provided by ordinance. 
(b)  No person shall be qualified or eligible to serve as a judge on the municipal court unless he shall have attained the age of 21 years and shall be a member of the State Bar of Georgia. All judges shall be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the city council and shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor and city council. 
(c)  Compensation of the judges shall be fixed by the city council by ordinance. 
(d)  Before assuming office, each judge shall take an oath, given by the mayor, that he will honestly and faithfully discharge the duties of his office to the best of his ability and without fear, favor or partiality. The oath shall be entered upon the minutes of the city council journal required in section 2.20 of this Charter. 
(e)  At the request of the presiding municipal judge, a solicitor and an assistant solicitor may be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the city council. The method of selection and terms of such solicitors shall be provided by ordinance. 
Sec. 4.12. - Convening. 
The municipal court shall be convened at such times as designated by ordinance or at such times as the court deems necessary to keep current the dockets thereof. 
Sec. 4.13. - Jurisdiction; powers. 
(a)  The municipal court shall try and punish violations of this Charter, all city ordinances, and such other violations as provided by law. 
(b)  The municipal court shall have the authority to punish those in its presence for contempt, provided that such punishment shall not exceed a fine of $200.00 or ten days in jail. 
(c)  The municipal court may fix punishment for offenses within its jurisdiction not exceeding a fine of $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 180 days, or both, or may fix punishment by fine, imprisonment or alternative sentencing as now or hereafter provided by law. The municipal judge may appoint counsel as required by law at the request of any person sentenced to a jail term who is found to be indigent. 
(d)  The municipal court shall have the authority to establish a schedule of fees to defray the costs of operation and shall be entitled to reimbursement of the actual cost of meals, transportation and caretaking of prisoners bound over to superior courts for violation of state law. 
(e)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish bail and recognizances to ensure the presence of those charged with violations before said court and shall have discretionary authority to accept cash or personal or real property as surety bond for the appearance of persons charged with violations. Whenever any person shall give bail for his appearance and shall fail to appear at the time fixed for trial, his bond may be forfeited by the judge presiding at such time and an execution shall be issued thereon by serving the defendant and his sureties with a rule nisi at least two (2) days before a hearing on the rule nisi. In the event that cash or property is accepted in lieu of bond or security for the appearance of a defendant at trial and if such defendant fails to appear at the time and place fixed for trial, the cash so deposited shall be on order of the judge declared forfeited to the City of Norcross, or the property so deposited shall have a lien against it for the value forfeited, which lien shall be enforceable in the same manner and to the same extent as a lien for city property taxes. 
(f)  The municipal court shall have the authority to bind prisoners over to the appropriate court when it appears by probable cause that state law has been violated. 
(g)  The municipal court shall have the same authority as superior courts to administer oaths as are necessary and to perform all other acts necessary and proper to the conduct of said court. 
(h)  The municipal court may compel the presence of all parties necessary to a proper disposal of each case by the issuance of summonses, subpoenas and warrants which may be served as executed by any officer as authorized by this Charter or by law. 
(i)  The municipal court is specifically vested with all the jurisdiction and powers throughout the geographic area of the City of Norcross granted by law to municipal courts and particularly by such laws as authorize the abatement of nuisances and prosecution of traffic violations. 
Sec. 4.14. - Appeal and certiorari. 
(a)  A review of a decision of the municipal court, in the case of traffic violations, may be by direct appeal to the superior court, and any bond as may be required to secure the costs of appeal to the Superior Court of Gwinnett County, Georgia, from the municipal court shall lie as prescribed by law. An appeal to the superior court shall not be a de novo proceeding. 
(b)  The right of certiorari from the decision and judgment of the municipal court shall exist in all criminal cases and ordinance violation cases, and such certiorari shall be obtained under the sanction of the judge of the Superior Court of Gwinnett County under the laws of the State of Georgia regulating the granting and issuance of writs of certiorari. 
Sec. 4.15. - Rules of court. 
With the approval of the city council, the municipal judge shall have full power and authority to make reasonable rules and regulations necessary and proper to secure the efficient and successful administration of the municipal court; provided, however, that the city council may adopt in part or in toto the rules and regulations applicable to the superior courts under the laws of the State of Georgia. The rules and regulations made or adopted for said court shall be filed with the city clerk, shall be available for public inspection, and, upon request, a copy shall be furnished to all defendants in municipal court proceedings at least 48 hours prior to said proceedings. 
ARTICLE V. - ELECTIONS 

Sec. 5.10. - Applicability of general law. 
All elections shall be held and conducted in accordance with chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Election Code," O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq.), as now or hereafter amended. 
(Ord. No. 17-2018 , § II, 12-3-2018) 
Sec. 5.11. - Regular elections; time for holding. 
The city council shall cause an election to be held at the city hall or such other place in the city as the city council shall direct and designate. All general municipal elections shall be held on the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November of each year, except that no such election shall be held in 1994. The term of each elected officer shall begin on the day and hour of taking the oath of office as provided in Article II, Section 2.18 of this Charter. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Charter, no term of office to which a person has been elected prior to the date this section becomes effective in 1993 shall be shortened or lengthened except pursuant to the procedures established by general law. 
Sec. 5.12. - Qualifying; absentee ballots; other provisions. 
Except as otherwise provided by this Charter, the city council, by ordinance, may prescribe rules and regulations governing qualifying fees, absentee ballots, write-in votes, challenge of votes, and such other rules and regulations as it deems necessary to fulfill any options and duties under chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Election Code," O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq.), as now or hereafter amended. 
(Ord. No. 17-2018 , § II, 12-3-2018) 
Sec. 5.13. - Election by majority vote. 
The mayor and councilmembers shall be elected by a majority vote of the votes cast for each position. The procedures and requirements for election of all elected officers of the city shall be in conformity with the provisions of chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Election Code," O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq.), as now or hereafter amended. 
(Ord. No. 17-2018 , § II, 12-3-2018) 
Sec. 5.14. - Special elections; vacancies. 
In the event that the office of the mayor or any councilmember shall become vacant for any cause whatsoever, the city council or those remaining shall order a special election to fill the balance of the unexpired term of such official; provided, however, if such vacancy occurs within nine (9) months of the expiration of the term of office of the mayor or any councilmember, said vacancy in office shall be filled by appointment by the remaining members of the city council. In all other respects, a special election shall be held and conducted in accordance with chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Election Code," O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq.), as now or hereafter amended. 
(Ord. No. 17-2018 , § II, 12-3-2018) 
Sec. 5.15. - Grounds for removal. 
(a)  The mayor and any councilmember shall be subject to removal from office for any one or more of the following causes: 
(1)  Incompetence, misfeasance or malfeasance in office; 
(2)  Conviction of a crime involving moral turpitude; 
(3)  Failure at any time to possess any qualifications of office as provided by this Charter or by law; 
(4)  Willful violation of any express prohibition of this Charter; 
(5)  Abandonment of office or neglect to perform the duties thereof; or 
(6)  Failure for any other cause to perform the duties of office as required by this Charter or by state law. 
(b)  Removal of an elected officer pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall be accomplished by one of the following methods: 
(1)  Removal of an elected officer from office may be accompanied by two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of the vote of the entire membership of the council. In the event an elected officer is sought to be removed by the action of the city council, such officer shall be entitled to a written notice specifying the ground or grounds for removal and to a public hearing which shall be held not less than ten days after the service of such written notice. Any elected officer sought to be removed from office as provided in this section shall have the right of appeal from the decision of the city council to the Superior Court of Gwinnett County. Such appeal shall be governed by the same rules as govern appeals to the superior court from the probate court; 
(2)  By an order of the Superior Court of Gwinnett County following a hearing on a complaint seeking such removal brought by any resident of the City of Norcross, Georgia. 
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCE AND FISCAL 

Sec. 6.10. - Property taxes. 
All property subject to taxation for state and county purposes, assessed as of January 1 in each year, shall be subject to any property tax levied by the City of Norcross. The city shall use the county assessment for the year in which the city taxes are to be levied. The county is to furnish appropriate information for such purpose unless otherwise directed by state law. The maximum, general operation millage rate will be 15 mills. 
Sec. 6.11. - Property tax levy. 
The city council shall assess and collect an ad valorem tax on all real and personal property within the corporate limits of the city as permitted by state law for the purpose of raising revenues to defray the costs of operating the city government, of providing governmental services, for the repayment of principal and interest on general obligations, and for any other public purpose as determined by the city council in its discretion. 
Sec. 6.12. - Millage rate; due dates and payment methods. 
The city council by ordinance shall establish a millage rate for the city property tax, a due date and the time period within which these taxes must be paid. The city council by ordinance may provide for the payment of the taxes by installments or in one (1) lump sum, as well as authorize the voluntary payment of taxes prior to the time when due. 
Sec. 6.13. - Occupational and business taxes. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to levy such occupation or business taxes as are not prohibited by law. Such taxes may be levied on both individuals and corporations who transact business in the city or who practice or offer to practice any profession or calling therein to the extent such persons have a constitutionally sufficient nexus to the city to be so taxed. The city council may classify businesses, occupations, professions or callings for the purpose of such taxation in any way which may be lawful and may compel the payment of such taxes as provided in section 6.19 of this Charter. 
Sec. 6.14. - Licenses; permits; fees. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to require any individuals or corporations who transact business in this city or who practice or offer to practice any profession or calling therein to obtain a license or permit for such activity from the city and pay a reasonable fee for such license or permit where such activities are not now regulated by general law in such a way as to preclude city regulations. Such fees may reflect the total cost to the city of regulating the activity and, if unpaid, shall be collected as provided in section 6.19 of this Charter. The city council by ordinance may establish reasonable requirements for obtaining or keeping such licenses as the public health, safety and welfare necessitate. 
Sec. 6.15. - Sewer service charges. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the right, power and authority to assess and collect fees, charges and tolls for sewer services rendered both inside and outside the corporate limits of the city, to provide for the total cost and expense of providing for the collection and disposal of sewage through the sewerage facilities of the city. If unpaid, said sewer service shall constitute a lien against any property of persons served, which lien shall be second in priority to liens for county and city property taxes and shall be enforceable in the same manner and under the same remedies as a lien for city property taxes as provided in section 6.19 of this Charter. 
Sec. 6.16. - Sanitary and health service charges. 
The city council, by ordinance, shall have authority to provide for, to enforce, to levy and to collect the total costs of sanitary and health services provided or made available inside or outside the corporate limits of the city. Such authority shall include the power to assess, levy and collect annual or monthly sanitary taxes or fees in such amount, or amounts, and based upon and in accordance with such classification of property and sanitary service or services provided, as may be fixed by ordinance. Said sanitary taxes and assessment thereof shall be a charge and lien against the real estate in respect to which said taxes are so assessed and the owner or owners thereof, superior to all other liens except liens for county and city property taxes and shall be enforceable in the same manner and under the same remedies as a lien for city property taxes as provided in section 6.19 of this Charter. 
Sec. 6.17. - Special assessments. 
The city council, by ordinance, shall have the power and authority to assess and collect impact fees or other special assessment fees to cover all or part of the cost of constructing, reconstructing or improving any public way, street, sidewalk, curbing, gutters, sewers, water systems or other utility mains and appurtenances, against the abutting property owner or the owners of any property having a constitutionally sufficient nexus to the needed public improvement under such reasonable terms and conditions as may be prescribed by ordinance. Such special assessments shall become delinquent 30 days after their due dates, shall thereupon be subject, in addition to fieri facias charges, to a penalty of 10 percent and shall thereafter be subject to interest at the rate of nine percent (9%) per annum from date due until paid. A lien shall exist against the affected property superior to all other liens, except that it shall be of equal dignity with liens for county and city property taxes; and said lien shall be enforceable by the same procedure and under the same remedies as a lien for city property taxes as provided in section 6.19 of this Charter. 
Sec. 6.18. - Construction; other taxes. 
This city shall be empowered to levy any other tax allowed now or hereafter by law, and the specific mention of any right, power or authority in this article shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general powers of this city to govern its local affairs. 
Sec. 6.19. - Collection of delinquent taxes and fees. 
The city council, by ordinance, may provide for the collection of delinquent taxes, fees, or other revenues due the city under Sections 6.10 through 6.18 of this Charter by fieri facias issued by the General Government Administration department and executed by any police officer of the city or the city marshal under the same procedure provided by the law governing execution of such process from the superior court or by the use of any other available legal processes and remedies. The city council shall be authorized to impose an interest penalty upon delinquent tax payments to the city in an amount not exceeding the maximum rate of interest allowable under the laws of Georgia. A lien shall exist against all property upon which the city property taxes are levied, as of the assessment date of each year, which lien shall be superior to all other liens, except that it shall have equal dignity with those of federal, state, or county taxes. In case of hardship, the city council shall have discretionary authority to waive any and all penalties imposed by this Charter on delinquent taxes, assessments, or on other amounts due to the city. 
(1996 Ga. Laws, page 3666, § 7; 1997 Ga. Laws, page 3517, § 6) 
Sec. 6.20. - Transfer of executions. 
The general government administration department head shall be authorized to assign or transfer any fieri facias or execution issued for any tax, street, sewer, or other assessment in the same manner and to the same extent as provided by Georgia law regarding sales and transfers of tax fieri facias; provided, however, that upon levy of execution and sale of property pursuant to such tax fieri facias, whether assigned, transferred, or executed by the city, the owner of such property, in fee simple or lesser interest, shall not lose his or her right to redeem the property in accord with the requirements of redemption of property sold under state or county ad valorem tax fieri facias as said requirements now exist or may be hereinafter provided by law. 
(1996 Ga. Laws, page 3666, § 8) 
Sec. 6.21. - General obligation bonds. 
The city council shall have the power to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program or venture authorized under this Charter or the general laws of the state. Such bonding authority shall be exercised in accordance with the laws governing bond issuance by municipalities in effect at the time said issue is undertaken. 
Sec. 6.22. - Revenue bonds. 
Revenue bonds may be issued by the city council as state law now or hereafter provides. Such bonds are to be paid out of any revenues produced by the project, program or venture for which they were issued. 
Sec. 6.23. - Short-term loans. 
The city may obtain short-term loans between January 1 and December 31 of each year and must repay such loans not later than December 31 of each year. 
Sec. 6.24. - Fiscal year. 
The city council shall set the fiscal year by ordinance. This fiscal year shall constitute the budget year and the year for financial accounting and reporting for each and every office, department, institution, agency and activity of the city government, unless otherwise provided by state or federal law. 
Sec. 6.25. - Preparation of budgets. 
The city council shall provide an ordinance on the procedures and requirements for the preparation and execution of an annual operating budget, a capital improvement program, and a capital budget, including requirements as to the scope, content and form of such budgets and programs. 
Sec. 6.26. - Submission of the operating budget to the city council. 
On or before a date fixed by the city council, but not later than 60 days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the city manager shall prepare and submit to the city council a proposed operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year. The budget shall be accompanied by a message from the city manager containing a statement of the general fiscal policies of the city, the important features of the budget, explanations of major changes recommended for the next fiscal year, a general summary of the budget, and such other comments and information as he or she may deem pertinent. The operating budget, the capital improvements budget provided for in this chapter, the budget message, and all supporting documents shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and shall be open to public inspection. 
(1997 Ga. Laws, page 3517, § 7; 2007 Ga. Laws (Act No. 213), page 4071, § 5) 
Sec. 6.27. - Action by city council on operating budget. 
(a)  The city council may amend the proposed operating budget, except that the budget as finally amended and adopted must provide for all expenditures required by state law or by other provisions of this Charter and for all debt service requirements for the ensuing fiscal year, and the total appropriations from any fund shall not exceed the estimated fund balance, reserves, and revenues. 
(b)  The city council, by ordinance, shall adopt the final operating budget for the ensuing year not later than the last day of the old year. If the city council fails to adopt the budget by this date, the amounts appropriated for operation for the current fiscal year shall be deemed adopted for the ensuing fiscal year on a month-to-month basis, with all items prorated accordingly, until such time as the city council adopts a budget for the ensuing fiscal year. Adoption of the budget shall take the form of an appropriations ordinance setting out the estimated revenues in detail by sources and making appropriations according to fund and by organizational unit, purpose, or activity as set out in the budget document. 
(c)  The amount set out in the adopted operating budget for each organizational unit shall constitute the annual appropriation for such item, and no expenditure shall be made or encumbrance created in excess of the otherwise unencumbered balance of the appropriations or allotments thereof to which it is chargeable, unless authorized by the city council. 
(d)  The city council shall be authorized to establish a tax millage rate each year to ensure that the necessary revenue will be available to meet the appropriations provided for in said budget. The tax millage rate levied by the city council shall not exceed 15 mills to cover general operating expenses. An additional millage rate may be levied for the retirement of bonded indebtedness. 
(1997 Ga. Laws, page 3517, § 8) 
Sec. 6.28. - Changes in appropriations. 
The city council may make changes in the appropriations in addition to those contained in the current operating budget at any regular meeting or special or emergency meeting called for such purposes. 
Sec. 6.29. - Capital improvements budget. 
(a)  On or before a date fixed by the city council, but not later than 60 days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the city manager shall prepare and submit to the city council a proposed capital improvements budget with recommendations as to the means of financing the improvements proposed for the ensuing fiscal year. The city council shall have the power to accept, with or without amendments, or reject the proposed program and proposed means of financing. The city council shall not authorize an expenditure for the construction of any building, structure, work, or improvement, unless the appropriations for such project are included in the capital improvements budget, except to meet a public emergency as provided in Section 2.24 of this Charter. 
(b)  The city council shall adopt by ordinance the final capital improvements budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than December 31 of each year. No appropriations provided for in a prior capital improvements budget shall lapse until the purpose for which the appropriations were made shall have been accomplished or abandoned; provided, however, the mayor or any member of the city council may submit amendments to the capital improvements budget at any time during the fiscal year, accompanied by recommendations. Any such amendments to the capital improvements budget shall become effective only upon adoption by ordinance. 
(1997 Ga. Laws, page 3517, § 9; 2007 Ga. Laws (Act No. 213), page 4071, § 6) 
Sec. 6.30. - Independent audit. 
There shall be an annual independent audit of all city accounts, funds and financial transactions by a certified public accountant selected by the mayor and confirmed by the city council. The audit shall be conducted according to generally accepted accounting principles. Any audit of any funds by the state or federal government may be accepted as satisfying the requirements of this Charter. Copies of all audit reports shall be available at printing costs to the public. 
Sec. 6.31. - Procurement and property management; contracting procedures. 
All contracts shall be made or authorized by the city council and no contracts shall bind the city unless: 
(1)  It is in writing; 
(2)  In event a contract for goods or services is in excess of $500.00, it shall be drawn by or submitted and reviewed by the city attorney and, as a matter of course, shall be signed by him to indicate such drafting or review; and 
(3)  It is made or authorized by the city council and such approval is entered in the city council journal of proceedings pursuant to section 2.21 of this Charter. 
Sec. 6.32. - Centralized purchasing. 
The city council may by ordinance prescribe procedures for a system of centralized purchasing for the city. 
Sec. 6.33. - Sale of city property. 
(a)  The city council may sell and convey any real or personal property owned or held by the city for governmental or other purposes as now or hereafter provided by law. 
(b)  The city council may quitclaim any rights it may have in property not needed for public purposes upon report by the mayor and adoption of a resolution by the city council, both finding that the property is not needed for public or other purposes and that the interest of the city has no readily ascertainable monetary value. 
(c)  Whenever in opening, extending, or widening any street, avenue, alley, or public place of the city a small parcel or tract of land is cut off or separated by such work from a larger tract or boundary of land owned by the city, the city council may authorize the mayor to execute and deliver in the name of the city a deed conveying said cut off or separated parcel or tract of land to an abutting or adjoining property owner or owners in exchange for rights of way of said street, avenue, alley, or public place when such exchange is deemed to be in the best interest of the city. All deeds and conveyances heretofore and hereafter so executed and delivered shall convey all title and interest the city has in such property, notwithstanding the fact that no public sale after advertisement was or is hereafter made. 
(1997 Ga. Laws, page 3517, § 10) 
ARTICLE VII. - MUNICIPAL SERVICES AND REGULATORY FUNCTIONS 

Sec. 7.10. - Municipal services; streets. 
The city council shall have the power and authority to lay out, open, widen, change, straighten, alter, improve, vacate, abandon and otherwise to exercise complete control over the streets, alleys, squares and sidewalks of the city. The city council shall provide for the removal of any and all obstacles and nuisances in regard to the streets, alleys, or sidewalks, or other public places within the city and shall adopt appropriate ordinances to accomplish this purpose. 
Sec. 7.11. - Municipal utilities. 
The city council shall have the power and authority to acquire, own, hold, build, maintain and operate a system of waterworks, electric lights, sewerage systems; to establish rates and charge fees for services rendered in any of said systems; to finance any of said systems through appropriate bond issues in accordance with the laws of Georgia; to exercise the power of eminent domain in regard to any of said systems, both inside and outside the corporate limits; and to contract to furnish the services of said systems to consumers outside the corporate limits of the city. 
Sec. 7.12. - Sewers and drains. 
The city council shall have the power and authority to provide for the establishment, extension and maintenance of a system of sewers and drains, together with a sewerage disposal system. This power includes the authority to extend said system beyond the corporate limits. For these purposes the city is granted the power of eminent domain both inside and outside the corporate limits. The city council may provide by ordinances for reasonable connection fees for tapping on to the water and sewer lines of said city and may compel citizens to tap into the same when such services are made available. They may cause said connection to be made when the owners refuse and issue executions to be made for the amount so expended, which executions shall create a lien on the property connected with said water and sewerage system from the date of the order or connection. 
Sec. 7.13. - Rights-of-way. 
The city shall have the right, easement and franchise of laying the necessary mains, pipes, conduits and drains, for waterworks and sewerage system purposes along the highways in the County of Gwinnett, without cost; it shall have full power and authority to enact and enforce such rules and regulations and ordinances as may be necessary to protect the water basin and watershed from which the water supply is taken from contamination and to protect said waterworks and sewerage system, including the mains, pipes, and conduits whether the same be situated inside or outside the corporate limits of the city. 
Sec. 7.14. - Power to regulate and license. 
The city council shall have the power and authority to provide by ordinance for the registration and licensing of any trade, business, occupation, vocation, profession, or any and every other undertaking pursued for the purpose of personal gain or profit of whatever nature, engaged in or carried on within the limits of the city, regardless of whether or not the subject has an office or establishment within the city. The city council shall be authorized to fix the amount, terms and manner of issuing and revoking licenses, provided that this authority is subject to the constitutions and laws of the United States and State of Georgia. This power is conferred for the purpose of regulation under the police powers of the city and for the purpose of raising revenue for the operation of the city government through the imposition of a tax or fee on the privilege of operating within the city. This authority extends over individuals, partnerships, associations, corporations and their agents and any other legal entity capable of transacting business. 
Sec. 7.15. - Franchises. 
The city council shall have the authority to exercise control over the streets of the city. The power is conferred upon the city council to grant franchises for the use of this city's streets and alleys, for the purposes of railroads, street railways, telephone companies, electric companies, cable television companies, gas companies, transportation companies and other similar organizations. This franchise right extends to, but is not limited to, the erection of poles, stringing wires, laying of pipes, lines or conduits both above and below the ground surface. The council shall determine the duration, provisions, terms, whether the same shall be exclusive or nonexclusive and the consideration for such franchises; provided, however, that no franchise shall be granted for a period in excess of 35 years and no franchise shall be granted unless the city receives just and adequate compensation therefor. The council shall provide for the registration of all franchises with the city clerk in the registration book kept by her or him. The city council may provide by ordinance for the registration within a reasonable time of all franchises previously granted. 
Sec. 7.16. - Building, housing, electrical and plumbing regulations. 
The city council shall have the power and authority to enact such reasonable rules and regulations as it may deem necessary or expedient regarding the construction and maintenance of buildings, remodeling of buildings, plumbing and electrical wiring and equipping of buildings, in order to promote the safety and welfare of its citizens and to guard against fire or other property damage. This power may, in the discretion of the council, be exercised by adoption of any such standard building, housing, gas, heating and air conditioning, electrical, and plumbing codes as may be deemed proper. The city council shall be empowered to engage the necessary personnel to enforce such rules and regulations as adopted and to charge reasonable fees for inspections and permits; and may require the obtaining of a permit as a condition precedent to any construction, building, electrical or plumbing work. The city council may enact all ordinances necessary to enforce such rules and regulations. 
ARTICLE VIII. - ZONING 

Sec. 8.10. - Zoning board. 
The mayor shall recommend and the city council shall appoint a planning and zoning board and the city council shall adopt ordinances and regulations for the administration thereof. The zoning board shall be advisory in nature and must view all matters before them in full recognition of the criteria set forth in the City of Norcross land use plan. 
Sec. 8.11. - Zoning board of appeals. 
The mayor shall recommend and the city council shall appoint a zoning board of appeals to hear cases involving variances from the zoning rules and regulations. 
ARTICLE IX. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 9.10. - Bonds for officials. 
The officers and employees of the city, both elective and appointive, shall execute such surety or fidelity bonds in the amounts and upon such terms and conditions as the city council shall from time to time require by ordinance or as may be provided by law. 
Sec. 9.11. - Existing ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations. 
Existing ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations of the City of Norcross not in conflict with the provisions of this Charter shall continue in force, unless repealed or amended by the city council. To the extent the Code of the City of Norcross conflicts with this Charter, the Charter shall control. Existing rules and regulations of departments or agencies not in conflict with the provisions of this Charter shall continue in force until they have been repealed or amended. 
Sec. 9.12. - Construction. 
(a)  Section captions in this Charter are informative only and shall not be considered as a part thereof. 
(b)  The word "shall" is mandatory and the word "may" is permissive. 
(c)  The singular shall include the plural, the masculine shall include the feminine, and vice versa. 
Sec. 9.13. - Penalties. 
The violation of any provision of this Charter, for which a penalty is not specifically provided for herein, shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 or by imprisonment not to exceed 30 days or both such fine and imprisonment. 
Sec. 9.14. - Existing personnel and officers. 
Except as specifically provided otherwise by this Charter, all personnel and officers of the city and their rights, privileges, and powers shall continue beyond the time this Charter takes effect for a period of 30 days before or during which the existing city council shall pass a transition ordinance detailing the changes in personnel and appointive officers required or desired and arranging such titles, rights, privileges and powers as may be required or desired to allow a reasonable transition. 
Sec. 9.15. - Pending matters. 
Except as specifically provided otherwise by this Charter, all rights, claims, actions, orders, contracts and legal or administrative proceedings shall continue and any such ongoing work or cases shall be completed by such city agencies, personnel or offices as may be provided by the city council. 
Sec. 9.16. - Severability. 
If any article, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence or part of this Charter shall be held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect or impair the other parts of this Charter unless it clearly appears that such other parts are wholly and necessarily dependent upon the part held to be invalid or unconstitutional, it being the legislative intent in enacting this Charter that each article, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence or part thereof be enacted separately and independent of each other. 
Sec. 9.17. - Specific repealer. 
An Act incorporating the City of Norcross, in the County of Gwinnett, approved February 11, 1977 (1977 Ga. Laws, page 2546), is repealed in its entirety and all amendatory acts thereto are likewise repealed in their entirety. 
Sec. 9.18. - General repealer. 
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are repealed. 
Subpart B - RELATED LAWS 
ARTICLE II. - HOMESTEAD EXEMPTION FROM AD VALOREM TAXATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is 1990 Ga. Laws (Act No. 798) p. 3941, as enacted by the Georgia General Assembly. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original Act. Any provisions regarding the notice to introduce legislation, call for special election, form of ballot, and the repealing clause have been omitted. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. The style used for headings and catchlines has been made uniform and consistent with those appearing in the Code. Additions made for clarity, such as consistent state statute citations and catchline modifications, are indicated by brackets. 

Sec. 1. - Statutory authorization. 
The following legislation pertaining to homestead exemptions in the City of Norcross is enacted pursuant to article VII, section II, paragraph II of the Constitution of the State of Georgia, relating to exemptions from taxation of property. 
Sec. 2. - Exemptions granted. 
(a)  Each resident of the City of Norcross is granted a homestead exemption from all City of Norcross ad valorem taxes levied by the city, except taxes to pay interest on the retired bonded indebtedness, in the amount of $9,000.00 of the value of the homestead owned and occupied by said resident within the City of Norcross. The value of the homestead in excess of the exempted amount shall remain subject to taxation. 
(b)  Each resident of the City of Norcross who is 62 years of age or older is granted a homestead exemption from all City of Norcross ad valorem taxes levied by the city in the amount of $18,000.00 of the value of the homestead owned and occupied by said resident within the City of Norcross. The value of the homestead in excess of the exempted amount shall remain subject to taxation. 
(c)  The increased homestead exemptions provided in this Act shall apply to all taxable years beginning after December 31, 1989. 
CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE GEORGIA LAWS 
This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and Related Laws and any amendments thereto. 

 
CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and Related Laws and any amendments thereto. 

 
Subpart A - GENERAL ORDINANCES 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of municipality to adopt ordinances, resolutions or regulations, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-3. 

Sec. 1-1. - Code designation and citation. 
The provisions in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated as the "Code of the City of Norcross, Georgia," and may be so cited. Such Code may also be cited as the "Norcross City Code." 
(Code 1979, § 1-1-1; Code 1998, § 1-1) 
State Law reference— Codification requirements, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-19. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless inconsistent with the manifest intent of Council or the context clearly requires otherwise. 
Bond. When a bond is required, an undertaking in writing shall be sufficient. 
City. The term "the city" means the City of Norcross in the County of Gwinnett and the State of Georgia, except as otherwise provided. 
City Council or the Council. The term "City Council" or "the Council" means the City Council of the City of Norcross, Georgia. 
Code. The term "Code" means the Code of the City of Norcross, Georgia, as designated in section 1-1. 
Computation of time. Except as otherwise provided by time period computations specifically applying to other laws, when a period of time measured in days, weeks, months, years or other measurements of time, except hours, is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, the first day shall not be counted but the last day shall be counted; and, if the last day falls on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action falls on a public and legal holiday as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 1-4-1, the party having the privilege or duty shall have through the next business day to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. 
County. The term "county" or "the county" means the County of Gwinnett, State of Georgia. 
Day. The term "day" means a calendar day of 24 hours. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department to do some act or make certain inspections, it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act or make the required inspection, unless the terms of the provision or section designate otherwise. 
Gender. Terms importing the masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter. 
Joint authority. All terms giving joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers, except when such terms are used to grant authority to the Mayor and Council. 
Keeper and proprietor. The terms "keeper" and "proprietor" mean and include persons, firms, associations, corporations, receivers, trustees, personal representatives, clubs and partnerships, whether acting by themselves or through a servant, agent or employee. 
Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
Names of officers and departments. The name or title of any officer or department shall be read as though the term "of the City of Norcross" were added thereto. 
Nontechnical and technical terms. Terms and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical terms and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. 
Number. Terms used in the singular include the plural and the plural includes the singular number. 
Oath. The term "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the terms "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the terms "affirm" and "affirmed." 
O.C.G.A. The abbreviation "O.C.G.A." means the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
Or, and. The term "or" may be read "and," and the term "and" may be read "or," if the sense requires it. 
Overlapping provisions. Where any provision of this Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than any general provisions imposed by this Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be applicable. 
Owner. The term "owner," applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a part of such building or land. 
Penal ordinances. The rules of construction and definitions of terms as contained in the penal code of the state, insofar as they can be made applicable, are hereby adopted as governing the penal ordinances of the city. 
Person. The term "person" includes a corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization and any other group acting as a unit, as well as an individual. 
Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property, except real property. 
Preceding, following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Premises. Whenever the term "premises" is used, it means place. 
Property. The term "property" includes real and personal property. 
Public place. The term "public place" means any park, cemetery, schoolyard or open space adjacent thereto, or any area available and/or accessible to the public, regardless of whether privately or publicly owned. 
Real property. The term "real property" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Residence. The term "residence" shall be construed to mean the place adopted by a person as his place of habitation and to which, whenever he is absent, he has the intention of returning. When a person eats at one place and sleeps at another, the place where such person sleeps shall be deemed his residence. 
Schedule of fees and charges. The term "schedule of fees and charges" means the official consolidated list maintained in the Office of the General Government Administration Department which lists rates for utility or other public enterprises, fees of any nature, deposit amounts and various charges as determined from time to time by the City Council. 
Seal. The term "seal" means the city seal. 
Shall, may. The term "shall" is mandatory; the term "may" is permissive. 
Sheriff. The term "Sheriff" means the Sheriff of Gwinnett County, Georgia. 
Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, but shall not include any unimproved areas between the curbline and improved walkways. 
Signature or subscription. The term "signature" or "subscription" includes a mark when the person cannot write. 
State. The term "state" or "the state" means the State of Georgia. 
Street. The term "street" means and includes any public way, road, highway, street, avenue, boulevard, parkway, alley, lane, viaduct, bridge and the approaches thereto within the city. 
Tenant or occupant. The term "tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building or land, includes any person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others. 
Tense. Terms used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
Titles of officers and departments. The name or title of any officer or department shall be read as though the term "of the City of Norcross" were added thereto. 
Week. The term "week" shall be construed to mean a calendar week of seven days. 
Written or in writing. The term "written" or "in writing" includes printing and any other mode of representing terms and letters. 
Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
(Code 1979, § 1-1-2; Code 1998, § 1-2) 
State Law reference— Computation of time, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1; construction of definitions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-2; meaning of certain terms, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections; history notes and references. 
The catchlines of sections in this Code printed in boldface type, italics or otherwise are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section, and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. The history notes appearing in parentheses after each section and the references and editor's notes scattered throughout the Code are for the benefit of the user of the Code and shall have no legal effect. 
(Code 1979, § 1-1-3; Code 1998, § 1-3) 
State Law reference— Notes and catchlines of code sections not part of law, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-7. 
Sec. 1-4. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the City Council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code, since the same would have been enacted by the Council without the incorporation in this Code of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
(Code 1979, § 1-1-5; Code 1998, § 1-4) 
State Law reference— Severability, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-3. 
Sec. 1-5. - Effect of repeal or expiration of ordinance. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance, or its expiration by virtue of any provision contained therein, shall not affect any right accrued or any offense committed, any penalty or punishment incurred or any proceeding commenced before the repeal took effect or the ordinance expired. 
(b)  When an ordinance which repealed another shall itself be repealed, the previous ordinance shall not be revived without express words to that effect. 
(Code 1979, § 1-1-4; Code 1998, § 1-5) 
Sec. 1-6. - Ordinances not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(2)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds or any evidence of the city's indebtedness. 
(3)  Any contract or obligation assumed by the city. 
(4)  Any ordinance fixing the salary of any city officer or employee. 
(5)  Any right or franchise granted by the city. 
(6)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, widening, paving, etc., any street or public way in the city. 
(7)  Any appropriation ordinance. 
(8)  Any ordinance which, by its own terms, is effective for a stated or limited term. 
(9)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor. 
(10)  Any zoning ordinance or amendments thereto, and any ordinance establishing a board of zoning appeals or planning commission, including joint commissions. 
(11)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat. 
(12)  Any ordinance describing or altering the boundaries of the city. 
(13)  The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code. 
(14)  Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included in this Code. 
(15)  Any ordinance establishing or prescribing street grades in the city. 
(16)  Any ordinance or resolution establishing and prescribing employment and personnel policies and procedures. 
(17)  Any ordinance or regulation prescribing traffic regulations for specific locations concerning through streets, parking limitations, parking prohibitions, one-way traffic, limitations on loads of vehicles or loading zones, not in conflict or inconsistent with this Code. 
(18)  Any ordinance or resolution of agreement with another political subdivision. 
(19)  Any ordinance or resolution establishing city or joint city-county boards, commissions and authorities. 
(20)  Any other ordinance or resolution, or part thereof, which is not of a general and permanent nature, or which is referred to elsewhere in this Code as continuing in effect. 
No such ordinance shall be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by this chapter. All such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
(Code 1998, § 1-6) 
Sec. 1-7. - Provisions considered continuations of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as ordinances adopted prior to this Code and included in such Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
(Code 1998, § 1-7) 
Sec. 1-8. - Amendments to Code. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion in this Code. In the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new code by the City Council. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code. 
(c)  If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That the Code of the City of Norcross, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section (or article or chapter) to be numbered ___, which section reads as follows:…." The new section may then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
(Code 1979, § 1-1-6; Code 1998, § 1-8) 
Sec. 1-9. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared at least on an annual basis. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive, permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the City Council during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions. 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles. 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers. 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ___ to ___" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code). 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meanings of ordinance sections inserted into the Code. 
But in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
(Code 1998, § 1-9) 
Sec. 1-10. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change or amend by additions or deletions any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby, unless so authorized by ordinance or resolution or other official act of the City Council. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(Code 1979, § 1-1-7; Code 1998, § 1-10) 
State Law reference— Altering, falsifying or stealing public records unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 45-11-1. 
Sec. 1-11. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the city any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in this Code or any ordinance the doing of any act is required and the failure to do such act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided therefor, and unless otherwise provided by state law, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any such ordinance shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 and imprisonment in the county jail and work and labor on the streets or public works of the city, whether within or without the corporate limits, not exceeding 180 days, or both a fine and sentence of imprisonment and labor. All sentences may be in the alternative and fines may be imposed with the alternative of sentence to imprisonment and labor if the fines are not paid. Each day any violation of this Code or of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  The judge of the municipal court shall have the power and authority to: 
(1)  Impose upon persons convicted in the municipal court the fines provided for in this Code, the ordinances of the city, or as otherwise provided by law, with the alternative of other punishment allowed by law, if such fines are not paid. 
(2)  Sentence such person to community service work. 
(3)  Impose a sentence consisting of any combination of the penalties provided for in this section. 
(4)  Place the defendant on probation to be supervised by an employee or contractor of the city. 
(c)  The judge of the municipal court shall have full power and authority to declare the forfeiture of bonds given by offenders for their appearance before the municipal court upon the offender's failure to appear as provided for in such bond. The procedure for the forfeiture of such bonds shall be as is provided for the forfeiture of bonds and recognizance set forth in O.C.G.A. § 17-6-70 et seq., as amended. 
(Code 1979, § 1-1-8; Code 1998, § 1-11) 
State Law reference— Maximum sentences and fines which may be imposed for violation of municipal ordinance, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2). 
Sec. 1-12. - Liability for violations by corporations and other associations. 
(a)  Any violation of this Code by any officer, agent or other person acting for or employed by any corporation or unincorporated association or organization, while acting within the scope of his office or employment, shall in every case also be deemed to be a violation by such corporation, association or organization. 
(b)  Any officer, agent or other person acting for or employed by any corporation or unincorporated association or organization shall be subject and liable to punishment as well as such corporation or unincorporated association or organization for the violation by it of any provisions of this Code, where such violation was the act or omission, or the result of the act, omission or order, of any such person. 
(Code 1998, § 1-12) 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal corporations generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-3-1 et seq.; powers of municipal corporations generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-1 et seq.; powers relating to administration of municipal government generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2; provisions applicable to counties and municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-1 et seq.; provisions applicable to counties and municipal corporations, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-1 et seq.; supplemental powers of municipalities and counties enumerated, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 2-1—2-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MAYOR AND COUNCIL[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Requirement to prescribe the time, place and dates of regular meetings of governing authority, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1(d). 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-19. - Chairperson. 
The Mayor shall act as chairperson and is responsible for the orderly conduct of the meeting. In order to fulfill this duty, the Mayor shall enforce the rules of procedure that are adopted by the City Council. The chairperson shall be impartial and conduct the meetings in a fair manner. The chairperson may not introduce motions or second a motion, except the chairperson may introduce or second a motion to go into executive session as authorized by section 2-27. The chairperson shall not vote, except to break a tie. 
(Code 1998, § 2-32) 
Sec. 2-20. - Vice-chairperson. 
(a)  The Council shall select a vice-chairperson from the Councilmembers at the beginning of each calendar year. The vice-chairperson shall fulfill the duties of the chairperson, if the chairperson is not in attendance. 
(b)  If the chairperson and the vice-chairperson are absent and a quorum is present, the remaining Councilmembers shall select a Councilmember to serve as temporary chairperson of the meeting until either the chairperson or vice-chairperson is present at the meeting. 
(Code 1998, § 2-33) 
Sec. 2-21. - Committees. 
The chairperson, with the concurrence of the Council, may create committees of members of the Council to study any issue before the Council. Any such committees may make recommendations to the City Council but no committee shall be empowered to make any final decision on any matter before it for consideration. In addition to Councilmembers, committees may include other city officials, staff or citizens at large. Whenever a committee is created, its duties, any litigation on the scope of its duties, and the times, places and periods of time for which the committee may operate, shall be determined by the chairperson with the concurrence of the Council. The chairperson shall serve as an ex officio member of all committees. 
(Code 1998, § 2-34) 
Sec. 2-22. - Open meetings. 
All meetings of the City Council shall be held in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 et seq. The public shall at all times be afforded access to all meetings other than executive sessions. 
(Code 1998, § 2-35) 
Sec. 2-23. - Organizational meeting. 
The City Council shall hold an organizational meeting on or before the second Monday in January. The meeting shall be called to order by the City Clerk and the oath of office shall be administered to the newly elected members of the City Council whose terms of office shall begin the day and hour of taking the oath of office. 
(Code 1979, § 2-1-5; Code 1998, § 2-36) 
Sec. 2-24. - Regular meetings. 
Regular meetings of the City Council shall be held at 6:30 p.m. on the first Monday of each month. All regular meetings shall be held in the City Hall. A notice containing the foregoing information shall be posted and maintained in a conspicuous place available to the general public at the regular meeting place of the Council. 
(Code 1979, § 2-1-1(a); Code 1998, § 2-37; Ord. No. 06-2015 , 8-3-2015) 
Sec. 2-25. - Special meetings and rescheduled regular meetings. 
A regular meeting may be canceled, rescheduled or moved to a new location within the city by the chairperson for any reason. Other special meetings may be called as provided in the Charter. Whenever a rescheduled regular meeting or any other special meeting is to be held at a time or place other than the regularly scheduled time or place, written notice of the change shall be posted for at least 24 hours at the place of the regular meetings. In addition, written or oral notice shall be given by the Clerk at least 24 hours in advance of the meeting to either the legal organ of the city or a newspaper having a general circulation at least equal to that of the legal organ and to each member of the City Council. 
(Code 1979, § 2-1-1(b); Code 1998, § 2-38) 
Sec. 2-26. - Emergency sessions. 
When emergency circumstances occur, the Council may hold a meeting with less than 24 hours' notice to the public. When such meetings are to be held, the Clerk shall provide notice to the legal organ of the city or a newspaper with a general circulation at least equal to that of the legal organ and to each member of the City Council as soon as possible. The notice shall include the subjects expected to be considered at the meeting. In addition, the minutes shall reflect the reason for the emergency meeting and the nature of the notice given to the media. 
(Code 1998, § 2-39) 
Sec. 2-27. - Executive sessions. 
(a)  Executive sessions of the City Council may be held for the purpose of conducting business, excepted from public access requirements as authorized by O.C.G.A. §§ 50-14-2 and 50-14-3. Where a meeting of the Council is devoted in part to matters within the authorized exceptions to public access requirements, any portion of the meeting not subject to any such exceptions shall be open to the public. No executive session shall be held except pursuant to a majority affirmative vote of the City Council taken in a public meeting. 
(b)  The minutes of the public meeting shall reflect the names of the Councilmembers present, those voting for the executive session and the specific reasons for the executive session. Minutes of the executive session may be maintained by the City Clerk at the direction of the chairperson. Any such minutes shall be maintained in a confidential file and shall not be subject to disclosure, except that disclosures of such portions of minutes identifying real estate to be acquired by the Council may only be delayed until such time as the acquisition of the real estate has been completed, terminated, or abandoned or court proceedings have been initiated. 
(Code 1998, § 2-40) 
Sec. 2-28. - Quorum. 
A quorum must be present for conducting meetings of the Council. It is the duty of the chairperson to enforce this rule. Any Councilmember may raise a point of order directed to the chairperson if he believes that a quorum is not present. If, during the course of a meeting, a Councilmember leaves and a quorum no longer exists, the meeting cannot continue. If a quorum is not attained within 30 minutes, the meeting will be rescheduled by the chairperson with the approval of the Councilmembers present. 
(Code 1998, § 2-41) 
Sec. 2-29. - Voting; majority. 
Passage of a motion shall require the affirmative vote of a majority of Councilmembers present and voting at a meeting at which a quorum is present. Unless otherwise specified in these procedures, a majority means more than one-half of the Councilmembers present excluding abstentions. Upon a tie vote, the chairperson shall vote to break the tie. 
(Code 1998, § 2-42) 
Sec. 2-30. - Abstentions. 
A Councilmember shall vote on all motions unless he has a conflict of interest which would prevent him from making a decision in a fair and legal manner. If a conflict of interest does exist, the Councilmember shall explain for the record his decision to abstain on any vote. 
(Code 1998, § 2-43) 
Sec. 2-31. - Agenda. 
(a)  The City Clerk, with the advice of the chairperson and the Councilmembers, shall prepare an agenda of subjects to be acted on for each meeting. Whenever a quorum of the Council is present for a meeting, the meeting shall be open to the public and all notice and recordkeeping requirements applicable to an open meeting must be met. The agenda shall be made available to the Councilmembers and a copy of the same posted at the meeting site at least one business day before every Council meeting. 
(b)  Members of the public may request that a particular subject be placed on the agenda for the following meeting. To be considered, this request must be submitted in writing to the City Clerk and received at least three business days before the meeting. 
(c)  The order of the agenda may be changed during a meeting by a majority vote of the Council. A new subject that requires urgent attention may be added to the agenda during a meeting by a majority vote of the Council. 
(d)  A copy of the agenda and a list of those members present shall be made available to the public for inspection within two business days of the adjournment of any meeting. 
(Code 1998, § 2-44; Ord. No. 06-2015 , 8-3-2015) 
Sec. 2-32. - Consent agenda. 
(a)  A consent agenda may be prepared by the City Clerk for the Council to unanimously adopt motions on routine items. Any items of business that are expected to receive unanimous approval and where no debate is expected may be placed on a consent agenda. 
(b)  At the appropriate time of the meeting, the chairperson shall read all of the items on the consent agenda. If a Councilmember objects to an item being on the consent agenda, the chairperson shall move that particular item to the regular agenda. Following the reading of the consent agenda, the chairperson will ask for unanimous approval of the items on the consent agenda. If there are no objections, all the items on the consent agenda will be adopted by unanimous consent. 
(Code 1998, § 2-45) 
Sec. 2-33. - Minutes. 
(a)  The City Clerk shall promptly record the minutes for each Council meeting. The minutes serve as the official written record of the Council meeting and shall be open for public inspection once approved as official by the Council but in no case later than immediately following the next regular meeting of the Council. The minutes shall specify the names of Councilmembers present at the meeting, a description of each motion or other proposal made at the meeting, the Councilmember who proposed each motion, the Councilmember who seconded each motion, and a record of all votes. In the case of a roll call vote, the name of each Councilmember voting for or against a proposal shall be recorded. It shall be presumed that a Councilmember has voted in the affirmative unless the minutes show otherwise. More detailed information may be included in the minutes at the request of the Council. 
(b)  The Council must approve the minutes before they can be considered as an official record of the Council. A copy of the minutes from the previous meeting shall be distributed to the Councilmembers at least one business day before the following meeting. The minutes of the previous meeting shall be corrected and approved by the Council at the beginning of each meeting. A majority vote is required for approval. Conflicts about the content of the minutes shall be decided by majority vote. Upon being approved, the minutes shall be signed by the chairperson and attested to by the City Clerk. 
(Code 1998, § 2-46) 
Sec. 2-34. - Decorum. 
(a)  All Councilmembers must conduct themselves in a professional and respectful manner. All remarks should be directed to the chairperson and not to individual Councilmembers, staff or citizens in attendance. Personal remarks are inappropriate. A Councilmember is not allowed to speak at a meeting until he has been recognized by the chairperson. All comments made by a Councilmember shall address the motion that is being discussed. 
(b)  The chairperson shall enforce these rules of decorum. If a Councilmember believes that a rule has been broken, he can raise a point of order. A second is not required. The chairperson can rule on the question or he may allow the Council to debate the issue and decide the issue by majority vote. 
(Code 1998, § 2-47) 
Sec. 2-35. - Public participation. 
Public participation in meetings of the City Council shall be permitted in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(1)  Public comments. The public shall have the right to address the Mayor and Council on matters of concern. All members of the public who wish to address the Council must submit their name and the topic of their comments to the City Clerk at least three business days before the Council meeting. These individuals will be allotted five minutes to make their comments and their comments must be limited to their chosen topic. These limits can be waived by a majority vote of the Council. 
(2)  Public participation on agenda items. By a majority vote, the Council may allow public comment on an agenda item at the time the item is being considered by the Council. These comments must be limited to the subject that is being debated. Members of the public may speak for five minutes and may only speak once. These limits may be waived by a majority vote of the Council. Anyone wishing to speak at any Council meeting must be recognized by the chairperson before addressing the Council. 
(3)  Decorum. Members of the public shall not make inappropriate or offensive comments at a Council meeting and are expected to comply with the rules of decorum that are established for Councilmembers. Individuals who violate any rules of the Council may be ruled out of order by the chairperson or on a point of order made by a Councilmember. A majority vote of the Council will rule on the point of order. An individual who violates the rules of decorum may be removed from the meeting at the direction of the chairperson. 
(4)  Public hearings. The Council may schedule public hearings for the purpose of soliciting public comment on any subject of interest to the Council. Hearings may be held immediately prior to or following a meeting of the Council or at such other places and times as the Council may determine. No official action shall be taken at any such public hearing. 
(Code 1998, § 2-48) 
Sec. 2-36. - Rules of procedure. 
(a)  The role of the Mayor. 
(1)  The Mayor is in charge of applying the rules in the conduct of the meeting. 
(2)  The Mayor makes the final ruling on the rules of procedure. All decisions by the Mayor are final unless overruled by the Council by a majority vote. 
(b)  Schedule of meetings. When a regular scheduled meeting falls on a national holiday or on a day that City Hall is scheduled to be closed for a holiday, the meeting will be moved to the Tuesday immediately following the Monday of the originally scheduled date. 
(1)  Policy work session. The policy work session meeting is the beginning of the agenda cycle. The meeting is held the third Monday of each month at 6:30 p.m. in the second floor conference room of City Hall. Items on the agenda are discussed by members of the governing authority. The Mayor may, as items are considered by Council, recognize members of the public who desire to make comment on agenda items. It is determined at this meeting what items will be put on the work session agenda and the regular monthly Council meeting for further action. 
a.  Submittal of agenda items. Department heads suggest potential agenda items at the biweekly staff meeting held by the City Manager for inclusion at the policy work session. Department heads must submit agenda items to the City Clerk no later than noon on the Monday prior to the policy work session, seven days prior to the meeting. All backup must be attached at this time. The City Manager and/or Mayor review the items and determine if they will remain on the agenda. 
b.  Councilmembers must have agenda requests submitted to the Mayor or City Manager no later than noon on the Monday prior to the policy work session, seven days prior to the meeting with all backup materials available at that time attached. If the Mayor does not approve an item to be placed on the agenda, two of the Councilmembers may overrule the Mayor's decision. If backup materials are not provided until meeting night, ample copies for all elected officials, City Manager and City Clerk are to be provided. If an item is not approved the submitting member will be notified prior to Friday p.m. 
c.  Except for extraordinary circumstances (as determined by the Mayor) will an item be added to the regular meeting agenda without having first been on a policy work session agenda. No items will be accepted after the deadline. If items are received late, they will be deferred to the following month's agenda in order to comply with O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1(d), (e)(1). 
An electronic file of the agenda containing all backup materials collected for the meeting will be delivered via email to each Councilmember on Tuesday afternoon prior to the meeting. Should any changes be necessary, council will submit changes no later than 12:00 noon on Wednesday prior to publication. The agenda will be published to the website by 5:00 p.m. on the Wednesday prior to the policy work session meeting to be held the following week. 
(2)  Reserved . 
(3)  Regular Mayor and Council meeting . The final meeting of the cycle is the regular Mayor and Council meeting which is held in the courtroom downstairs at City Hall at 6:30 p.m. on the first Monday of each month. This meeting is the only meeting (other than a special called meeting) that official actions are taken. The meeting allows for public input and is recorded and televised on Comcast the Tuesday night of the following week at 10:00 p.m. on channel 25. DVD's are available for purchase from the City Clerk for $5.00 each. It is the intent of the city to post recordings of the City Council meetings on the City of Norcross website (www.norcrossga.net). 
(4)  Special called meeting. Occasionally, there will be an issue or item that is time sensitive and therefore cannot be delayed until it has been through a full agenda cycle. In these limited circumstances, if immediate action on an item is deemed necessary and in the best interests of the City of Norcross, the Mayor or three members of the City Council may officially call a special call meeting. At least 24 hours' notice to the public is required for a special call meeting. 
(5)  Executive sessions . Executive sessions may be held after any policy work session, special called meeting or regular Council meeting only for the purpose of discussion of personnel, real estate or legal matters, as allowed under Georgia law. No official action is taken in any executive session. An affidavit is signed by each member of the governing body stating that only the subject matter for which the meeting was called was discussed. Except in instances where Georgia law forbids it, all discussions held in executive session that meet the bounds of the law are considered confidential. Any member of the governing body shall be subject to public censure for a breach of said confidentiality. 
(c)  Basic format for a Mayor and Council meeting agenda. The template used for the Mayor and Council meeting will be in the following format: 
(1)  Call to order by Mayor or Mayor Pro Tem; 
(2)  Invocation; 
(3)  Pledge of allegiance to the flag of the United States of America; 
(4)  Roll call; 
(5)  Presentation of previous meeting minutes for acceptance; 
(6)  Acceptance of the agenda as presented for the scheduled meeting; 
(7)  Ceremonial presentations, recognitions and swearing in ceremonies; 
(8)  Floor open to citizens desiring to address the governing Council: 
a.  Comments by Citizens; 
b.  Comments by Council. 
(9)  Public hearings; 
General announcements; 
(10)  Consent agenda; 
(11)  Items for discussion; 
(12)  Adjourn to executive session for personnel, real estate and legal. 
First, the Mayor should clearly announce the agenda item number and state what the agenda items subject is. 
Second, the appropriate person will come forward to introduce or explain the item and its intent. The Mayor will then ask members of the City Council if they have any technical questions or are in need of a clarification. 
Third, the Mayor will invite public comments. If numerous members of the public indicate a desire to speak to the subject, the Mayor may limit the time of public speakers. The normal total limit of time for discussion of a matter is 15 minutes. At the end of the allotted time, the Mayor has the authority to end the public comment period on that particular issue. 
Fourth, the Mayor will invite discussion of the item by the City Council. 
Fifth, the Mayor will invite a motion, announcing the name of the member of the City Council who makes the initial motion. 
Sixth, the Mayor will ask for a second to the motion, announce the name of the member of the City Council who seconds the motion. 
Seventh, if the motion is made and properly seconded, the Mayor will confirm publicly that everyone understands the motion, and ask if the motion needs to be repeated. 
Eighth, the Mayor calls for a vote on the item in question, by asking for those in favor of the motion to raise their hand. Nays then respond in the same manner. Those who do not vote, "abstain". An affirmative vote of a simple majority of the members present determines whether a motion passes or is defeated. In case of a tie, the Mayor then votes to determine the outcome by breaking the tie. 
Ninth, the Mayor will announce the result of the vote and may indicate the names of the members of the City Council, who voted either in favor of or in opposition to the motion. 
(d)  Three basic motions. 
(1)  The basic motion. The basic motion puts forward a decision for the Council's consideration. 
(2)  The motion to amend. If a member wants to change a basic motion that is before the Council, they can move to amend it. A motion to amend can only change the basic motion in a manner that retains the premise of the basic motion. 
(3)  The substitute motion. If a member intends to completely negate the basic motion that is before the City Council, and create a new motion, they can make a substitute motion. A substitute motion negates the basic motion and replaces it with a completely different motion. 
The Mayor has the sole discretion to determine whether a proposed substitute or amended motion is a "motion to amend" or a "substitute motion". 
(e)  Multiple motions before the City Council. There can be up to three motions on the floor at the same time. 
When there are multiple motions made and properly seconded at the same time, the vote shall proceed first on the last motion that is made. If it is a substitute motion which passes, it would be a substitute for the basic motion and would eliminate it. The first motion would be moot, as would the second motion (which sought to amend the first motion), and the action on the agenda item would be completed on the passage by the City Council of the third motion (the substitute motion). No vote can be taken on the first or second motions. If the substitute motion (the third motion) fails, the Mayor shall proceed to consider the second (now, the last) motion on the floor, the motion to amend. 
Second, if the substitute motion failed, the Mayor shall deal with the second (now the last) motion on the floor, the motion to amend. The discussion and debate shall focus strictly on the amendment. If the motion to amend passed, the Mayor shall then call for discussion and a vote on the main motion (the first motion) as amended. If the motion to amend failed, the Mayor shall then call for discussion and a vote on the main motion (the first motion) in its original format, not as amended. 
Third, the Mayor would now deal with the first motion that was placed on the floor. The original motion would either be in its original format, or, if amended, would be in its amended format. 
(f)  To debate or not to debate. Motions are generally subject to discussion and debate. Accordingly, basic motions, motions to amend, and substitute motions are all eligible, each in their turn, for full discussion before and by the City Council. The debate shall be limited to 15 minutes unless the Mayor or at least 75 percent of the City Council present at the meeting elects to extend the time allotted for debate. There are exceptions to the general rule of free and open debate on motions. The following motions are not debatable: 
(1)  A motion to adjourn. This motion, if passed requires the Council to immediately adjourn. A motion to adjourn requires a simple majority vote for passage. 
(2)  A motion to recess. This motion, if passed, requires the Council to immediately recess. The Mayor determines the length of the recess which shall last at least five minutes and shall last no longer than one hour. A motion to recess requires a simple majority vote for passage. A motion to fix the time to adjourn. This motion, if passed, requires the Council to adjourn the meeting at the specific time set in the motion. A motion to fix the time to adjourn requires a simple majority vote for passage. 
(3)  A motion to table. This motion, if passed, requires discussion of the agenda item to be halted and the agenda item to be placed on "hold". The motion may include, a specific time in which the item can come back to the Council: A motion to table an item indefinitely or for a specified time requires a simple majority vote for passage. 
(4)  A motion to extend debate. When a motion has been debated for the 15-minute limit and a member of the City Council objects to the Mayor calling the question, a motion to extend the debate is necessary. A motion to extend debate requires that 75 percent of the City Councilmembers present at the meeting elect to extend the time allotted for debate. 
(5)  A motion to limit debate or "calling the question". The most common form of this motion is to say "I move the previous question" or "I move the question" or I call the question." When a member of the body makes such a motion, the member is really saying: "I've had enough debate. Let's get on with the vote". When such a motion is made, the Chair should ask for a second, stop debate, and vote on the motion to limit debate. The motion to limit debate requires a two-third's vote of the body. 
(6)  A motion to object to consideration of an item. This motion is not debatable, and if passed, precludes the body from considering special rules that apply to the motion to reconsider. A motion to reconsider must be made at the meeting at which the item was first voted upon or at the very next meeting of the governing body where action may be taken on items. The Council, however, can always vote to suspend the rules and by a 75-percent majority of City Councilmembers present at the meeting, can allow a motion to reconsider to be made at another time. A motion to reconsider can only be made by certain members of the body. A motion to reconsider can only be made by a member who voted in the majority in the original motion. If such a member has a change of heart, he or she can make the motion to reconsider (any other member of the Council may second the motion). If the motion to reconsider passes, then the original matter is back before the Council, and a new original motion is then in order. The matter shall be discussed and debated as if it were on the floor for the first time. 
(g)  Courtesy and decorum. The rules of order are meant to create an atmosphere where the Mayor, members of the City Council and the members of the public can attend to business efficiently, fairly and with full participation. At the same time, it is up to the Mayor and the members of the Council to maintain common courtesy and decorum. Only one person at a time shall have the floor, and every speaker must first be recognized by the Chair before proceeding to speak. 
The Mayor shall ensure that debate and discussion of an agenda item focuses on the item and the policy in question, not the personalities of the member of the City Council. The Mayor has the right to cut off discussion that is too personal, is too loud, or is too crude. A speaker may be interrupted for the following reasons: 
(1)  Privilege. The proper interruption shall be; "point of privilege." The Mayor shall ask the interrupter to "state your point." Appropriate points of privilege relate to anything that would interfere with the normal comfort of the meeting. For example, the room may be too hot or too cold, or a blowing fan might interfere with a person's ability to hear. 
(2)  Order. The proper interruption shall be: "point of order." The Mayor shall ask the interrupter to "state your point." Appropriate points of order relate to anything that would not be considered appropriate conduct of the meeting. For example, if the Mayor moved on to a vote on a motion that permits debate without allowing that discussion or debate. 
(3)  Appeal. If the Mayor makes a ruling that a member of the City Council disagrees with, that member may appeal the ruling of the Mayor. If the motion is seconded, and after debate, if it passes by a simple majority vote, then the ruling of the Mayor is deemed reversed. 
(4)  Call for order of the day. If a member of the City Council believes that the body has drifted from the agreed-upon agenda, such a call may be made. It does not require a vote, and if the Mayor discovers that the agenda has not been followed, the Mayor shall remind the City Council to return to the agenda item properly before them. If the Mayor fails to do so, the Mayor's determination may be appealed. 
(5)  Withdraw a motion. During debate and discussion of a motion, the maker of the motion on the floor, at any time, may interrupt a speaker to withdraw his or her motion from the floor. The motion is immediately deemed withdrawn, although the Mayor may ask the person who seconded the motion if he or she wishes to make the motion, and any other member may make the motion if properly recognized. 
(Ord. No. 15-2008, 5-5-2008; Ord. No. 25-2008, 11-3-2008; Ord. No. 10-2010, 6-7-2010; Ord. No. 13-2010, 10-4-2010; Ord. No. 18-2012, 7-2-2012; Ord. No. 09-2014, 11-3-2014; Ord. No. 06-2015 , 8-3-2015) 
Secs. 2-37—2-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LEGISLATION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Powers and authority of municipality generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-1; home rule powers of municipality generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-3. 

Sec. 2-61. - Legislative authority. 
The City Council shall exercise the legislative functions of the city, and may pass any ordinance or resolution that it deems best for the government of the city; provided, however, that such ordinance or resolution is not in conflict with the Charter, the constitution or the laws of the state, or the Constitution or the laws of the United States. 
(Code 1998, § 2-81) 
Sec. 2-62. - Ordinances, resolutions, contracts and interlocal agreements. 
Unless otherwise provided in this Code, all ordinances, resolutions, contracts and interlocal agreements of the city shall be prepared, approved, introduced and adopted in the manner provided in this division. 
(Code 1998, § 2-82) 
Sec. 2-63. - Preparation of ordinances. 
Whenever possible, all ordinances shall be prepared by the City Attorney. 
(Code 1998, § 2-83) 
Sec. 2-64. - Required elements of ordinances. 
All ordinances passed by the Council shall contain the following items, which shall be set forth in the ordinance in the following order: 
(1)  Ordinance number. 
(2)  Title and purpose. 
(3)  Enacting clause. 
(4)  Body of ordinance by sections. 
(5)  Severability clause. 
(6)  Penalty clause. 
(7)  Repealing clause. 
(8)  Adoption date. 
(9)  Effective date. 
(10)  Authentication of City Clerk. 
(Code 1979, § 2-1-3; Code 1998, § 2-84) 
Sec. 2-65. - Introduction of ordinances, resolutions and other matters. 
Ordinances, resolutions and other matters of subjects requiring action by the Council must be introduced and sponsored by a member of the Council. 
(Code 1998, § 2-85) 
Sec. 2-66. - Subject matter of ordinances. 
No ordinance shall relate to more than one subject, which shall be clearly expressed in its title, and no ordinance, or section of such ordinance, shall be amended or repealed unless the new ordinance contains the title of the ordinance or section amended or repealed, and when practicable, all ordinances shall be introduced as amendments to this Code. 
(Code 1998, § 2-86) 
Sec. 2-67. - Adoption of ordinances, resolutions, etc. 
An ordinance, resolution or contract shall be deemed adopted or approved when it receives an affirmative vote of a majority of the whole Council. 
(Code 1998, § 2-87) 
Secs. 2-68—2-92. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Power to define, regulate and alter the powers, duties, qualifications, compensation and tenure of municipal officers, agents and employees, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2(2); Fair Employment Practices Act of 1978, O.C.G.A. § 45-19-20 et seq. 

Sec. 2-93. - City Clerk. 
(a)  The Office of City Clerk is hereby established in and for the city. The office shall be composed of the City Clerk and any other employees that may be necessary. 
(b)  The City Clerk, or office personnel under the Clerk's direction, shall: 
(1)  Exercise any powers and perform any duties charged to the City Clerk by the city Charter or this Code; 
(2)  Be the custodian of the city seal and affix its impression on documents whenever required; 
(3)  Carefully preserve the codes, records and documents belonging to the city which are not delegated to the custody of some other department of the city, and maintain a proper index of city records and documents so that ready access thereto and use thereof may be had; 
(4)  Attest to the Mayor's signature on all contracts; and 
(5)  Perform such other duties as may be assigned, from time to time, to the City Clerk by the Mayor and Council. 
(Code 1979, § 2-3-1; Code 1998, § 2-122; Ord. No. 18-95, § I, 11-6-1995) 
Sec. 2-94. - Code Enforcement Officer. 
(a)  There is hereby created the Office of Code Enforcement for the city. 
(b)  The Code Enforcement Officer shall be hired by and report directly to the Community Development Director. 
(c)  The duties of the Code Enforcement Officer shall be to: 
(1)  Enforce city ordinances and issue warnings and citations. 
(2)  Perform all duties of this Code/Code Enforcement Officer under the city personnel management system. 
(Code 1979, § 2-13-18; Code 1998, § 2-123; Ord. No. 18-95, § I, 11-6-1995; Ord. No. 08-2007, pt. I, 3-5-2007) 
Sec. 2-95. - City Attorney. 
(a)  The Office of City Attorney is hereby created in and for the city. The office shall be composed of the City Attorney together with any Assistant City Attorneys that may be authorized by the City Council. 
(b)  The City Attorney or assistants under his direction shall be the legal advisor and representative of the city and, in that capacity, shall: 
(1)  Exercise any powers and perform any duties charged to the City Attorney by the Charter or this Code; 
(2)  Advise any Councilmember or the Mayor when requested, upon all legal questions arising in the conduct of the city business; 
(3)  Prepare or revise ordinances when so requested by the City Council or Mayor; 
(4)  Give official opinions upon any legal matter or question submitted by a majority vote of the City Council; 
(5)  Shall at the discretion of the Mayor and Council attend Council meetings for the purpose of giving the Mayor and Council any legal advice requested by its members; 
(6)  Prepare for execution all contracts and instruments to which the city is a party when so requested and approve, as to form, all bonds and city contracts; 
(7)  Prepare, when authorized by the City Council, charges and complaints against, and appear in the municipal court in the prosecution of persons charged with a violation of this Code or of any regulations and see to the full enforcement of all civil judgments or decrees rendered or entered in favor of the city; 
(8)  Defend any and all suits and actions at law or equity brought against the city, unless otherwise directed by the City Council; 
(9)  Prepare and file any civil suit or action at law or equity to secure or protect the city's best interest when so ordered by a resolution of the City Council; 
(10)  Make immediate report to the City Council of the outcome of any litigation in which the city has a direct interest; 
(11)  Keep complete and accurate records of the following, which records shall remain the property of the city: 
a.  All suits in which the city had or has an interest, giving the names of the parties, the nature of the action, the disposition of the case or its status, if pending, and the briefs of counsel; and 
b.  All written opinions prepared by the City Attorney and all certificates or abstracts of titles furnished by the City Attorney to the city, or any department or official thereof; and 
(12)  Render any other legal services that may be required by the City Council. 
(Code 1979, § 2-3-2; Code 1998, § 2-124; Ord. No. 18-95, § I, 11-6-1995; Ord. No. 04-2004, 3-1-2004) 
Secs. 2-96—2-118. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DEPARTMENTS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Expenditure of county funds for insurance and employment benefits, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-11.1; employment of additional temporary personnel and equipment for assistance of county officers or departments, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-11. 

Sec. 2-119. - General Government Administration Department. 
A General Government Administration Department is hereby created for the city. The Department shall be composed of a Department head and any other employees that may be necessary. Subject to the authority of the City Manager to direct and supervise, the supervision and control of the Department is vested in the Department head. The Department shall be responsible for general administration, overall computer operations, human resources, and all utility and franchise applications. 
(Code 1979, § 2-3-11; Code 1998, § 2-156) 
Sec. 2-120. - Police Department. 
A Police Department is hereby created for the city. The Department shall be composed of a Chief of Police and any police officers or other employees that may be necessary. Subject to the authority of the City Manager to direct and supervise, the supervision and control of the Department is vested in the Chief of Police. All references within this Code to the Director of Police Services shall refer to the Chief of Police. 
(Code 1979, § 2-3-12; Code 1998, § 2-157) 
Sec. 2-121. - Public Works Department. 
A Public Works Department is hereby created by the city. The Department shall be composed of a Department head and such other employees as may be necessary. Subject to the authority of the City Manager to direct and supervise, the supervision and control of the Department is vested in the Department head. The Public Works Department shall be responsible for maintenance of streets and sidewalks, water and sewer service, solid waste collection and disposal, electrical services, and all functions incident thereto. 
(Code 1979, § 2-3-13; Code 1998, § 2-158) 
Sec. 2-122. - Community Development Department. 
A Community Development Department is hereby created for the city. The Department may be composed of a Department head, a Building Official, a City Engineer, a Code Enforcement Officer and any other employees that may be necessary. Subject to the authority of the City Manager to direct and supervise, the supervision and control of the Department is vested in the Department head. The Building Official, City Engineer and Code Enforcement Officer shall be under the supervision of the Department head. The Community Development Department shall be responsible for the enforcement and implementation of the Planning and Development Code. In addition thereto, the Community Development Department may have the responsibility to oversee community development projects, capital improvement undertakings, and all other related matters. 
(Code 1979, § 2-3-15; Code 1998, § 2-159; Ord. No. 08-2007, pt. I, 3-5-2007) 
Sec. 2-123. - General Government Administration Department. 
A General Government Administration (GGA) Department is hereby created by the city. The Department shall be composed of a Department head and any other employees that may be necessary. Subject to the authority of the City Manager to direct and supervise, the supervision and control of the Department is vested in the Department head. 
(Code 1979, § 2-3-17; Code 1998, § 2-160) 
Sec. 2-124. - Consolidation. 
Nothing contained in this article shall prevent the consolidation, at the Mayor's and Council's discretion, of one or more of the city departments. Nothing contained herein shall prevent one individual from acting as a Department head in one or more city departments subject to the direction of the Mayor and Council. 
(Code 1979, § 2-3-19; Code 1998, § 2-161) 
Secs. 2-125—2-146. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND AUTHORITIES[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Code of ethics for members of boards, commissions and authorities, O.C.G.A. § 45-10-3. 

Sec. 2-147. - Qualifications of members. 
(a)  The qualifications for membership on boards, commissions, or authorities shall be as established by the City Council from time to time. 
(b)  Unless otherwise provided by state law, members of any board, commission or authority shall serve at the pleasure of the City Council. 
(Code 1979, § 2-3-32; Code 1998, § 2-192) 
Secs. 2-148—2-177. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - RECORDS MANAGEMENT[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference— Offenses involving public records, documents and other items, O.C.G.A. § 45-11-1; inspection of public records, O.C.G.A. § 45-6-6; records as public property, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-102; "Georgia Records Act," O.C.G.A. § 50-18-90 et seq.; records management plan required, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-99(e). 

Sec. 2-178. - Management responsibility. 
The City Clerk is responsible for records management activities. The City Clerk shall act for and on behalf of the Mayor and Council in directing and coordinating all records management matters. Each Department head is responsible for their department's current use records until they are made available to archiving. The records management procedure shall be in accordance with applicable state law. 
(Code 1979, § 2-3-41; Code 1998, § 2-226; Ord. No. 18-95, § I, 11-6-1995; Ord. No. 06-96, 2-5-1996) 
Sec. 2-179. - Destruction of records. 
(a)  No record shall be destroyed, except in accordance with approved retention schedules. 
(b)  Whenever any records are destroyed, a certificate of destruction shall be prepared and forwarded to the Mayor and Council which shall show the type of records destroyed, the approved retention schedule number, the dates covered, and the volume destroyed. 
(Code 1979, § 2-3-42; Code 1998, § 2-227) 
Secs. 2-180—2-196. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - PERSONNEL[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to establish retirement systems for municipal employees, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2(4); authority of municipality to provide insurance, retirement and pension benefits, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-4; social security coverage for employees of the state and political subdivisions of the state, O.C.G.A. § 47-18-1 et seq.; Georgia municipal employees benefit system, O.C.G.A. § 47-5-1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-197. - Personnel management system. 
The employment rules and regulations for employees of the city, as well as the personnel classification and pay plans, shall be as set forth in that certain document entitled "Norcross Personnel Policy," a copy of which shall be maintained on file in the Office of the City Clerk and made available for public inspection during regular business hours. These rules and regulations and any amendments or changes thereto are hereby incorporated into this Code and made a part hereof as fully as if set forth in this article. 
(Code 1979, §§ 2-4-1, 2-4-2; Code 1998, § 2-256; Ord. No. 18-95, § II, 11-6-1995; Ord. No. 11-2000, 7-10-2000; Ord. No. 12-2000, 8-7-2000; Ord. No. 15-2000, 11-6-2000; Ord. No. 16-2000, 11-6-2000; Ord. No. 01-2001, 2-5-2001; Ord. No. 05-2001, 3-5-2001; Ord. No. 07-2001, 5-7-2001; Ord. No. 10-2001, 7-2-2001; Ord. No. 01-2002, 1-7-2002; Ord. No. 07-2002, 3-4-2002; Ord. No. 08-2002, 4-1-2002; Ord. No. 09-2002, 4-1-2002; Ord. No. 11-2002, 12-9-2002; Ord. No. 05-2003, 4-7-2003; Ord. No. 17-2003, 11-3-2003; Ord. No. 01-2004, 2-2-2004; Ord. No. 06-2004, 5-3-2004; Ord. No. 09-2004, 10-4-2004; Ord. No. 15-2004, 10-4-2004; Ord. No. 18-2004, 12-6-2004; Ord. No. 19-2004, 12-6-2004; Ord. No. 01-2005, 2-7-2005; Ord. No. 02-2005, 2-7-2005; Ord. No. 10-2006, 10-2-2006; Ord. No. 11-2006, 10-2-2006) 
Sec. 2-198. - Classification and pay plan. 
The employment positions in the city and the duties, responsibilities, and wage or salary rates of each shall be as set forth in that certain document entitled "Classification and Pay Plan for the City of Norcross", a copy of which shall be maintained on file in the Office of the City Clerk and made available for public inspection during regular business hours. This plan and any amendments or changes thereto are hereby incorporated into this Code and made a part hereof as fully as if set forth in this article. 
(Code 1979, § 2-4-2; Code 1998, § 2-257; Ord. No. 15-2000, 11-6-2000; Ord. No. 16-2000, 11-6-2000; Ord. No. 01-2001, 2-5-2001; Ord. No. 03-2001, 3-5-2001; Ord. No. 04-2001, 3-5-2001; Ord. No. 07-2001, 5-7-2001; Ord. No. 13-2001, 12-3-2001; Ord. No. 01-2002, 1-7-2002; Ord. No. 11-2002, 12-9-2002; Ord. No. 01-2003, 2-3-2003; Ord. No. 05-2003, 4-7-2003; Ord. No. 12-2003, 8-4-2003; Ord. No. 13-2003, 9-2-2003; Ord. No. 01-2004, 2-2-2004; Ord. No. 06-2004, 5-3-2004; Ord. No. 12-2004, 8-2-2004; Ord. No. 09-2004, 10-4-2004; Ord. No. 18-2004, 12-6-2004; Ord. No. 19-2004, 12-6-2004; Ord. No. 01-2005, 2-7-2005; Ord. No. 01-2007, 1-2-2007; Ord. No. 05-2013 , 5-6-2013) 
Sec. 2-199. - Governing officials, employees, boards, authorities indemnification. 
Any governing official, employee or members of authorities and boards of the city against whom a claim is made arising from damage to the person or property of another and which damage occurred in the pursuit of their official duties with the city, shall be indemnified and held harmless from such claim by the city. No distinction is made between full and parttime employment or appointment. 
(Code 1979, § 2-4-3; Code 1998, § 2-258; Ord. No. 18-95, § II, 11-6-1995) 
Sec. 2-200. - Retirement plan. 
(a)  The retirement plan for the employees of the City of Norcross, Georgia, is hereby amended and restated as set forth in and subject to the terms and conditions stated in the following adoption agreement, any addendum to the adoption agreement, the Georgia Employees Benefit System (GMEBS) Master Plan Document, and the GMEBS Trust Agreement. 
(b)  Except as otherwise specifically required by law or by the terms of the master plan or adoption agreement (or any addendum), the rights and obligations under the plan with respect to persons whose employment or term of office with the City was terminated for any reason whatsoever prior to the effective date of this section [January 1, 2012] are fixed and shall be governed by such plan, if any, as it existed and was in effect at the time of such termination. 
(Ord. No. 22-2011, §§ 1, 2, 11-7-2011) 
Chapter 4 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq.; authority to adopt rules and regulations relating to manufacture, sale and distribution of distilled spirits, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-49. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 4-1. - Consumption in public places. 
No person shall consume any alcoholic beverage while in or upon public streets, alleys, sidewalks, parking lots, or other public ways within the city except as specifically permitted in sections 4-4, 4-5, 4-6, 4-7 and/or 4-8. 
(Code 1979, § 11-1-7(a); Code 1998, § 6-1; Ord. No. 11-2018 , § I, 9-4-2018) 
Sec. 4-2. - Open containers—Vehicles. 
No person shall have in his possession an open container containing alcohol within or on a motor vehicle, including motorcycles, while parked or standing on a public street or public parking lot in the city, or while such vehicle is in motion. 
(Code 1979, § 11-1-7(c); Code 1998, § 6-2) 
Sec. 4-3. - Same—In public. 
No person shall be in possession of any glass, can or open container containing alcohol on any thoroughfare, street, sidewalk, alley, parking lots or any other public way within the city, except as specifically permitted in sections 4-4, 4-5, 4-6, 4-7 and/or 4-8. 
(Code 1979, § 11-1-7(b); Code 1998, § 6-3; Ord. No. 11-2018 , § I, 9-4-2018) 
Sec. 4-4. - Exceptions—Consumption, possession of alcoholic beverages on city property. 
(a)  No person shall consume or have in his possession any alcoholic beverage on property owned by the city which shall include, but is not limited to, recreational areas and municipal parks; provided however, 
(1)  This section shall not apply to city-owned buildings including the community center, the welcome center, the city arts center/rectory, the kudzu and the train depot buildings; and 
(2)  This section shall not apply to the personal consumption of alcoholic beverages in paper or plastic cups by the public in Discovery Garden Park on weekdays between the hours of 5:00 p.m. to 10:00 p.m., Saturdays from 1:00 p.m. to 10:00 p.m. and Sundays from 2:00 p.m. to 8:00 p.m. These hours may be further restricted for specific events where the public consumption of alcoholic beverages is not deemed appropriate by the Director of Public Works, Utilities and Parks. Notices shall be posted at Discovery Garden Park during the events for which the consumption of alcoholic beverages is not permitted. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, the City Council may, by resolution, allow consumption of alcoholic beverages on city property during special events as declared by the City Council. 
(Code 1979, § 11-1-7(d); Code 1998, § 6-4; Ord. No. 13-2007, 6-4-2007; Ord. No. 25-2012, 10-1-2012; Ord. No. 13-2016 , § I, 12-5-2016; Ord. No. 11-2018 , § I, 9-4-2018) 
Sec. 4-5. - Exceptions—City-sponsored events. 
(a)  Whenever the City Council shall determine that the public interest would be served by such action, the Council may designate by resolution that the provisions of sections 4-1, 4-3, and 4-4 shall not apply to city-sponsored events at such place and at such time as specifically designated by resolution. 
(b)  In the event that the City Council does enact a resolution excepting a specific event from the provisions of sections 4-1, 4-3, and 4-4, the following provisions shall control in that instance: 
(1)  One drink on-street limit. Any establishment licensed to dispense alcoholic beverages by the drink for consumption on the premises is authorized to dispense an alcoholic beverage in a paper or plastic cup, or other container other than a can, bottle, or glass, for removal from the premises; provided, however, that no establishment shall dispense to any person more than one such alcoholic beverage at a time for removal from the premises, and no person shall remove at one time more than one such alcoholic beverage from the licensed premises. 
(2)  Size limited to 16 fluid ounces. No container in which an alcoholic beverage is dispensed and removed from the licensed premises shall exceed 16 fluid ounces in size. No person shall hold in his possession on the streets and sidewalks, in parks and squares, or in other public places within the defined area any open alcoholic beverage container which exceeds 16 fluid ounces in size. 
(3)  Drinking from can, bottle, or glass prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to drink or attempt to drink any alcoholic beverage from a can, bottle, or glass or to possess in an open can, bottle, or glass any alcoholic beverage on the streets, sidewalks, rights-of-way, and parking lots, whether public or private. 
(Ord. No. 14-2008, 5-5-2008; Ord. No. 11-2018 , § I, 9-4-2018) 
Sec. 4-6. - Exceptions for permits issued for sidewalk sales of alcoholic beverages during designated city-sponsored events. 
(a)  During city sponsored events where one or more of the streets of Downtown Historic Norcross are closed for the duration of the event, and the City Council has passed a resolution pursuant to section 4-5 above, said resolution may also provide that any establishment licensed to dispense alcoholic beverages by the drink for consumption on the premises may apply to the city for a permit (hereinafter a "temporary outdoor sales permit") to set up a temporary booth, stand, kiosk or tent for the sale of alcoholic beverages (a "temporary bar") immediately adjacent to said establishment for the duration of the event during such times that are specifically designated by resolution establishing the event, as set forth in section 4-5. 
(1)  Said temporary bar must be located on the sidewalk immediately adjacent to or in front of said establishment; or 
(2)  Said temporary bar must be located on a public or private parking lot immediately adjacent to said establishment; provided however; 
(3)  No temporary bar may be permitted on any public street or in any designated parking area on any public street; 
(4)  The location, size and configuration of said temporary bar must be approved by the City Manager or his designee and must be properly zoned and approved by the Community Development Director. 
(b)  The establishment applying for the temporary outdoor sales permit shall pay the fees as adopted by city council in the schedule of fees and kept on file in the City Clerk's office. 
(c)  The temporary outdoor sales permittee shall be required to comply with all general ordinances and the licensing and regulations for a consumption on the premises establishment. 
(d)  All employees of the temporary outdoor sales permittee working the establishment's temporary bar dispensing, selling, serving, taking orders or mixing alcoholic beverages shall be required to have a pouring permit. 
(e)  As a condition on the issuance of the temporary outdoor sales permit, the permittee shall indemnify and hold the city harmless from claims, demand or cause of action which may arise from activities associated with the event and/or the operation of the temporary bar. 
(f)  The temporary outdoor sales permittee must obtain written approval from Chief of Police for crowd control, pedestrian traffic control and security measures. 
(g)  The City Manager or his designee may immediately revoke any or all temporary outdoor sales permits issued for an event if it is determined that continued alcohol sales may endanger the health, welfare or safety of the public. 
(h)  Nothing contained herein shall be construed to create a vested right for any establishment to be issued a temporary outdoor permit. 
(Ord. No. 07-2015 , § I, 10-5-2015; Ord. No. 11-2018 , § I, 9-4-2018) 
Sec. 4-7. - Exceptions—Temporary special event licenses. 
(a)  Requirements: 
(1)  Private events. A temporary special event license may be issued to any person for a period not to exceed two days in any one year for an approved special event to be held on privately owned property. 
(2)  City sponsored events. A temporary special event license may be issued to any person designated by the city for a city sponsored event for the duration of the event at such place and during such times that are specifically designated by resolution establishing the event, as set forth in section 4-5. 
(3)  A temporary special event license may be issued for mobile concession trucks and trailers for the sale of beer, malt beverages and/or wine ("mobile alcohol concessions"). Distilled spirits shall not be sold from mobile alcohol concessions. Mobile alcohol concessions are not permitted to sell food or other products and shall not be issued a food truck permit. Food trucks are not permitted to sell any alcoholic beverages. 
(4)  The person applying for the temporary special event license shall pay the fees as adopted by city council in the schedule of fees and kept on file in the City Clerk's office. 
(5)  The temporary special event licensee shall be required to comply with all general ordinances and the licensing and regulations for a consumption on the premises establishment with the exception of the full-service kitchen requirement. 
(b)  Any employee or volunteer of the special event licensee, working the special event in any position dispensing, selling, serving, taking orders or mixing alcoholic beverages, shall not be required to obtain a pouring permit for the special event. 
(c)  The City Manager or his designee may immediately revoke any temporary license for a special event if it is determined continued alcohol sales may endanger the health, welfare or safety of the public. 
(d)  As a condition on the issuance of the special event license, the licensee shall indemnify and hold the city harmless from claims, demand or cause of action which may arise from activities associated with the special event. 
(e)  The special event must meet the following criteria prior to the issuance of a license to sell alcoholic beverages: 
(1)  The special event must have the prior approval of the Chief of Police on crowd control, traffic control measures and security measures. 
(2)  The location at which the special event is to take place must be approved by the General Government Administration Department Director or his designee and the location must be properly zoned and approved by the Community Development Director. 
(Ord. No. 11-2018 , § I, 9-4-2018) 
Sec. 4-8. - Exceptions—Downtown dining district—Outside consumption of alcoholic beverages permitted. 
(a)  The Mayor and Council may, by resolution, designate a downtown dining district as a specifically authorized and pedestrian oriented area of the city that applies to all establishments holding a valid license for retail consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises within such area to dispense and/or serve an alcoholic beverage for carry out purposes, provided all other laws, rules and ordinances are followed. 
(b)  Within the downtown dining district, the provisions of sections 4-1, 4-3, and 4-4 shall not apply and the following provisions shall control: 
(1)  One drink on-street limit . Any establishment licensed to dispense alcoholic beverages by the drink for consumption on the premises is authorized to dispense an alcoholic beverage in a paper or plastic cup, or other container other than a can, bottle, or glass, for removal from the premises; provided, however, that no establishment shall dispense to any person more than one such alcoholic beverage at a time for removal from the premises, and no person shall remove at one time more than one such alcoholic beverage from the licensed premises. 
(2)  Size limited to 16 fluid ounces . No container in which an alcoholic beverage is dispensed and removed from the licensed premises shall exceed 16 fluid ounces in size. No person shall hold in his possession on the streets and sidewalks, in parks and squares, or in other public places within the defined area any open alcoholic beverage container which exceeds 16 fluid ounces in size. 
(3)  Drinking from can, bottle, or glass prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to drink or attempt to drink any alcoholic beverage from a can, bottle, or glass or to possess in an open can, bottle, or glass any alcoholic beverage on the streets, sidewalks, rights-of-way, and parking lots, whether public or private. 
(c)  No alcoholic beverage purchased pursuant to this provision may be consumed outside of the downtown dining district, or upon any private property, without the express consent of the private property owners. 
(d)  Unless authorized by mayor and council in the resolution creating the downtown dining district, no alcoholic beverage purchased within the downtown dining district pursuant to this provision shall be consumed within the downtown dining district on the streets, sidewalks, rights-of-way, and/or parking lots, whether public or private, prior to 12:00 p.m. or later than 12:00 a.m. 
(Ord. No. 11-2018 , § I, 9-4-2018) 
Secs. 4-9—4-28. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MALT BEVERAGES AND WINE[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Governing authority of city has power to locally regulate, license, and tax the manufacturing, distribution and selling of malt beverages, O.C.G.A. §§ 3-5-40 et seq. and 3-5-80 et seq.; governing authority of city has power to locally regulate, license, and tax the manufacturing, distribution and selling of wine, O.C.G.A. §§ 3-6-40 et seq. and 3-6-60 et seq.; local government may authorize issuance license to sell distilled spirits by the drink for consumption on premises where sold, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-90 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 4-29. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alcohol means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever process produced. 
Alcoholic beverage means and includes all alcohol, distilled spirits, beer, malt beverage, wine or fortified wine as defined in this section. 
Approved closure means a cork, stopper or twist-type enclosure with shrink wrap seal forming a leak-proof sanitary seal for a growler. 
Beer or malt beverage means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops, or any other similar product, or any combination of such products in water containing not more than 14 percent alcohol by volume, and including ale, porter, brown stout, lager beer, and strong beer. Also included are beverages known as nonalcoholic beer which is made by fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops, or other products, and containing less than three percent but more than 0.1 percent alcohol by volume. The term "malt beverage" does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine. 
Brewpub means any eating establishment in which beer or malt beverages are manufactured or brewed, subject to the barrel production limitation prescribed in O.C.G.A. § 3-5-36 for retail consumption on the premises and solely in draft form. 
Craft brewery (also known as a microbrewery ) means a building or group of buildings where beer is brewed, bottled, packaged, and distributed for wholesale and/or retail distribution, subject to the limitations imposed by the city zoning resolution. 
Distilled spirits or spirituous liquor means any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume including, but not limited to, all fortified wines. 
Eating establishment or restaurant means any public place, including a place available for rental by the public, which is kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place where meals are actually and regularly served, which: 
(1)  Sells prepared food for consumption by the public on the premises with a full-service kitchen. A full-service kitchen will consist of a three-compartment pot sink, a stove or grill permanently installed, and refrigerator, all of which must be approved by the health and fire departments; 
(2)  Prepares and serves food and prepared meals every hour it is open and the serving of such prepared meals and food is the principal business conducted with the serving of alcoholic beverages as only incidental thereto; 
(3)  Has seating for 75 or more persons at tables or booths, excluding stools and counters; 
(4)  Employs sufficient numbers and kinds of employees to prepare, cook and serve prepared meals and food to its guests; 
(5)  Derives at least 50 percent of its total gross sales from the sale of prepared meals or food, or if a new business, fully intends and expects to derive at least 50 percent of its total gross sales from the sale of prepared meals or food during the remainder of the current calendar quarter and year; and 
(6)  Charges no fee for admission, no cover charge for any purpose, or no fee for contests, nor allows an independent individual to charge fees for admission, cover charge or contests on the premises. 
Fortified wine means any alcoholic beverage containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries, or grapes, either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term "fortified wine" includes, but is not limited to, brandy. 
Growler means a properly sanitized, reusable plastic or glass container capable of holding no more than 64 fluid ounces and which shall be capable of being sealed with an approved closure type at the time of purchase for off-premises consumption of the contents. 
Growler shop means an entity operating under a current proper growler shop license and producing a minimum 75 percent of its revenue from beer and wine sales. 
Growler shop license means the license issued by the city which allows under certain conditions the filling of reusable containers commonly referred to as growlers on the premises of the licensee, as defined herein. 
Hotel means any building or other structure providing sleeping accommodations for hire to the general public either transient, permanent or residential. Such hotels shall maintain a minimum of 50 rooms available for hire and have one or more public dining rooms with adequate kitchens. Motels meeting the qualification set out herein for hotels shall be classified in the same category as hotels. Hotels shall have the privilege of granting franchises for the operation of any licensed establishment herein and the holder of such franchise shall be included in the definition of a hotel hereunder. 
License means an authorization granted by the city to operate as a retail consumption dealer, retail package dealer of malt beverages and wine or wholesale dealer. 
Licensee means the individual to whom a license is issued or, in the case of a partnership or corporation, all partners, officers and directors of such partnership or corporation. 
Liter means the metric measurement currently used by the United States. 
Manufacturer means any maker, producer or bottler of malt beverage or wine. In the case of malt beverage, the term "manufacturer" also means any brewer. In the case of wine, the term "manufacturer" also means any vintner. 
Package means a bottle, can, keg, barrel or other original consumer container. 
Person means any individual, firm, partnership, cooperative, nonprofit membership corporation, joint venture, association, company, corporation, agency, syndicate, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, fiduciary or other group or combination acting as a unit, body politic or political subdivision, whether public, private or quasi-public. 
Pouring permit means an authorization granted by the city to dispense, sell, serve, take orders, or mix alcoholic beverages in establishments licensed as a retail consumption dealer. 
Premises means one or more rooms, all contiguous in nature, operating under the same trade name and sharing a common entrance. 
Retail consumption dealer means any person who sells alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises at retail only to consumers and not for resale. 
Retail package dealer means any person who sells malt beverages and/or wine in unbroken packages, at retail only to consumers and not for resale. 
Wholesaler or wholesale dealer means any person who sells malt beverages and/or wine to other wholesale dealers, to retail dealers or to retail consumption dealers. 
Wine means any alcoholic beverage containing not more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries, or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. 
(1)  The term "wine" includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, champagnes, combinations of such beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines and like products. 
(2)  The term "wine" does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. 
A liquid shall first be deemed to be a wine at that point in the manufacturing process when it conforms to the definition of "wine" contained in this section. 
Wine specialty shop means a retail establishment: 
(1)  a.  Which engages in the sale of table wine, dessert wine, fortified wines, port, sherry or other wine as the term "wine" is defined in this section for consumption on the premises or in closed packages for consumption off the premises, and wine accessories; 
b.  Which engages in the sale of beer and other malt beverages, as contemplated by O.C.G.A. § 3-1-2(13), defined herein as "beer", for consumption on the shop premises only. 
(2)  Which shall not maintain on the premises or offer for sale distilled spirits; 
(3)  Which shall maintain on the premises and offer for sale at all times a variety of wines from not less than 30 manufacturers; 
(4)  Which shall submit an inventory list to the administration office for the city of all wines and beer maintained on the premises and offered for sale. Such inventory list shall be submitted to the General Government Administration Department on a quarterly basis by the first day of each of the following months of each year January, April, July and October; and 
(5)  Whose total interior floor area, inclusive of storage area, shall not exceed 2,500 square feet. 
(Code 1979, § 9-4-1.1; Code 1998, § 6-36; Ord. No. 17-2000, 12-4-2000; Ord. No. 05-2002, 3-4-2002; Ord. No. 07-2003, § 6-36, 7-7-2003; Ord. No. 19-2007, 10-1-2007; Ord. No. 01-2009, pt. I, 3-2-2009; Ord. No. 12-2014 , § IA, 1-5-2015; Ord. No. 05-2018 , § 1, 5-7-2018) 
Sec. 4-30. - Storage of inventory. 
No retail consumption dealer licensed hereunder shall keep any alcoholic beverages at any place except the licensed place of business. 
(Code 1979, § 9-4-14.3; Code 1998, § 6-37; Ord. No. 07-2003, § 6-37, 7-7-2003) 
Sec. 4-31. - No adding to contents. 
No one shall add to or permit the adding to any container of any alcoholic beverage any additional alcoholic beverage. 
(Code 1979, § 9-4-14.4; Code 1998, § 6-38; Ord. No. 07-2003, § 6-38, 7-7-2003) 
Sec. 4-32. - Alcoholic beverages to be transported by employees. 
Any poured alcoholic beverage will be transported from outlet to outlet by employees only. 
(Code 1979, § 9-4-14.5; Code 1998, § 6-39; Ord. No. 07-2003, § 6-39, 7-7-2003) 
Sec. 4-33. - Hours of sale. 
(a)  Retailers with pouring permits shall not engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises except as follows: 
(1)  Between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 1:55 a.m. on Monday through Saturday; 
(2)  Between the hours of 12:00 midnight on Saturdays until 1:55 a.m. on Sundays; 
(3)  Between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 12:00 midnight on Sundays. 
(b)  Retailers in package sales shall not engage in the sale of beer or wine except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight, Monday through Saturday, and between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m. on Sunday. 
(c)  No package sales of distilled spirits are authorized in the city. 
(d)  Alcoholic beverages may be sold for consumption on the premises from 12:00 midnight until 2:00 a.m. on any Monday which is New Year's Day (January 1), of any year. 
(e)  No retailer with a pouring permit shall keep any alcoholic beverages at any place, except the licensed place of business. 
(Code 1979, § 9-4-15(a), (b), (d); Code 1998, § 6-40; Ord. No. 07-2003, § 6-40, 7-7-2003; Ord. No. 17-2006, § 6.40, 12-4-2006; Ord. No. 19-2007, 10-1-2007; Ord. No. 01-2009, pt. I, 3-2-2009; Ord. No. 27-2011, pt. I, 7-11-2011) 
Sec. 4-34. - Sale on election days. 
Pursuant to the delegation of authority granted to the Mayor and Council by O.C.G.A. § 3-3-20(b) the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be lawful on any election day during the hours of sale set forth in section 4-33(a); provided, however, nothing contained in the section shall authorize the sale of alcoholic beverages within 250 feet of a polling place during such time as the polls are open. 
(Code 1979, § 9-4-15(c); Code 1998, § 6-41; Ord. No. 10-2003, 8-4-2003) 
Sec. 4-35. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  No holder of a license authorizing the sale of alcoholic beverages at retail nor any agent or employee of the licensee shall: 
(1)  Knowingly sell, provide or furnish alcoholic beverages or wine to a minor as defined by state law. 
(2)  Knowingly sell, provide or furnish alcoholic beverages to any person who is in a state of noticeable intoxication. 
(3)  Knowingly sell, or permit the consumption of, alcoholic beverages on any day or at any hour when the sale or consumption is prohibited by this article or state law. 
(b)  If conduct is not otherwise prohibited pursuant to subsection (c) of this section, nothing contained in this section shall be construed to prohibit any person under 21 years of age from: 
(1)  Dispensing, servicing, selling or handling alcoholic beverages as a part of employment in any licensed establishment. 
(2)  Taking orders for, and having possession of, alcoholic beverages or wine as a part of employment in a licensed establishment. 
(c)  No licensee under this article shall allow any person under 18 years of age in any establishment to sell, dispense, serve or take orders for malt beverages or wine. This section will not prohibit persons under 18 years of age who are employed in supermarkets, convenience stores, breweries or drugstores from selling or handling malt beverages and wine which are sold for consumption off the premises. 
(d)  It is prohibited for any person to bring in his own alcoholic beverages (brown bag in any establishment either licensed or unlicensed to service alcoholic beverages. 
(Code 1979, § 9-4-16; Code 1998, § 6-42; Ord. No. 07-2003, § 6-42, 7-7-2003) 
Sec. 4-36. - Examination of patron identification cards. 
It shall be the responsibility of the licensee authorizing the sale of alcoholic beverages at retail or any agent or employee of the licensee to examine the required identification of each patron as provided by state law. 
(Code 1979, § 9-4-16.1; Code 1998, § 6-43; Ord. No. 07-2003, § 6-43, 7-7-2003) 
Sec. 4-37. - Distance requirements. 
(a)  No person shall sell or offer to sell malt beverages or wine within 100 yards of any school building. 
(b)  The school building referred to in this section shall apply only to state, county, city or church school buildings and to such buildings at such other schools in which are taught subjects commonly taught in the common schools and colleges of this state. The term "school building" includes only those structures in which instruction is offered. 
(c)  For the purposes of this section, distance shall be measured in a straight line from the main entrance of the school building in question to the main entrance of the establishment for the sale of malt beverages and/or wine in question. 
(d)  No location which is licensed to sell malt beverages and/or wine on the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived shall be denied continued operation under an existing license, or denied a new license based upon the measurements set forth in this section. 
(e)  As to any location licensed in the future, if the distance requirements in this section are met at the time of issuance of any license, the subsequent opening and operation of a church or school within the distance prohibited in this section shall not prevent the continuance of an existing license or the renewal thereof or the issuance of a new license to any subsequent owner of such property. 
(Code 1979, § 9-4-17; Code 1998, § 6-44; Ord. No. 07-2003, § 6-44, 7-7-2003; Ord. No. 20-2007, 10-1-2007) 
Sec. 4-38. - Regulations as to employees. 
The following regulations shall apply to all establishments holding a license for retail consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises: 
(1)  An employee shall meet the same character requirements as set forth in this article for the licensee, except for the residency requirements and except that no employee shall be denied a pouring permit because of any criminal case disposed of more than five years before the date of application for such permit. 
(2)  All present and future employees and agents of the licensee, in connection with the sale or other disposition of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises, shall obtain an annual identification card as prescribed by the General Government Administration Department and must comply with all applicable state and federal laws regarding alcoholic beverages. No employee shall be allowed to work for any licensee hereunder without the identification as prescribed by the General Government Administration Department. The annual fee for the identification permit shall be in the amount set forth in the schedule of regulatory fees which is maintained on file in the Office of the General Government Administration Department where it shall be available for inspection by the public. All permits issued hereunder are renewable on the anniversary date of issue on proper forms furnished by the city. A separate permit must be obtained for each location employing the employee. Said card shall be revoked and seized by the Police Chief for a violation of any of the provisions of this article, city ordinances, or state or federal laws. 
(3)  No permit shall be issued until such time as a signed application has been filed with the General Government Administration Department and a search of the criminal record of the applicant completed by the Police Chief or his designee. Such application shall include, but shall not be limited to, the name, date of birth, and prior arrest record of the applicant, though the fact of an arrest record shall be used for investigative purposes only, and shall give rise to no presumption or inference of guilt. Due to the inclusion of arrest information, these applications shall be regarded as confidential and shall not be produced for public inspection without a court order. 
(4)  No person shall be employed to sell or serve alcoholic beverages by an establishment holding a license hereunder until the person has been fingerprinted or cleared by the Chief of Police or his designee indicating the person is eligible for this employment. The Chief of Police shall have a complete and exhaustive search made relative to any police record of the person fingerprinted or cleared. If there is no record of a violation of this article, the General Government Administration Department shall issue a permit to the employee, stating that the person is eligible for employment. If it is found that the person fingerprinted or cleared is not eligible for employment, the Chief of Police or his designee shall notify the employer that this person is not eligible for employment. 
(5)  It shall be the duty of all persons holding any license to sell alcoholic beverages to file with the General Government Administration Department the name of the establishment, the license number and a list of all employees, with their home addresses and home telephone numbers, twice annually on or before June 1 and again on or before December 1. 
(6)  All permits issued through administrative error or through an error in completion of a background investigation can be terminated by the city. 
(7)  This section shall not be construed to include employees whose duties are limited solely to those of busboys, cook or dishwasher. 
(8)  No licensee shall allow any employee required to hold a permit to work on the licensed premises unless the licensee has on file, on the premises, the current, valid permit for each such employee. 
(9)  If any permit holder leaves the employ of a licensed establishment, the licensee shall immediately surrender the permit to the General Government Administration Department. 
(10)  All permits issued under this article remain the property of the city, and shall be produced for inspection upon the demand of any employee of the city. 
(11)  Separate permits shall be required by the city for each employee working in more than one establishment serving alcoholic beverages. 
(12)  No person shall be issued a permit if it is determined that the person knowingly and willfully falsified, concealed, or covered up any material fact by any device, trick, or scheme while making application to the city for an alcoholic beverage pouring permit under this article. 
(Code 1979, § 9-4-17.1; Code 1998, § 6-45; Ord. No. 09-98, 5-4-1998; Ord. No. 17-2000, 12-4-2000; Ord. No. 07-2003, § 6-45, 7-7-2003; Ord. No. 08-2007, 3-5-2007) 
Sec. 4-39. - Zoning required. 
The sale and/or consumption on the premises of distilled spirits, malt beverages or wine, except in a wine specialty shop, shall be permitted in C1 (Neighborhood business district), C2 (General business district), C3 (Central business district) and DCD (Design concept district). Sale of wine and beer as defined herein in a wine specialty shop shall be permitted only in the downtown development district. The manufacture and consumption of malt beverages on the premises shall be permitted by manufacturers known as microbreweries and craft breweries in the M1 zoning district and in brewpubs in the C2 and C3 zoning district. Sales and/or consumption on the premises of alcohol are specifically prohibited in any other zoning district. 
(Code 1979, § 9-4-18; Code 1998, § 6-46; Ord. No. 07-2003, § 6-46, 7-7-2003; Ord. No. 19-2007, 10-1-2007; Ord. No. 01-2009, pt. I, 3-2-009; Ord. No. 05-2018 , § 1, 5-7-2018) 
Sec. 4-40. - Wholesalers. 
Any person desiring to sell at wholesale any alcoholic beverages in the incorporated area of the city shall make application to the City Council for a license to do so, which application shall be in writing on the forms authorized and prescribed by the General Government Administration Department. No alcoholic beverages shall be delivered to any retail sales outlet in the city except by a duly licensed wholesaler in licensed vehicles. The name of the wholesaler distributor shall be clearly marked on the vehicle. 
(Code 1979, § 9-4-20; Code 1998, § 6-47; Ord. No. 07-2003, § 6-47, 7-7-2003) 
Sec. 4-41. - Retail sales. 
(a)  No malt beverage or wine shall be sold as a retail package, except in retail establishments which derive 50 percent of their total annual sales from groceries and related products. For purposes of this section the term "related products" shall not include gasoline sales nor beer and/or wine sales. No sales of distilled spirits are permitted. 
(b)  No sign or advertisement shall be located or placed in a retail establishment except as follows: 
(1)  Bottles may be labeled to indicate the price of the beer and/or wine offered for sale. 
(2)  A sign may be displayed overhead above the counter where the beer and/or wine is sold. The lettering on such signs shall not be overly conspicuous or the size of the letters exceeding in size the lettering of signs on the other counters where the other products are sold. No other signs may be exposed within or without the retail establishment showing prices or indicating that beer and/or wine is for sale on the premises. 
(c)  Retail sales of single cans, bottles or other containers of malt beverages and/or wine shall be allowed. 
(d)  No retailer shall purchase beer or wine from any person, other than a wholesaler licensed under this article; provided, however, that this section shall not prohibit the purchase by one retailer of another retailer's entire stock in a bona fide purchase of an ongoing business. 
(e)  The General Government Administration Department or its designee may request, from time to time, information concerning purchases and sales of beer and wine from retailers and wholesalers. 
(Code 1979, § 9-4-21; Code 1998, § 6-48; Ord. No. 07-2003, § 6-48, 7-7-2003) 
Sec. 4-42. - Consumption on the premises. 
(a)  No alcoholic beverages shall be sold for consumption on the premises, except in an eating establishment or restaurant or brewpubs or in microbreweries or craft breweries as defined in this article and which is located within a proper zoning district. 
(b)  Any eating establishment or restaurant, as defined in this article, where alcoholic beverages are sold for consumption on the premises shall have a seating capacity of 75 persons excluding stools and counters. 
(c)  The only advertisement or sign indicating that alcoholic beverages may be consumed on the premises shall be a menu stating the name, brand or type of alcoholic beverages served and the price per serving. No other sign may be displayed either within or without the eating establishment indicating that alcoholic beverages are sold or may be consumed on the premises. 
(d)  On or before the 20th day of the month following the end of each calendar quarter, the licensee shall file with the General Government Administration Department a gross income report for the proceeding calendar quarter certified under oath by the licensee which contains a percentage breakdown of the amount of alcoholic beverage sales relative to the establishment's total gross income from the sale of prepared meals and food for the preceding applicable quarter. Failure to file a timely and complete report as provided herein, or the filing of an incomplete or fraudulent report, shall constitute grounds for the suspension or revocation of the license issued by the city to such licensee. 
(Code 1979, § 9-4-22; Code 1998, § 6-49; Ord. No. 17-2000, 12-4-2000; Ord. No. 07-2003, § 6-49, 7-7-2003; Ord. No. 05-2018 , § 1, 5-7-2018) 
Sec. 4-43. - Premises. 
No alcoholic beverage license shall be licensed to any person unless the building in which the business will be located is complete and detailed plans of the building and outside premises are attached to the application, or unless proposed plans and specifications and a building permit of a proposed building to be built are attached to the application. The completed building or the proposed building shall comply with ordinances of the city, regulations of the state revenue commissioner and the state. The proposed building shall also be subject to final inspection and approval when completed by the Building Inspector. Each building in which the business will be located shall contain sufficient lighting so that the building itself and the premises on all sides of the building are readily visible at all times from the front of the street on which the building is located so as to reveal all of the outside premises of such building. Each applicant for an alcoholic beverage license shall attach to the application evidence of ownership of the building or proposed building or a copy of the lease if the applicant is leasing the building. If the applicant is a franchisee, then such applicant shall attach a copy of the franchise agreement or contract with the application. All premises for which an alcoholic beverage license shall be issued shall afford therein adequate sanitary toilet facilities and shall be adequately illuminated so that all hallways, passage ways and open areas may be clearly seen by the customers therein. 
(Code 1979, § 9-4-22.1; Code 1998, § 6-50; Ord. No. 07-2003, § 6-50, 7-7-2003; Ord. No. 11-2018 , § I, 9-4-2018) 
Sec. 4-44. - Open area and patio sales. 
(a)  Alcoholic beverage sales can be made by a licensed consumption on premises establishment in a patio/open area type environment if the establishment has been approved to do so by the Mayor and City Council. 
(b)  The requirements for approval is that the patio/open area be enclosed by some structure providing for public ingress/egress only through the main licensed premises. The purpose of this requirement is to prevent a customer from leaving the outside sales area with an open drink without the licensee's knowledge. 
(c)  The height of such structure shall be a minimum of four feet above ground level. It does not have to be solid nor does it have to restrict visibility into or out of the patio/open sales area. It must be permitted and approved by the city's Building Inspection Department and all other applicable governing regulations or codes. 
(d)  The only exit from this type area is to be through the licensed establishment's main premises and through an approved fire exit (not for general public use unless an emergency exists). The fire exit should be of the type that sounds an alarm so that the establishment will be alerted in the event of unauthorized use when no emergency exists. 
(e)  If a licensee desires a patio/open sales area inside an existing structure, plans will be reviewed and approved on an individual basis by the Mayor and City Council. Interior type patio/open sales areas must also meet the requirements of the city's development and fire codes. 
(f)  Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit a hotel or motel with a consumption on the premises license from making sales and allowing consumption of alcoholic beverages in ballrooms, meeting rooms, reception rooms, or patio areas of such hotel or motel. 
(Code 1979, § 9-4-22.2; Code 1998, § 6-51; Ord. No. 07-2003, § 6-51, 7-7-2003) 
Sec. 4-45. - No outside consumption. 
(a)  It is prohibited for customers to leave the premises with open alcoholic beverages and it is the licensee's responsibility to ensure that no open beverages are sold and carried out, except as specifically permitted in sections 4-4, 4-5, 4-6, 4-7 and/or 4-8. 
(b)  It is prohibited for customers to gather outside an alcoholic beverages establishment and consume alcoholic beverages except as specifically permitted in sections 4-4, 4-5, 4-6, 4-7 and/or 4-8. 
(c)  It is prohibited for the manager or any employee to allow persons to gather outside an alcoholic beverage establishment and consume alcoholic beverages except as specifically permitted in sections 4-4, 4-5, 4-6, 4-7 and/or 4-8. 
(Code 1979, § 9-4-22.2; Code 1998, § 6-51; Ord. No. 07-2003, § 6-51, 7-7-2003; Ord. No. 11-2018 , § I, 9-4-2018) 
Sec. 4-46. - Solicitation prohibited. 
No retail consumption dealer licensed under this article shall require, permit, suffer, encourage or induce any employee or person to solicit in the licensed premises for himself, or for any person other than the patron and guest of the patron, the purchase by the patron of any alcoholic beverage or money with which to purchase the same; nor shall any licensee pay a commission or any other compensation to any person frequenting his establishment or to his agent or manager to solicit for himself or for others, the purchase by the patron of any alcoholic beverage or money with which to purchase the same; nor shall any licensee pay a commission or any other compensation to any person frequenting his establishment or to his agent or manager to solicit for himself or for others, the purchase by the patron of any alcoholic beverage. 
(Code 1979, § 9-4-22.4; Code 1998, § 6-53; Ord. No. 07-2003, § 6-53, 7-7-2003) 
Sec. 4-47. - Noise from establishments prohibited. 
Noise will not be allowed that can be heard outside the physical boundaries of establishments licensed under this article. 
(Code 1979, § 9-4-22.5; Code 1998, § 6-54) 
Sec. 4-48. - Types of entertainment, attire and conduct prohibited. 
The following types of entertainment, attire, and conduct are not permitted upon any premises licensed to sell, serve or dispense alcoholic beverages upon any premises licensed under the business and occupational ordinances of the city in which alcoholic beverages are consumed, allowed or dispensed on the premises: 
(1)  The employment or use of any person, in any capacity, in the sale or service of alcoholic beverages while such person is unclothed or in such attire as to expose to view any portion of the female breast below the tip of the areola or of any portion of the pubic hair, anus, cleft of the buttock, vulva or genitals; 
(2)  Live entertainment where any person appears in the manner described in subsection (1) of this section or where any person performs acts which simulate: 
a.  Sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation or any sexual acts which are prohibited by law; 
b.  The touching, caressing or fondling of the breast, buttock, anus or genitals; or 
c.  The displaying of the pubic hair, anus, vulva or genitals. 
(3)  The showing of any film, still pictures, electronic reproduction or other visual reproductions depicting any of the acts described in subsection (2) of this section; or 
(4)  The holding, promotion or allowance of any contest, promotion, special night or any other activity where patrons of the licensed establishment are encouraged or allowed to engage in any of the conduct prohibited in this section. 
(Code 1979, § 9-4-22.6; Code 1998, § 6-55; Ord. No. 07-2003, § 6-55, 7-7-2003; Ord. No. 10-2003, 8-4-2003) 
Sec. 4-49. - Enforcement. 
The City Manager or his designee will cause periodic inspections of all establishments licensed to sell alcoholic beverages under this article during the hours in which the premises are open for business to ensure compliance with this article and state law. If a violation of this article is observed the licensee or employee who is in violation of this article will be issued a summons to appear at the next session of municipal court. A thorough investigation will be conducted and the results of the investigation forwarded to the General Government Administration Department in order to comply with section 4-101. 
(Code 1979, § 9-4-23; Code 1998, § 6-56; Ord. No. 17-2000, 12-4-2000; Ord. No. 07-2003, § 6-56, 7-7-2003) 
Sec. 4-50. - Establishment closure in cases of emergency. 
The Chief of Police or his designee may immediately close an establishment licensed under this article in case of emergency, for the safety of the public or to investigate a crime, for a period of time not to exceed 24 hours. 
(Code 1979, § 9-4-23.1; Code 1998, § 6-57) 
Sec. 4-51. - Happy hour promotion and sales. 
(a)  No licensee or employee or agent of a licensee, in connection with the sale or other disposition of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises, shall: 
(1)  Offer or deliver any free alcoholic beverage to any person or group of persons. 
(2)  Deliver more than one alcoholic beverage to one person at a time; however, nothing herein shall prohibit a brewpub from offering a sampler of malt beverages in containers not exceeding four ounces. Each sampler shall not exceed four different types of malt beverages. 
(3)  Sell, offer to sell, or deliver to any person or group of persons any alcoholic beverage at a price less than the price regularly charged for such alcoholic beverage during the same calendar week, except at private functions not open to the public. 
(4)  Sell, offer to sell, or deliver to any person or group of persons an unlimited number of alcoholic beverages during any set period of time for a fixed price, except at private functions not open to the public. 
(5)  Sell, offer to sell, or deliver alcoholic beverages to any person or group of persons on any one day at prices less than those charged the general public on that day, except at private functions not open to the public. 
(6)  Sell, offer to sell, or deliver alcoholic beverages, including malt beverages, in any container which holds more than 32 fluid ounces (0.947 liters), except to two or more persons at any one time. 
(7)  Increase the volume of alcohol contained in a drink without increasing proportionately the price regularly charged for such alcoholic beverage during the same calendar week. 
(8)  Encourage or permit on the licensed premises any game or contest which involves the drinking of alcoholic beverages or the awarding of alcoholic beverages as a prize. 
(b)  Each licensee shall maintain a schedule of the price charged for all alcoholic beverages to be served and consumed on the licensed premises or in any room or part thereof. The licensee shall not vary the schedule of prices from day to day or from hour to hour within a single day. The schedule of prices shall be posted in a conspicuous manner so as to be in view of the paying public and said schedule shall be effective for not less than one calendar week. 
(c)  No licensee shall advertise or promote in any way, whether within or without the licensed premises, any of the practices prohibited under subsection (a) of this section. 
(d)  No provision of this section shall be construed to prohibit licensees from offering free food or entertainment provided same is not done to overcome the cover charge prohibition at any time, or to prohibit licensees from including an alcoholic beverage as part of a meal package, or to prohibit the sale or delivery of wine by the bottle or carafe when sold with meals or to more than one person. 
(e)  It is the intent of this section to prohibit activities typically associated with promotions referred to as "happy hour" or similarly designated promotions. 
(f)  The City Manager and the Police Department shall have the responsibility for the enforcement of this article. 
(g)  No licensee may require the purchase of any alcoholic beverage as a part or prerequisite to the purchase of any other product or service. If alcoholic beverages are included as part of a package of other goods and/or services, the alcoholic beverage must be priced separately and all customers must be allowed to purchase the remaining goods and services without the alcoholic beverage at a price from which the full price of the alcoholic beverage has been deducted. 
(Ord. No. 07-2003, § 6-58, 7-7-2003) 
Sec. 4-52. - Brewpub. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Brewpub means any eating establishment in which beer or malt beverages are manufactured or brewed for consumption on the premises. 
(b)  No person shall be issued a brewpub license without first obtaining a retail consumption license. 
(c)  A brewpub license authorizes the holder of such license to manufacture on the licensed premises subject to the barrel production limitation prescribed in O.C.G.A. § 3-5-36 and as amended from time to time solely for retail sale on the premises and solely in draft form. 
(d)  Distribution of any malt beverages produced by a brewpub licensed under this article to any wholesaler is prohibited. 
(e)  Administration. 
(1)  The director of the General Government Administration Department, or his designee, is authorized to establish procedures for administering all provisions of this article to include, but not limited to, reporting forms and requirements, or establishing procedures and schedules for conducting financial audits or inspections of the books or records of any establishment licensed under this section. 
(2)  Every brewpub located within the city shall file a monthly report with the Licensing and Tax Manager, no later than the 20th day of each month, on such forms as the Licensing and Tax Manager may prescribe, setting forth all malt beverages produced during such preceding calendar month, to include beginning and ending inventories. Such report shall also indicate the total production of malt beverages during the report period and the proper tax remittance for such production. Failure to properly complete or submit the required reports shall subject the licensee to a late filing penalty not to exceed $25.00 for each deficient reporting period. 
(Ord. No. 07-2003, § 6-59, 7-7-2003; Ord. No. 05-2018 , § 1, 5-7-2018) 
Sec. 4-53. - Hotel-motel in-room service. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
In-room service means the provision of a cabinet or other facility located in a hotel-motel guestroom: 
(1)  Which contains beer and/or wine only and which is provided upon written request of the guest; 
(2)  Which is accessible by lock and key only to the guest; 
(3)  For which the sale of the beer and/or wine contained therein is final at the time requested, except for a credit which may be given to the guest for any unused portion. 
(b)  Any hotel-motel that acquires in-room service shall be also required to obtain a consumption on the premises license and meet all the requirements of this article. 
(c)  No hotel-motel shall be authorized to provide in-room service until it has been issued a special license to do so. A license fee in the amount set forth in the schedule of fees on file with the General Government Administration Department shall be imposed to provide only beer and/or wine by in-room service. 
(d)  The sale of beer and/or wine by in-room service shall be subject to all restrictions and limitations relative to the retail sale of any alcoholic beverages, except as provided otherwise in this article. 
(e)  Keys for in-room service shall only be sold to guests between the hours of sales permitted in this article. 
(Ord. No. 07-2003, § 6-61, 7-7-2003; Ord. No. 11-2018 , § I, 9-4-2018) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 11-2018, § I, adopted September 4, 2018 repealed § 4-53 and renumbered §§ 4-54—4-56 as §§ 4-53—4-55. The former § 4-53 pertained to eligibility for issuance of a temporary special event license and derived from Ord. No. 07-2003, § 6-60, adopted July 7, 2003; and Ord. No. 05-2015 , § I, adopted June 1, 2015. 
Sec. 4-54. - Growler shops. 
(a)  Growler shop license. Any applicant for or holder of a valid liquor license in the city shall also be eligible for a growler shop license upon approval of the licensee and payment of an additional regulatory fee as provided in section 4-83. 
(b)  Growlers may only be filled with beer or malt beverages from kegs procured from duly licensed wholesalers or manufacturers. 
(c)  It shall be the responsibility of the individual or entity filling the growler to sanitize such growler prior to filling. The licensee must comply with Georgia Department of Agriculture's General Rules general rules 40-7-1-.40 requiring a "contamination free" transfer process for beverages and the use of washed, rinsed and sanitized growler fill tubes, which must be cleaned between each use and must comply with state department of agriculture best management practices for growler refilling. 
(d)  Each growler must be securely sealed and removed from the premises in its original sealed condition utilizing an approved closure. At the time of sale and/or refilling, a paper or plastic adhesive band, strip, or sleeve shall be applied to the container and extend over the top of the approved closure forming a tamper evident seal that must be broken upon opening of the container. The adhesive band, strip, or sleeve shall bear the name and address of the business filling the growler and the contents of the container must be displayed prominently on the container. 
(e)  The licensee must comply with all federal and state laws and regulations regarding packaging and labeling alcoholic malt beverages. Each growler filled with a beer or malt beverage must contain the following warning which may be printed on the paper or plastic adhesive band, strip or sleeve that is applied to the container after filling or which may be affixed separately to the container on a preprinted label as follows: 
"Government Warning" (1) According to the Surgeon General, women should not drink alcoholic beverages during pregnancy because of the risk of birth defects. (2) Consumption of alcoholic beverages impairs your ability to drive a car or operate machinery, and may cause health problems." 
(f)  Growler shops shall be authorized to offer without charge, samples of beer or malt beverages to patrons over the age of 21 years. Samples shall not exceed two ounces in volume nor shall any one individual be offered more than four samples, within a 24-hour period. It shall be the responsibility of the licensee and each employee to comply with the identification requirements set forth herein prior to filling a growler or supplying a sample to a patron to ensure the patron is of legal age to purchase and consume alcoholic beverages. 
( Ord. No. 12-2014 , § IB, 1-5-2015; Ord. No. 05-2018 , § 1, 5-7-2018; Ord. No. 11-2018 , § I, 9-4-2018) 
Editor's note— Former § 4-55. See editor's note, § 4-53. 
Sec. 4-55. - Manufacturer (craft brewery/microbrewery and brewpubs). 
(a)  Manufacturer license required; compliance with applicable regulations. It shall be unlawful to operate an establishment governed under the provisions of this article without first obtaining a license from the city and paying such fees and taxes as may be required by the ordinances, rules and regulations of the city. 
(b)  Investigative and administrative fee. Each application for a license under this article shall be accompanied by a certified check for the full amount of the license fee, together with a separate check or cash in an amount as may be required by the ordinances, rules and regulations of the city to defray investigative and administrative costs. If the application is denied and the license refused, or if the applicant withdraws the application prior to its being issued, the license fee shall be refunded, but the investigative and administrative fees shall be retained. 
(Ord. No. 05-2018 , § 1, 5-7-2018; Ord. No. 11-2018 , § I, 9-4-2018) 
Editor's note— Former § 4-56. See editor's note, § 4-53. 
Secs. 4-56—4-81. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 4-82. - Required. 
Each growler shop, retail consumption dealer, retail package dealer and each wine specialty shop, as such terms are defined in section 4-29 above, shall be required to obtain a license from the city council upon the terms and conditions of this article. 
(Code 1979, § 9-4-1; Code 1998, § 6-86; Ord. No. 07-2003, § 6-86, 7-7-2003; Ord. No. 19-2007, 10-1-2007; Ord. No. 02-2009. pt. I, 3-2-2009; Ord. No. 12-2014 , § IC, 1-5-2015) 
Sec. 4-83. - Fee. 
The license fee to be paid by an applicant who desires a license under this article shall be as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges. 
(Code 1979, § 9-4-2; Code 1998, § 6-87) 
Sec. 4-84. - Separate license for each location. 
A separate license to sell alcoholic beverages or combinations thereof must be obtained for each location where the same is sold at retail. 
(Code 1979, § 9-4-3; Code 1998, § 6-88; Ord. No. 07-2003, § 6-88, 7-7-2003) 
Sec. 4-85. - Application forms. 
(a)  All persons desiring to sell alcoholic beverages shall make application through the General Government Administration Department on a form prescribed by the General Government Administration Department. 
(b)  No application for alcoholic beverages shall be accepted unless the premises for which the application is made has been completed to the extent that the City Manager can make a determination as to whether or not the premises will comply with this article. Wholesale dealers shall not be subject to the terms of this division. 
(c)  The application shall include but shall not be limited to: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant. 
(2)  The proposed business to be carried on. 
(3)  If a partnership, the names and residence addresses of the partners. 
(4)  If a corporation, the names of the officers, the name and address of the registered agent for service of process, the name of the manager, and the names of all shareholders holding more than 20 percent of any class of corporate stock, or any other entity having a financial interest in each entity which is to own or operate the establishment for which a license is sought. If the manager changes, the applicant must furnish the General Government Administration Department the name and address of the new manager and other information as requested within three days of such change. 
(d)  All applicants shall furnish data, fingerprints, financial responsibility and other records as are required by the General Government Administration Department to ensure compliance with the provisions of this division. Failure to furnish data pursuant to such request shall automatically serve to dismiss the application with prejudice. 
(e)  All applications shall be sworn to by the applicant before a notary public or other officer empowered by law to administer oaths. 
(f)  In all instances in which an application is denied under the provisions of this division the applicant may not reapply for a license for at least one year from the final date of such denial. 
(g)  The General Government Administration Department shall provide written notice to any applicant whose application is denied under the provisions of this division. Such written notification shall set forth in reasonable detail the reasons for such denial and shall advise the applicant of the right to appeal under the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1979, § 9-4-4; Code 1998, § 6-89; Ord. No. 07-2003, § 6-89, 7-7-2003) 
Sec. 4-86. - Publication of notices for application for license. 
No application for a license for sale or manufacture of alcoholic beverages permitted within this city shall be acted upon until such notice shall have been run in a newspaper of general circulation in the city for at least ten days. Such notice shall contain the name of the applicant and the location of the proposed business and shall be run at the applicant's expense. 
(Code 1979, § 9-4-5; Code 1998, § 6-90; Ord. No. 07-2003, § 6-90, 7-7-2003) 
Sec. 4-87. - Issuance. 
Upon a determination that an applicant complies with this division, the General Government Administration Department shall issue the appropriate license. 
(Code 1979, § 9-4-6; Code 1998, § 6-91) 
Sec. 4-88. - Registration of manager. 
All applicants for a license shall list in their application the names, home addresses, home telephone numbers, and places of employment of the persons who will be employed by them as manager in the place of business for which the license is sought to sell or dispense alcoholic beverages. Thereafter, if any person other than the one listed in the application as manager shall be employed as manager, the name, address and telephone number of the new manager shall be filed with the General Government Administration Department within three days of the date of such employment. Upon a change of managers, the City Manager shall be authorized to initiate an investigation of the new manager. If the investigation is unfavorable, the City Manager shall notify the present license holder together with the General Government Administration Department of the unfavorable finding. License holders agree to abide by the direction of the General Government Administration Department as to such finding. 
(Code 1979, § 9-4-7; Code 1998, § 6-92; Ord. No. 17-2000, 12-4-2000; Ord. No. 07-2003, § 6-92, 7-7-2003) 
Sec. 4-89. - Qualifications. 
(a)  No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be granted to any person who is not a citizen of the United States or an alien lawfully admitted for permanent residence. 
(b)  Where the applicant is a partnership or corporation, the provisions of this section shall apply to all its partners, officers, managers and majority stockholders. In the case of a corporation, the license shall be issued jointly to the corporation and to the majority stockholder, if an individual. Where the majority stockholder is not an individual, the license shall be issued jointly to the corporation and its agent registered under the provisions of this division. In the case of a partnership the license will be issued to all the partners owning at least 20 percent of the partnership, or if no partner owns 20 percent, to the partnership, then the general partner, managing partner or the partner with the greatest ownership will be licensed. 
(c)  No person shall be granted any alcoholic beverage license unless it shall appear to the satisfaction of the General Government Administration Department that such person, partners in the firm, or officers and Directors of the corporation shall be of good moral character and in no event shall any license be granted to any persons or officers or Directors of any such corporations who have been convicted or have pleaded guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any crime involving moral turpitude, illegal gambling or illegal possession or sale of illegal drugs or alcoholic beverages within a period of ten years immediately prior to the filing of such application. At the time an application is submitted for any alcoholic beverage license, the applicant shall, by a duly sworn affidavit, certify that the applicant, nor any of the other owners of the establishment, nor the manager of such establishment has been convicted or has pleaded guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any crime involving moral turpitude or the violation of any laws, regulating the sale of illegal drugs, alcoholic beverages, or the illegal gambling laws of this state. If such certification is falsely given, or if the applicant, owners, or manager is later convicted or has pled guilty or nolo contendere to any crime involving moral turpitude, then the license shall be immediately revoked and canceled by administrative action. 
(d)  No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be granted to any person convicted under any federal, state or local law of any felony, within ten years, prior to the filing of application of such license. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any city employee directly involved in the issuance of alcoholic beverage licenses under this division to have any whole, partial or beneficial interest in any license to sell alcoholic beverages in the city. 
(f)  No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be granted to any person who has had any license issued under the police powers of the city previously revoked within two years prior to the filing of the application. 
(g)  The General Government Administration Department may decline to issue a license when any person having any ownership interest in the operation of such place of business or control over such place of business does not meet the same character requirements as set forth in this article for the license. 
(h)  All licensed establishments must have and continuously maintain in the city a registered agent upon whom any process, notice or demand required or permitted by law or under this article to be served upon the licensee or owner may be served. This person must be a resident of the county. The licensee shall file the name of such agent, along with the written consent of such agent, with the General Government Administration Department of the city on the form prescribed. 
(i)  All applicants for any alcoholic beverage license must be of good character, and all operators, managers, clerks, or other employees shall be of like character. Corporate or firm applicants shall be of good business reputation, and no principal of a corporation or firm shall have been convicted of any crime of moral turpitude. 
(j)  A license application may be denied to any applicant for any malt beverage and/or wine license where it appears that the applicant would not have adequate financial participation in the proposed business to direct and manage its affairs, or where it appears that the application is intended to be a mere surrogate for a person who would not otherwise qualify for a license for any reason whatsoever. 
(k)  The General Government Administration Department, in its discretion, may consider any extenuating circumstances which may reflect favorably on the applicant, the application or the proposed location of the business. If in its judgment circumstances are such that granting of the license would not be in the best interest of the general public, such circumstances may be grounds for denying the application. 
(l)  For purposes of the alcoholic beverage ordinance codified in this article, a conviction or plea of guilty or nolo contendere shall be ignored as to any offense for which a defendant was allowed to avail themselves of the Georgia First Offender Act (O.C.G.A. § 42-8-60 et seq.) as amended. Except, however, that any such offense shall not be ignored where the defendant violated any term of probation imposed by the court granting first offender treatment or committed another crime and the sentencing court entered an adjudication of guilt as to the crime for which defendant had previously been sentenced as a first offender. 
(m)  All applicants, including all applicants for renewal, are required to apply for an alcoholic beverage license from the state and a city business license before a license shall be issued under this division. 
(Code 1979, § 9-4-8; Code 1998, § 6-93; Ord. No. 03-2002(A), 1-7-2002; Ord. No. 07-2003, § 6-93, 7-7-2003) 
Sec. 4-90. - Investigation fee. 
Each application for license under this division shall be accompanied by a certified check for the full amount of the license fee, together with a separate check or cash in an amount as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges to defray investigative and administrative costs. If the application is denied and the license refused, or if the applicant withdraws the application prior to its being issued, the deposit representing the license fee shall be refunded, but the fee paid for investigation shall be retained; provided, however, that any person applying for more than one license shall pay only one fee to defray investigative and administrative expenses. Any applicant for a license under this division who has in existence at the time of making the new application an existing license under this division shall pay no investigative and administrative costs. 
(Code 1979, § 9-4-9; Ord. No. 05-98, 3-2-1998) 
Sec. 4-91. - Expiration, renewal. 
(a)  All licenses granted under this division shall expire on December 31 of each year. Licensees who desire to renew their license shall file application with the requisite business tax and fees heretofore provided in this Code with the General Government Administration Department on the form provided for renewal of the license by December 31 for the ensuing year. Applications for renewal must be filed on or before December 31 of each year, otherwise no renewal license shall be granted and an application for renewal shall be treated as an initial application and the applicant shall be required to comply with all rules and regulations for the granting of licenses as if no previous license had been held. 
(b)  No license shall be renewed where the licensee commits any act in violation of federal, state or local laws or ordinances, or does anything else that would disqualify the licensee on an original license application; nor shall any license be renewed where a licensee cannot qualify and meet all requirements as provided in an original application. 
(c)  No license shall be renewed where any license fees have not been paid. 
(Code 1979, § 9-4-10(a); Code 1998, § 6-95; Ord. No. 18-95, § XII, 11-6-1995; Ord. No. 17-2000, 12-4-2000) 
Sec. 4-92. - Time limit on vacating premises after the time of closing. 
In all locations licensed to serve alcoholic beverages by the drink, said premises must be vacated of customers within 30 minutes of the time of closing as established by this article. 
(Code 1979, § 9-4-10; Code 1998, § 6-96; Ord. No. 17-2000, 12-4-2000; Ord. No. 07-2003, § 6-96, 7-7-2003) 
Sec. 4-93. - Display. 
The license issued by the city under this division shall be prominently displayed at the place of business where such beer and/or wine or alcoholic beverages are sold. 
(Code 1979, § 9-4-11; Code 1998, § 6-97; Ord. No. 07-2003, § 6-97, 7-7-2003) 
Sec. 4-94. - Transferability of license. 
(a)  No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be transferable, except as provided in subsections (b) through (d) of this section. 
(b)  In case of the death of a licensee, the establishment shall be allowed to continue to sell alcoholic beverages for a period of 45 days from the date of the death or until expiration of the license or until approval of a new licensee, whichever shall first occur; provided, that no sale of alcoholic beverages shall be allowed until such time as a personal representative of the estate, appointed by a probate court of competent jurisdiction, shall make application for authorization with the General Government Administration Department. 
(c)  If a license is surrendered, or a licensee severs his association with a licensed establishment, the establishment may continue to sell alcoholic beverages for a period of 45 days from the date of surrender, or from the date determined by the General Government Administration Department to be the date of severance; provided, no such sale shall be authorized until such time as a new application indicating that no change of ownership has occurred, except as expected herein. Upon issuance of a new license, the authorization to sell under the previous license shall be revoked by operation of law. No additional license fees shall be required during the period for which the original license was issued. 
(d)  Nothing in this section shall prohibit one or more of the partners holding a license to withdraw from the partnership in favor of one or more of the partners who were partners at the time of the issuance of the license. This section shall not prohibit transfers of stock between persons who held stock in the corporation at the time of issuance of the license nor shall it prohibit transfers of stock which do not result in any person increasing his stock holdings to a total of ten percent or more of any class of stock. 
(e)  Except as provided in subsections (b) through (d) of this section, any change in the ownership of any entity owning a licensed establishment shall cancel and revoke any license automatically, without the necessity of any hearing. 
(Code 1979, § 9-4-12; Code 1998, § 6-98; Ord. No. 07-2003, § 6-98, 7-7-2003) 
Sec. 4-95. - Sale permitted only at licensed premises. 
A license issued under the provisions of this division shall permit the sale of malt beverages and wine or alcoholic beverages only on the premises described in the application. 
(Code 1979, § 9-4-13; Code 1998, § 6-99; Ord. No. 07-2003, § 6-99, 7-7-2003) 
Sec. 4-96. - Selling without a license. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or possess for the purpose of sale any alcoholic beverages where such person does not have a license from the city. 
(Code 1979, § 9-4-14; Code 1998, § 6-100; Ord. No. 07-2003, § 6-100, 7-7-2003) 
Sec. 4-97. - Audits. 
(a)  If the General Government Administration Department deems it necessary to conduct an audit of the records and books of the licensee, the Department shall notify the licensee of the date, time and place of the audit. The General Government Administration Department may designate the person to perform any audit authorized in this Code. The licensee shall cooperate with such audit or forfeit any license issued under this division. 
(b)  All licensed establishments must maintain the following records for a three-year period and make them available for audit within five business days at the licensed premises upon request: 
(1)  Monthly income and operating statements; quarterly income and operating statements; 
(2)  Daily sales receipts showing alcoholic beverage and food sales broken down separately (this requirement does not apply to package beer and wine licensees) and daily cash register receipts such as Z-tapes or guest tickets; 
(3)  All invoices for alcoholic beverage and food purchases for each month, quarter, and year; 
(4)  Monthly state sales and use tax reports; and 
(5)  Federal and state income tax returns with all form 1099s. 
(c)  The General Government Administration Department may waive all or some of the requirements of subsection (b) of this section, if the Department finds that no such records exist; and it is not financially practical based on the net income of the licensed establishment to require them to keep such records. 
(Code 1979, § 9-4-14.1; Code 1998, § 6-101; Ord. No. 17-2000, 12-4-2000; Ord. No. 07-2003, § 6-101, 7-7-2003) 
Sec. 4-98. - Collection of sums due. 
Due dates for sums levied under this division are set forth in section 16-140. If any person shall fail to pay the sums due under this division, the General Government Administration Department shall issue executions in the manner provided by law for the collection of other taxes, fees or revenue due the city. 
(Code 1979, § 9-4-14.2; Code 1998, § 6-102) 
Sec. 4-99. - Familiarity with provisions. 
Each licensed alcoholic beverage dealer under this division shall keep a copy of this article in the licensed premises and shall instruct any person working there with respect to the terms hereof. Each licensee, the licensee's agents and employees selling alcoholic beverages shall at all times be familiar with the terms hereof. 
(Code 1979, § 9-4-14.6; Code 1998, § 6-103; Ord. No. 07-2003, § 6-103, 7-7-2003) 
Sec. 4-100. - Automatic forfeiture for nonuse. 
Any holder of any license issued under this division who shall, for a period of three consecutive months after the license has been issued, cease to operate the business and sell of the product or products authorized, shall after such three-month period automatically forfeit the license without the necessity of any further action. 
(Code 1979, § 9-4-19; Code 1998, § 6-104) 
Sec. 4-101. - Suspension or revocation. 
(a)  A license issued under this division may be suspended or revoked by the General Government Administration Department head or his designee where the licensee furnishes fraudulent or untruthful information in the application for a license and for failure to pay all fees, taxes or other charges imposed under the provisions of this division. 
(b)  Whenever the state shall revoke any permit or license to sell alcoholic beverages, the city's license shall thereupon be automatically revoked. The City Manager or his designee upon notice of this revocation from the General Government Administration Department shall take the necessary steps to see that signs are removed and that all alcoholic beverage sales cease. 
(c)  The failure to produce accurate records as set forth in section 4-97(b)(1), (2), and (3) shall be grounds to suspend the city's issued license by administrative decision until said records in proper form are produced. 
(d)  Should the records as set forth in section 4-97(b)(1), (2), and (3) fail to establish by the preponderance of the evidence that the establishment does not derive at least 50 percent of its total gross revenue from the sale of food for each quarter of each calendar year, then the city may revoke or suspend the license by administrative action. 
(e)  The General Government Administration Department head or his designee may suspend or revoke the license of any establishment which does not meet the licensing qualifications set forth in this division at any time such knowledge becomes known to them. 
(f)  An act or omission of a licensee, owner of more than 20 percent interest in the establishment, or employee of the licensee or licensed establishment willingly or knowingly performed, which constitutes a violation of federal and state law or of any provision of this article will subject the licensee to suspension or revocation of the license in accordance with the provisions of this division, when the General Government Administration Department head, or his designee, determines to his own satisfaction that the act or omission did occur, regardless of whether any criminal prosecution or conviction ensues. In the case of an employee, the General Government Administration Department head, or his designee, must determine that the acts of the employee were known to or under reasonable circumstances should have been known to the licensee or where the licensee has not established practices or procedures to prevent the violation from occurring. 
(g)  Whenever it can be shown that a licensee under this division no longer maintains adequate financial responsibility upon which issuance of the license was conditioned or whenever the licensee has defaulted in any obligation, of any kind whatsoever, lawfully owing to the city, such license may be suspended or revoked. 
(h)  Wherever this division permits the General Government Administration Department head, or his designee, to revoke or to suspend any license issued hereunder but does not mandate the period of such suspension, such discretion shall be exercised within the guidelines of this section. 
(1)  No suspension shall be for a period of time longer than the time remaining on such license. 
(2)  The following factors shall be considered on any revocation or suspension as set out in this section: 
a.  Consistency of penalties mandated by this article and those set by the City Clerk; 
b.  Likelihood of deterring future wrongdoing; 
c.  Impact of the offense on the community; 
d.  Any mitigating circumstances or remedial or corrective steps taken by licensee; and 
e.  Any aggravating circumstances or failure by licensee to take remedial or corrective steps. 
(Code 1979, § 9-4-24; Code 1998, § 6-105; Ord. No. 22-98, 12-7-1998; Ord. No. 17-2000, 12-4-2000; Ord. No. 07-2003, § 6-105, 7-7-2003) 
Sec. 4-102. - Hearings. 
(a)  No license shall be denied, suspended or revoked without the opportunity for a hearing as provided in this section. 
(b)  The General Government Administration Department head or his designee shall provide written notice to the applicant or licensee of his order to deny, suspend or revoke the license. Such written notice shall set forth in reasonable detail the reasons for such action and shall notify the applicant or licensee of the right to appeal under the provisions of this chapter. Any applicant or licensee who is aggrieved or adversely affected by a final action of the General Government Administration Department head or his designee may have a review of the final action by appeal to the hearing officer who is appointed by the Mayor and City Council. Such appeal shall be by written petition and filed in the Office of the General Government Administration Department head or his designee within ten days after the final order or action of the General Government Administration Department head or his designee. 
(c)  A hearing shall be conducted on each appeal within 30 days of the date of filing with the General Government Administration Department head or his designee, unless a continuance of such date is agreed to by the appellant and the General Government Administration Department head and the hearing officer so appointed. The appellant of such hearing shall have the right to be represented by an attorney, at the expense of the appellant, and to present evidence and cross examine witnesses. The hearing shall not exceed four hours. 
(d)  The findings of the hearing officer shall be forwarded to the General Government Administration Department head within 15 days after the conclusion of the hearing and it shall be the duty of the General Government Administration Department head to notify the appellant of the action of the hearing officer. 
(e)  The findings of the hearing officer shall not be set aside unless found to be: 
(1)  Contrary to law or ordinances; or 
(2)  Unsupported by any evidence on the record as a whole. 
(f)  The findings of the hearing officer shall be final unless appealed within 30 days of the date of the findings by certiorari to the superior court of the county. 
(Code 1979, § 9-4-24.1; Code 1998, § 6-106; Ord. No. 22-98, 12-7-1998; Ord. No. 17-2000, 12-4-2000; Ord. No. 03-2002(A), 1-7-2002) 
Sec. 4-103. - Notice. 
For purposes of this division, notice shall be deemed delivered when personally served and/or sent by certified mail, within three days after the date of deposit in the United States mail. 
(Code 1979, § 9-4-24.2; Code 1998, § 6-107; Ord. No. 22-98, 12-7-1998) 
Sec. 4-104. - Withdrawal of application. 
Any license application made pursuant to this division may be withdrawn by the applicant at any time. If the application is withdrawn before the license is issued, any sums deposited as license fees will be refunded. After issuance of the license, no refunds will be made. No refunds shall be made under any circumstances for investigative and administrative expenses required in this division. 
(Code 1979, § 9-4-25.1; Code 1998, § 6-108) 
Sec. 4-105. - Responsible alcohol sales and service (RASS). 
(a)  New licenses. Effective with the adoption of this section, any applicant seeking to obtain an alcoholic beverage license in the city must provide proof of attendance at, and completion of, a responsible alcohol sales and service (RASS) workshop that has been approved by the General Government Administration Director. Such workshop shall be attended by the applicant prior to the issuance of any alcohol license and shall be at the applicant's expense. If, at the time the application is considered by the Mayor and Council, the applicant has not provided evidence to the City that the applicant has successfully completed an approved RASS workshop, the license shall be denied. Once the license is granted, the licensee will be required to meet the remaining requirements set forth in this section. 
(b)  Existing licenses. All licensees currently holding a valid county alcoholic beverage license at the time of this amendment, who have not attended an approved responsible alcohol sales and service (RASS) workshop, are required to attend and complete a RASS workshop that has been approved by the General Government and Administration Director within six months of the adoption of this section. Such workshop shall be attended by the licensee at the licensee's expense. All licensees must provide proof of attendance and completion of such RASS workshop to the city within six months of the adoption of this section. Failure to abide by any of the provisions in this subsection may result in suspension or revocation of the licensee's alcoholic beverage license. Any change of ownership or licensee will require a new license and will require compliance with the requirements of subsection (a) prior to issuance of any new license. 
(c)  All alcoholic beverage licensees shall be required to attend and complete an approved responsible alcohol sales and service (RASS) workshop every two years. Proof of attendance at, and completion of, an approved RASS workshop within the previous two years must be attached to any renewal application. No alcoholic beverage license will be renewed or issued unless this requirement has been satisfied. 
(d)  Effective with the adoption of this section, within 60 days of the issuance of any new license, or prior to any license renewal, the licensee must provide proof that all employees and managers involved in the sale or service of alcoholic beverages have, within the previous year, satisfactorily completed a comprehensive alcohol compliance training course approved by the city. Employees and managers must complete such yearly training within six months of commencing work or being hired, whichever is shorter. Documentation of each employee's and manager's date of hire and proof of training within the previous year must be attached to all renewal applications and maintained on the premises, posted in a prominent location and available for public inspection at all times during which the location is open for business and engaged in alcohol sales for off-premises consumption. Employees and managers who directly serve alcoholic beverages to patrons for on-premises consumption shall be required to keep on their person while at work documentation verifying that they have completed their annual RASS training as required under this article. All employees and managers subject to this subsection must attend an approved training course at least once a year. Such training shall be at the expense of the licensee or the licensed establishment. 
(e)  If, at the time an alcohol beverage license application or renewal is considered by the city, the licensee has not provided evidence to the General Government and Administration Director that the licensee has satisfied the requirements of subsections (a), (b) and (c) above, the application or renewal shall be denied. 
(f)  If, at the time an alcoholic beverage license renewal is being considered, or at any other time more than 60 days after the license has been issued, the licensee is unable to provide evidence to the General Government and Administration Director and the Mayor and Council that the employees and management of the licensed establishment have complied with the training requirements as set forth in subsection (d), the license may be suspended or revoked. 
(g)  The General Government and Administration Director shall not have authority to waive the workshop or training provisions set forth in this section. 
(Ord. No. 05-2018 , § 1, 5-7-2018) 
Chapter 6 - ANIMALS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to exercise animal control, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(3); Georgia Animal Protection Act, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-1 et seq. 

Sec. 6-1. - County animal control ordinance—Adopted. 
The Gwinnett County Animal Control Ordinance, as now or hereafter amended, as adopted by ordinance of the County Board of Commissioners on January 16, 2007, is hereby adopted by reference and incorporated herein as if fully set out as a general ordinance of the city to the extent that the animal control ordinance is not inconsistent with the city local amendments under this chapter. A copy of the current animal control ordinance and any additions, deletions or local amendments thereto shall be maintained in the Office of the City Clerk and be available for inspection by the public. 
(Code 1979, § 4-4-1; Code 1998, § 10-1) 
Sec. 6-2. - Same—Local amendments. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following sections of the animal control ordinance are amended as follows: 
Sec. 10-26. Definitions. This section is amended by adding the following: "in the unincorporated area of Gwinnett County" to read "inside the City of Norcross." 
Sec. 10-28. Adoption of ordinance by municipalities within county boundaries. All persons owning animals in the city may buy permits from the Gwinnett County animal control unit and will receive the same benefits as those who live in the unincorporated areas. All license fees shall be retained by Gwinnett County to defray the cost of the operation of the animal control unit. The Gwinnett County animal control unit is hereby given the power to enforce the city animal control ordinance in the city. 
(Code 1979, § 4-4-2; Code 1998, § 10-2) 
Sec. 6-3. - Restraint and muzzling of dogs. 
The City Manager or officer designated by him may restrain or order to be restrained or muzzled any dog for any of the following: 
(1)  Being found at-large or unmuzzled, as the case may be, while an order of the City Manager or officer designated by him for the restraint or muzzling of such dog in is effect; 
(2)  Being found in a school, schoolyard, church, on the grounds of a church, or public recreational area; 
(3)  Having bitten or otherwise injured any person; 
(4)  Having killed, maimed, or otherwise caused damage to another domesticated animal; 
(5)  Having caused damage to real personal property owned by an individual other than the person owning or harboring said dog; 
(6)  Chasing any vehicle upon any public way or on any way to which the public has a right of access. 
(Ord. No. 09-2005, § 10-3, 12-5-2005) 
Sec. 6-4. - Removal of canine fecal matter. 
It shall be unlawful for any person owning, possessing, harboring or having care, charge, control or custody of any dog not to remove any feces left by that dog on any sidewalk, gutter, street, lot or public area. Dog waste shall be immediately removed by placing said matter in a closed or sealed container and thereafter disposing of it in a trash receptacle, sanitary disposal unit or other closed or sealed refuse container. 
(Ord. No. 09-2005, § 10-4, 12-5-2005) 
Sec. 6-5. - Cruelty. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to overload, cruelly treat, maim, bruise, deprive of necessary sustenance, ill-use or, in any manner whatsoever, torture or abuse any animal. 
(b)  Each and every violation of this section shall be punishable by fines of $25.00 and not more than $300.00. 
(Ord. No. 09-2005, § 10-5, 12-5-2005) 
Chapter 8 - BUSINESSES AND BUSINESS REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Limitation on expanding the power of municipal regulation over any business activity regulated by the public service commission, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(5). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 8-1. - Firearms dealers. 
No business license shall be issued for the sale of firearms and ammunition until the applicant submits proof of a federal firearms license to the city. 
(Code 1979, § 9-2-4; Code 1998, § 14-1; Ord. No. 23-95, § I, 12-4-1995; Ord. No. 08-96, § 9-2-4, 4-1-1996) 
Sec. 8-2. - Blasting contractors. 
No business license shall be issued to a blasting contractor, unless the applicant provides proof of a valid state registration card and written approval of the Police Department and county Fire Department. The fee for such license shall be as provided in the business license schedule. All operations of such contractor shall comply with all applicable federal and state requirements. 
(Code 1979, § 9-2-5; Code 1998, § 14-2) 
Secs. 8-3—8-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Giving massages in places used for lewdness, prostitution, assignation or masturbation for hire, O.C.G.A. § 16-6-17; restriction of adult bookstores and movie houses to certain areas, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-3; establishment, maintenance or use of building, structure or place for unlawful sexual purposes, O.C.G.A. § 41-3-1. 

Sec. 8-23. - Findings; public purpose. 
(a)  Based on the experience of other counties and municipalities, including, but not limited to, Austin, Texas, which experiences are found to be relevant to the problems faced by the city and based on the documentary evidence and oral testimony presented by a law enforcement professional who is familiar with conditions resulting in other localities, including the City Council's hearing on March 4, 2002; and based on the evidence and testimony of persons who have appeared before members of the City Council and on documentary evidence submitted to the City Council, the City Council takes note of the well-known and self-evident conditions and secondary effects attendant to the commercial exploration of human sexuality, which do not vary greatly among the various communities within our country. 
(b)  It is the finding of the City Council that public nudity (either partial or total) under certain circumstances, particularly circumstances related to the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages in establishments offering live nude entertainment or adult entertainment, (whether such alcoholic beverages are sold on the premises or not) begets criminal behavior and tends to create undesirable community conditions. In the same manner, establishments offering cinematographic or videographic adult entertainment have the same deleterious effects on the community. 
(c)  Among the acts of criminal behavior found to be associated with the commercial combination of live nudity and alcohol, live commercial nudity in general, and cinematographic or videographic adult entertainment are disorderly conduct, prostitution, public solicitation, public indecency, drug use and drug trafficking. Among the undesirable community conditions identified in other communities with the commercial combination of live nudity and alcohol, commercial nudity in general, and cinematographic or videographic adult entertainment are depression of property values and acceleration of community blight in the surrounding neighborhood, increased allocation of and expenditure for law enforcement personnel to preserve law and order, and increased burden on the judicial system as a consequence of the criminal behavior herein described in this section. The City Council finds it is reasonable to believe that some or all of these undesirable community conditions will result in the city, as well. 
(d)  Furthermore, it is the finding of the City Council that other forms of adult entertainment including, but not limited to, adult bookstores, adult novelty shops, adult video stores, peep shows, adult theaters, and massage parlors have an adverse effect upon the quality of life in surrounding communities. 
(e)  The City Council finds that the negative secondary effects of adult entertainment establishments upon the city are similar whether the adult entertainment establishment features live nude dancing or sells videotapes depicting sexual activities. In addition, the City Council has evidence that the adult bookstore located within the county has shown that a substantial amount of activity at the bookstore involves booths which an individual may enter, view videos depicting sexual activity and sexually interact with a bookstore patron in an adjoining booth through a hole strategically placed in the wall of adjoining booths. 
(f)  The City Council therefore finds that it is in the best interests of the health, welfare, safety and morals of the community and the preservation of its businesses, neighborhoods, and of churches, schools, residential areas, public parks and children's day care facilities to prevent or reduce the adverse impacts of adult entertainment establishments. Therefore, the City Council finds that licensing and regulations are necessary for any adult entertainment establishment. The City Council finds that these regulations promote the public welfare by furthering legitimate public and governmental interests including, but not limited to, reducing criminal activity and protecting against or eliminating undesirable community conditions and further finds that such will not infringe upon the protected Constitutional rights of freedom of speech or expression. To that end, the ordinance from which this section is derived is hereby adopted. 
(Ord. No. 04-2002, § 14-31, 3-4-2002; Ord. No. 09-2003, 8-4-2003) 
Sec. 8-24. - Definitions. 
Except as specifically defined herein, all words used in this article shall be as defined in the most recent edition of the New Illustrated Book of Development Definitions (Rutgers). Words not defined herein or in the above book shall be construed to have the meaning given by common and ordinary use, and shall be interpreted within the context of the sentence and section in which they occur. 
Adult bookstore means any commercial establishment in which more than ten square feet of floorspace is used for the display or offer for sale of any book or publication, film, or other medium which depicts sexually explicit nudity or sexual conduct by its emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult entertainer means any person employed by any adult entertainment establishment who exposes his specified anatomical areas as defined herein. For the purpose of this article, adult entertainers include employees as well as independent contractors. 
Adult entertainment means entertainment that is characterized by an emphasis on the depiction, display or the featuring of specified anatomical areas. 
Adult entertainment establishment. 
(1)  The term "adult entertainment establishment" includes the following types of businesses: 
a.  Any commercial establishment that employs or uses any person live, in any capacity in the sale or services of beverages or food while such person is unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing, so as to expose any portion of his specified anatomical areas, as defined herein; 
b.  Any commercial establishment which provides live entertainment where any person appears unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing as to expose any portion of his specified anatomical areas as defined herein or where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities, as defined herein; 
c.  Any commercial establishment which holds, promotes, sponsors or allows any contest, promotion, special night, event or any other activity where live patrons of the establishment are encouraged or allowed to engage in any of the conduct described in subsections (1)a. and b. of this definition; 
d.  Any commercial establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines or other periodicals, videotapes or movies or other reproductions, whether for sale or rent, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities as defined herein or having a segment or section comprising more than ten square feet of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such material or which derives more than five percent of its net sales from the sale or rental of such material; 
e.  Any commercial establishment utilizing an enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons used for cinematographic or videographic presentation of material distinguished by or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined herein, for observation by patrons therein; 
f.  Any adult motion picture theater, adult motion picture arcade, adult mini-motion picture theater, adult bookstore, adult video store, adult hotel, or adult motel, as defined herein. 
(2)  The term "adult entertainment establishment" does not include traditional or live theater (mainstream theater) which means a theater, concert hall, museum, educational institution or similar establishment which regularly features live performances which are not distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the depiction, display, or description or the featuring of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities in that the depiction, display, description or featuring is incidental to the primary purpose of any performance. 
Adult hotel or motel means a hotel or motel wherein material is presented which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult mini-motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity for less than 50 persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult motion picture arcade means any place to which the public is permitted to be invited wherein paper currency, coin or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons, used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult video store means any establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, videotapes or movies or other reproductions, whether for sale or rent, which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising five percent of its total floorspace, devoted to the sale or display of such material or which derives more than five percent of its net sales from videos which are characterized or distinguished by or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Children's day care facility means a structure or portion of a structure wherein is provided care and supervision of children away from their place of residence for less than 24 hours per day on a regular basis for compensation. For the purpose of this article, the term "children's day care facility" shall include, but is not limited to, the terms "nursery school," "early learning center," "pre-kindergarten," "private kindergarten," "play school," or "pre-school." 
Operator means the manager or other person principally in charge of an adult entertainment establishment. 
Owner means any individual or entity holding more than a 20 percent interest in an adult entertainment establishment. 
Premises means a defined, closed or partitioned establishment, whether room, shop or building wherein adult entertainment is performed. 
Specified anatomical areas includes the following: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region, cleft of the buttocks, or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
(2)  Human male genitalia in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Specified sexual activities means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, and any of the following sexually oriented acts or conduct: anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, zooerasty; 
(2)  Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus or masturbation; 
(3)  Fondling or other erotic touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breasts; 
(4)  Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the infliction of pain; or 
(5)  Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexual contact with an animal by a human being. 
(Ord. No. 04-2002, § 14-32, 3-4-2002) 
Sec. 8-25. - License and annual regulatory fee required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, engage in, conduct, or carry on, in or upon any premises within the city, an adult entertainment establishment as defined in this article without first procuring an annual license to do so. The issuance of such an annual license shall not be deemed to authorize, condone or make legal any activity thereunder if the same is deemed illegal or unlawful under the laws of the state or the United States. No annual license for an adult entertainment establishment shall be issued by the city if the premises to be used also holds a license to sell alcoholic beverages or malt beverages and wine for consumption on the premises. 
(b)  There shall be an annual regulatory fee for each adult entertainment establishment licensed within the city in the amount of $5,000.00. The annual regulatory fee must be paid to the Licensing and Tax Manager of the city within ten days after the Licensing and Tax Manager approves the initial application for an adult entertainment establishment license or renewal thereof. In any event, no adult entertainment establishment license or renewal thereof shall be issued until the most recent annual regulatory fee has been paid. All licenses granted hereunder shall expire on December 31 of each year. Licensees who desire to renew their license shall file an application with the Licensing and Tax Manager on the form provided for renewal of the license for the ensuing year. Applications for renewal must be filed before November 30 of each year. Any renewal application received after November 30 shall pay, in addition to said annual regulatory fee, a late charge of 20 percent. If a license renewal application is received after January 1, such application shall be treated as an initial application and the applicant shall be required to comply with all rules and regulations for the granting of licenses as if no previous license had been held. If a license application is received after January 1, investigative and administrative costs, as hereinafter set forth in this article, will be assessed. All licenses granted hereunder shall be for the calendar year and the full annual regulatory fee must be paid for a license renewal application filed prior to July 1 of the license year. One-half of a full annual regulatory fee shall be paid for a license renewal application filed after July 1 of the license year. Any person renewing any license issued hereunder who shall pay the annual regulatory fee, or any portion thereof, after January 1 shall, in addition to said annual regulatory fee and late charges, pay simple interest on the delinquent balance at the annual rate then charged by the Internal Revenue Service of the United States on unpaid federal income taxes. 
(Ord. No. 04-2002, § 14-33, 3-4-2002) 
Sec. 8-26. - On-premises operator required. 
An adult entertainment establishment shall have a designated person to serve as an on-premises operator. The operator shall be principally in charge of the establishment and shall be located on the premises during all operating hours. 
(Ord. No. 04-2002, § 14-34, 3-4-2002) 
Sec. 8-27. - Application process and qualifications. 
(a)  Process. 
(1)  Any person desiring to obtain a license to operate, engage in, conduct, or carry on any adult entertainment establishment in the city shall make application to the Licensing and Tax Manager of the city. Such application shall be made on forms furnished by the city, shall be made in the name of the adult entertainment establishment by an applicant who is a natural person and an agent of the adult entertainment establishment and shall include the name of the operator as defined herein and of the owner as defined herein. If the adult entertainment establishment is a corporation, then the agent for purposes of making application for a license hereunder shall be an officer of the corporation. If the adult entertainment establishment is a partnership, the agent for such purposes shall be a general partner. 
(2)  At the time of submitting such application, a nonrefundable fee, payable in cash or by certified check in the amount of $300.00, shall be paid to the Licensing and Tax Manager to defray, in part, the cost of the investigation and report required by this article. The Licensing and Tax Manager shall issue a receipt showing that such application fee has been paid. The application for license does not authorize the operation of, engaging in, conduct or carrying on of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(b)  Contents. Each application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The full true name and any other names used by the applicant, the operator and owner; 
(2)  The present address and telephone number of the applicant, the operator and owner; 
(3)  The previous addresses of the applicant, the operator, and the owner, if any, for a period of five years immediately prior to the date of the application and the dates of residence at each; 
(4)  Acceptable written proof that the applicant, the operator and the owner are at least 18 years of age; 
(5)  The operator's height, weight, color of eyes and hair, and date and place of birth; 
(6)  Two photographs of the operator, at least two inches by two inches, taken within the last six months; 
(7)  The business, occupation or employment history of the applicant, the operator and owner for the five years immediately preceding the date of application; 
(8)  The business license history of the adult entertainment establishment seeking a license and whether such establishment, in previous operations in this or any other location under license, has had such license or permit for an adult entertainment business or similar type of business revoked or suspended, the reason therefor, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of revocation or suspension; 
(9)  If the application is made on behalf of a corporation, the name of the corporation, exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation or charter, together with the place and date of incorporation. If the application is on behalf of a limited partnership, a copy of the certificates of limited partnership filed with the County Clerk shall be provided. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this subsection pertaining to corporations shall apply; 
(10)  The names and addresses of the owner and lessor of the real property upon which the adult entertainment establishment is to be operated, engaged in, conducted or carried on, and a copy of the lease or rental agreement; 
(11)  Such other identification and information as the City Manager may require in order to discover the truth of the matters hereinbefore specified as required to be set forth in the application; 
(12)  With respect to the applicant, the operator and the owner, all convictions, (excluding misdemeanor traffic violations unrelated to driving under the influence of drugs or alcohol) within the past five years, including a complete description of the crime or violation, the date of the crime or violation, date of conviction (including plea of guilty or nolo contendere), jurisdiction and any disposition, including any fine or sentence imposed and whether the terms of disposition have been fully completed. Each person required to disclose convictions hereunder shall also provide a signed and notarized consent, on forms prescribed by the Georgia Crime Information Center, authorizing the release of his criminal records to the City Manager's office; 
(13)  A complete set of fingerprints of the applicant and the operator; 
(14)  If the person or business entity on whose behalf the application for a license is doing business under a trade name, a copy of the trade name as properly recorded. If the application is made on behalf of a corporation, a copy of its authority to do business in the state, including articles of incorporation, trade name affidavit, if any, and last annual report, if any; 
(15)  At least three character references for the applicant, the operator and owner from individuals who are not or will not benefit financially in any way from the application if the license is granted and who have not been convicted of any felony or a crime or this article violation involving moral turpitude in the past five years. The city shall prepare forms consistent with the provisions of this subsection for the applicant, the operator and owner, who shall submit all character references on such forms; 
(16)  The address of the premises where the adult entertainment establishment will be operated, engaged in, conducted, or carried on; 
(17)  A plat by a registered engineer or a registered land surveyor, licensed by the state, showing the location of the proposed premises where the adult entertainment establishment will be operated, engaged in, conducted or carried on in relation to the neighborhood, the surrounding zoning, its proximity to any residential area, church, school, public park or children's day care facility, establishment selling alcoholic beverages or malt beverages and wine or other adult entertainment establishment; 
(18)  Each application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall be verified and acknowledged under oath to be true and correct by: 
a.  If application is made on behalf of an individual, the individual; 
b.  If application is made on behalf of a partnership, by a general partner; 
c.  If application is made on behalf of a corporation, by the president of the corporation; 
d.  If application is made on behalf of any other organization or association, by the chief administrative official. 
(c)  Appearance by applicant. The applicant shall personally appear before the Licensing and Tax Manager and produce proof that a nonrefundable application fee, in an amount established by resolution of the city, has been paid and shall present the application containing the aforementioned and described information. 
(d)  Investigation standards for granting of license. The city shall have 30 days from the date of actual receipt of the application to investigate the facts provided in the application and the background of the applicant, the operator and owner. The Licensing and Tax Manager of the city shall stamp the date of actual receipt of each application on the first page thereof and notify the applicant of the actual receipt of the application within five business days of actual receipt of such application. The Licensing and Tax Manager of the city shall approve or deny any application for an adult entertainment establishment license within 30 days of actual receipt of such application. The application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall be granted if the Licensing and Tax Manager finds: 
(1)  The required $300.00 investigative fee has been paid; 
(2)  The application conforms in all respects to the provisions of this article; 
(3)  The applicant has not knowingly made a material misrepresentation in the application; 
(4)  The applicant has fully cooperated in the investigation of the application; 
(5)  Neither the applicant nor the operator or owner has been convicted or pled guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any crime involving moral turpitude, illegal gambling, or illegal possession or sale of alcoholic beverages, including the sale or transfer of alcoholic beverages to minors in a manner contrary to law, keeping a place of prostitution, pandering, pimping, public indecency, prostitution, solicitation of sodomy, or any sexual related crime within a period of five years. For purposes of this article, a conviction plea of guilty or nolo contendere shall be ignored as to any offense for which the applicant was allowed to avail himself of the Georgia First Offender Act unless the applicant violated any terms of probation imposed by the court granting first offender treatment; 
(6)  Neither the applicant nor the operator or owner has had any adult entertainment establishment license or other similar license or permit denied or revoked for cause by this city or any other county or municipality located in or out of this state prior to the date of application within the preceding five years; 
(7)  The building, structure, equipment and location of the premises of the adult entertainment establishment as proposed by the applicant would comply with all applicable laws including, but not limited to, health, zoning, distance, fire and safety requirements and standards; 
(8)  The applicant is at least 18 years of age; 
(9)  On the date the business for which a license is required herein commences, and thereafter, there will be an operator as defined herein on the premises at all times during which the business is open; 
(10)  The proposed premises is not to be located too close to any residential area, church, school, public park or children's day care facility, or an establishment licensed to sell alcoholic beverages or malt beverages and wine for consumption on the premises, or another adult entertainment establishment; and 
(11)  The grant of such license will not cause a violation of and will not be in conflict with this article or any other law, ordinance or regulation, of the city, the state or the United States. 
The Licensing and Tax Manager of the city shall deny the application for an adult entertainment establishment license if the application is not complete or if the application fails to meet any requirements contained in this article. 
(Ord. No. 04-2002, § 14-35, 3-4-2002) 
Sec. 8-28. - Regulation of adult entertainment establishment. 
(a)  Location. No adult entertainment establishment shall be located, established, maintained or operated: 
(1)  Within 600 feet of any parcel of land which is used for residential uses or purposes (residential area); 
(2)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land on which a church, school, college campus, public park or children's day care facility is located; 
(3)  Within 500 feet of any parcel of land upon which any establishment authorized to sell alcoholic beverages is located; 
(4)  In any zoning district other than in a C2, General business district; provided the parcel of land upon which the adult entertainment establishment is to be located has road frontage on a principal arterial street, Jimmy Carter Boulevard or Peachtree Industrial Boulevard, as shown on the official thoroughfare map on file with the Office of Community Development or unless the parcel of land upon which the adult entertainment establishment is to be located is directly adjacent to Interstate 85; or 
(5)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which another adult entertainment establishment regulated or defined hereunder is located. 
(b)  Measurement. For purposes of this section, distance shall be by airline measurement from property line, using the closest property lines of the parcels of land involved. The term "parcel of land" means any quantity of land capable of being described by location and boundary, designated and used or to be used as a unit. 
(Ord. No. 04-2002, § 14-36, 3-4-2002; Ord. No. 09-2003, 8-4-2003) 
Sec. 8-29. - Conduct or activities prohibited; penalty for violation. 
(a)  Advertising without a license. No person or other entity shall advertise or cause to be advertised an adult entertainment establishment without a valid adult entertainment establishment license issued pursuant to this article. 
(b)  Employment of minors or unpermitted persons. No adult entertainment establishment licensee shall employ or contract with a person under the age of 18 years or an adult entertainer who has not obtained a permit pursuant to this article. 
(c)  Sale, consumption of alcohol. No adult entertainment establishment licensee shall serve, sell, distribute or suffer the consumption or possession of any alcoholic beverages, malt beverages or wine or controlled substances upon the premises of the licensee. 
(d)  Contact between patrons, employees. No dancing or other performance by an adult entertainer at an adult entertainment establishment shall occur closer than four feet to any patron. No patron, customer or guest shall be permitted to touch, caress or fondle any specified anatomical area of or any part of the body or clothing of any adult entertainer. No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any adult entertainer. No adult entertainer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron. 
(e)  Engaging in specified sexual activities prohibited. No adult entertainer, other employee, patron or other person at an adult entertainment establishment shall be allowed to engage in any specified sexual activity as defined herein on the premises of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(f)  Public indecency prohibited. No adult entertainer, other employee, patron or other person at an adult entertainment establishment shall, while on the premises of an adult entertainment establishment, commit the offense of public indecency as defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-6-8. 
(g)  Penalty. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 60 days, or both. Each day of operation in violation of this article shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 04-2002, §§ 14-37, 14-38, 3-4-2002) 
Sec. 8-30. - Unlawful operation declared nuisance. 
Any adult entertainment establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this article shall be, and the same is hereby declared to be, unlawful and a public nuisance. The city may, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence actions or proceedings for abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof in the manner provided by law. It may take such other steps and shall apply to such courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such adult entertainment establishment and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, engaging in, conducting or carrying on an adult entertainment establishment contrary to the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 04-2002, § 14-39, 3-4-2002) 
Sec. 8-31. - Conditions of adult entertainment establishment. 
(a)  Cleaning of licensed premises. All adult entertainment establishments shall be kept in a clean, sanitary condition, and shall be in full compliance with all applicable ordinances and regulations of the city and the state. 
(b)  Inspection of licensed premises. The City Manager and the city shall have the authority to periodically inspect adult entertainment establishments to determine compliance with and enforce all provisions of this article and other applicable ordinances, regulations and laws. 
(Ord. No. 04-2002, § 14-40, 3-4-2002) 
Sec. 8-32. - Denial, suspension or revocation; hearing. 
(a)  Grounds. 
(1)  A license may be denied to persons or entities that have submitted an incomplete application or that have failed to satisfy any of the requirements of sections 8-23 through 8-32. 
(2)  Any of the following shall be grounds for suspension or revocation, as the Licensing and Tax Manager sees fit, of a license: 
a.  The making of any statement on an application for a license issued hereunder which is material and is later found to be false; 
b.  Violation of any of the regulations or prohibitions of this article; 
c.  With respect to the applicant, operator and owner, conviction or a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to any of the crimes which would make such person or adult entertainment establishment ineligible to hold a license under section 8-27(b)(12). 
(b)  Denial procedure. Within 30 days of actual receipt of an application for an adult entertainment establishment license, the Licensing and Tax Manager shall either approve or deny the application. In no event shall the Licensing and Tax Manager's decision whether to approve or deny the adult entertainment establishment license application be held without decision for more than 30 days after actual receipt of the application. In the event that such an application is held without decision for a period of more than 30 days, however, the license application shall be deemed approved, and expressive conduct may begin immediately notwithstanding the fact that no license has been issued. The Director of the General Government Administration Department shall issue an adult entertainment establishment license to an applicant who informs the Director of the fact that an application has been submitted, but no decision has been made thereon for a period of more than 30 days following actual receipt of the application. The Director shall issue an adult entertainment establishment license under such circumstances within three business days of actual receipt of written notice by the applicant of such circumstances. In the event that the Licensing and Tax Manager denies an application for an adult entertainment establishment license, notice of such denial shall be delivered to the applicant in person or by certified mail within five business days of such denial. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the city, its officials, employees or agents, may seek review of such decision by filing an appropriate pleading in the superior court of the county. 
(c)  Suspension or revocation; hearing. Whenever the Director of the General Government Administration Department finds reasonable grounds exist to suspend or revoke a license issued hereunder, the city shall schedule a hearing before a hearing officer appointed by the City Council to consider such suspension or revocation and shall, at least 20 days prior to the hearing, notify the licensee of the time and date of the hearing and the proposed action and the grounds therefor. The licensee shall be entitled to present evidence and cross examine any witnesses at the hearing, with or without legal counsel. The hearing officer shall make its decision within ten days of the hearing and shall notify the licensee in writing within five business days of the decision. 
(Ord. No. 04-2002, § 14-41, 3-4-2002) 
Sec. 8-33. - Article provision not intended to condone activities prohibited under other laws. 
Nothing contained in this article shall be deemed to permit or condone any activity whatsoever which is otherwise found to be obscene, lewd or illegal under applicable code, regulation or statute which provides any prohibition upon nudity or sexual activity. Further, the activities and uses which are regulated and permitted by this article shall only be allowed if they are not obscene or lewd and not in violation of any other such prohibitions on nudity or sexual activity. 
(Ord. No. 04-2002, § 14-42, 3-4-2002) 
Sec. 8-34. - Severability. 
If any portion or subsection of this article or its application to any person or circumstance is held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of application to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected. 
(Ord. No. 04-2002, § 14-43, 3-4-2002) 
Sec. 8-35. - Automatic license forfeiture for nonuse. 
Any holder of any license hereunder who, for a period of three consecutive months after the license has been issued ceases to operate the business and sale of the products authorized, shall after the said three-month period automatically forfeit the license without the necessity of any further action. 
(Ord. No. 04-2002, § 14-44, 3-4-2002) 
Sec. 8-36. - Physical layout of establishment. 
Any adult entertainment establishment having available for customers, patrons or members any booth, room or cubicle for the private viewing of any adult entertainment must comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Access. Each booth, room or cubicle shall be totally accessible to and from aisles and public areas of the establishment, and shall be unobstructed by any curtain, door, lock, or other control-type or view-obstructing devices or materials. 
(2)  Construction. Every booth, room or cubicle shall meet the following construction requirements: 
a.  Each booth, room or cubicle shall be separated from adjacent booths, rooms and cubicles and any nonpublic areas by a wall; 
b.  Each booth, room or cubicle shall have at least one side totally open to a public lighted area or aisle so that there is an unobstructed view of anyone occupying the booth from the area in which the cash register for the adult entertainment establishment is located; 
c.  All walls shall be solid and without openings, extending from the floor to a height of not less than six feet and be light-colored, nonabsorbent, smooth-textured and easily cleanable; 
d.  The floor must be light-colored, nonabsorbent, smooth-textured and easily cleanable; and 
e.  The lighting level of each booth, room or cubicle when not in use shall be a minimum of ten candles at all times, as measured from the floor. 
(3)  Occupants. Only one individual shall occupy a booth, room or cubicle at any time. No occupant of same shall engage in any type of sexual activity, cause any bodily discharge or litter while in the booth, room or cubicle. No individual shall damage or deface any portion of the booth, room or cubicle. 
(Ord. No. 04-2002, § 14-45, 3-4-2002) 
Secs. 8-37—8-62. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - VIDEO STORES 

Sec. 8-63. - Findings; purpose. 
(a)  Based on the experiences of other counties and municipalities, including, but not limited to, Houston, Texas, which experiences are found to be relevant to the problems faced by the city, and based on documentary evidence and oral testimony presented by law enforcement personnel during the City Council's public hearing and regular meeting on March 4, 2002, unlawful sexual activities including, but not limited to, masturbation and oral and anal sex do occur at video stores which provide private or semi-private booths or cubicles for viewing files or videos depicting nudity, and for sexually transmitted diseases to spread as a result of the unhealthy conditions and unlawful activities associated with such booths, and the City Council further notes that persons frequent such video viewing booths for the purpose of engaging in sexual activities within such video viewing booths, and bodily fluids, including semen, urine and feces are found in such video viewing booths. 
(b)  The City Council finds that removal of doors on such video viewing booths and prohibiting holes between such booths advances a substantial governmental interest in curbing the illegal and unsanitary sexual activity occurring in such booths. The City Council therefore finds that it is in the best interest of the health, safety and welfare of the community to require that doors or other partitions on video viewing booths in video stores be removed and that no holes be allowed to exist between adjoining booths. The City Council finds that these regulations promote the public welfare by furthering legitimate public and governmental interests, including, but not limited to, reducing unlawful sexual activities and unhealthy conditions in video viewing booths found in video stores. The City Council further finds that these regulations will not infringe upon the protected Constitutional rights of freedom of speech or expression. 
(Ord. No. 03-2002(B), 3-4-2002) 
Sec. 8-64. - Physical layout of establishment. 
Any video store having available for customers, patrons, or members, any booth, room or cubicle for the private viewing of any video or motion picture must comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Access. Each booth, room or cubicle shall be totally accessible to and from aisles and public areas of the video store, and shall be unobstructed by any curtain, door, lock or other control-type or view-obstructing devices or materials. 
(2)  Construction. Every booth, room or cubicle shall meet the following construction requirements: 
a.  Each booth, room or cubicle shall be separated from adjacent booths, rooms and cubicles and any nonpublic areas by a wall. 
b.  Each booth, room or cubicle shall have at least one side totally open to a public lighted area or aisle so that there is an unobstructed view of anyone occupying the booth from the area in which the cash register for the video store is located. 
c.  All walls shall be solid and without openings, extended from the floor to a height of not less than six feet and be light-colored, nonabsorbent, smooth-textured and easily cleanable. 
d.  The floor must be light-colored, nonabsorbent, smooth-textured and easily cleanable. 
e.  The lighting level of each booth, room or cubicle, when not in use, shall be a minimum of ten candles at all times, as measured from the floor. 
(3)  Occupants. Only one individual shall occupy a booth, room or cubicle at any time. No occupant of same shall engage in any type of sexual activity, cause any bodily discharge or litter while in the booth, room or cubicle. No individual shall damage or deface any portion of the booth, room or cubicle. 
(Ord. No. 03-2002(B), 3-4-2002) 
Sec. 8-65. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Video store means any establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade which includes videotapes or movies or other reproductions, whether for sale or rent, or an establishment with a segment or section comprising five percent or more of its total floorspace devoted to the sale or display of such material or which derives more than five percent of its net sales from videos. The term "video store" shall include adult video stores as defined in section 8-24. 
(Ord. No. 03-2002(B), 3-4-2002) 
Sec. 8-66. - Enforcement. 
The provisions of this article may, in addition to any criminal remedy available, be enforced through an action for abatement of a nuisance in the manner provided by law. The city may apply to a court with jurisdiction to grant equitable relief to abate or remove private video viewing booths and to restrain or enjoin any person from operating or engaging in conduct contrary to the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 03-2002(B), 3-4-2002) 
Secs. 8-67—8-86. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CANVASSERS AND SOLICITORS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Peddlers and itinerant traders, O.C.G.A. § 43-32-1 et seq.; exception from local peddler or itinerant vendor licensing requirements for persons selling agricultural products, O.C.G.A. § 43-32-6. 

Sec. 8-87. - Registration required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in business as a canvasser or solicitor, calling at residences without previous consent of the occupant for the purpose of soliciting orders, sales, subscriptions, or business of any kind, or seeking information or donations, without first having registered with the City Manager's office. The registrant shall give his complete identification, his signature, the name of his employer, the nature of the products or services in which he is interested, the names of the manufacturers of such products, or the organization which he is representing, and the proposed method of operation in the city. 
(Code 1979, § 9-2-1(a); Code 1998, § 14-196) 
Sec. 8-88. - Registration fee. 
Each registrant shall pay to the city a regulatory fee in the amount set forth in the schedule of regulatory fees which is maintained on file in the Office of the General Government Administration Department where it shall be available for inspection by the public. This fee shall be paid for each day that the registrant expects to be in the city. 
(Code 1979, § 9-2-1(b); Code 1998, § 14-197; Ord. No. 23-95, § I, 12-4-1995) 
Sec. 8-89. - Issuance of registration; possession. 
Each applicant for registration under this article who shows evidence of good character and who pays the required fee shall be furnished a certificate indicating that he has registered and showing the dates covered by the registration. Each person shall at all times, while soliciting or canvassing in the city, carry upon his person the registration certificate and the same shall be exhibited by the registrant whenever he is required to do so by any police officer or by any person solicited. 
(Code 1979, § 9-2-1(c); Code 1998, § 14-198) 
Sec. 8-90. - Exclusion. 
The provisions of this article shall not apply to officers or employees of the city, county, state or federal government, or any subdivision thereof, when on official business. 
(Code 1979, § 9-2-1(d); Code 1998, § 14-199) 
Sec. 8-91. - Revocation of registration. 
Any registration under this article may be revoked by the City Manager because of any violation by the registrant of this article, or of any other ordinance of the city or of any state or federal law, or whenever the registrant shall cease to possess the qualifications and character required in this section for the original registration. 
(Code 1979, § 9-2-1(e); Code 1998, § 14-200) 
Sec. 8-92. - Penalty for violation. 
Any person violating this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(Code 1979, § 9-2-1; Code 1998, § 14-201) 
Secs. 8-93—8-112. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - COMMERCIAL FILMING ACTIVITY[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Section I of Ord. No. 07-2014, adopted Oct. 6, 2014, amended art. V in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. V, §§ 8-113, 8-114, pertained to commercial filming operations, and derived from the 1998 Code, § 14-236; Ord. No. 8-95, adopted July 10, 1995; Ord. No. 21-2011, adopted Dec. 5, 2011; and Ord. No. 04-2014, § I, adopted Aug. 18, 2014. Ord. No. 07-2014 states "this Ordinance shall apply retroactively to all commercial filming permits issued and active as of the effective date of this Ordinance. 

Sec. 8-113. - Motion picture, television and photographic production ordinance. 
(a)  Permit required. 
(1)  No person shall use any public or private property, building, facility or residence located within the City Limits of Norcross for producing, taking or making any motion picture, television production or photographic production without first applying for and receiving a commercial filming permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Definitions. [The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this subsection, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
(1)  Administrative commercial filming permits are permits for commercial filming activity not to exceed four consecutive weeks. 
(2)  Applicant means the individual applying for a permit, who is legally authorized to bind the Producer. 
(3)  Application means the document created by the Community Development Director that must be completed and submitted to the Community Development Director by a producer or the producer's authorized representative, in order to request a permit. 
(4)  City means the City of Norcross. 
(5)  Code means the Norcross, Georgia Code of Ordinances. 
(6)  Commercial filming activity means the production of motion pictures, television series, commercials, music videos, interactive games and animation on public or private property, or which has any adverse effect on public property, such as the parking of commercial vehicles supporting such production activity in the public right of way and increased traffic as a result of such production activity, including the on-site/on-location pre-production activities associated therewith, where the final product is intended to be commercially released and/or commercially distributed; provided however, that commercial filming activity shall not include: 
a.  Location scouting. 
b.  Amateur photography. 
c.  The activities of reporters or cameramen in the employ of a newspaper, news service, radio or television broadcasting station engaged in on-the-spot broadcasting, reporting or photographing of news of current events or general public interest. This exception does not include magazine or documentary programs. 
d.  Productions, concerts, festivals or other events conducted or sponsored in whole or in part by the city or any city board, commission or authority. 
e.  Wedding celebrations, ceremonies, and similar private social events. 
(7)  Commercial filming permit includes administrative commercial filming permits and operational commercial filming permits. 
(8)  Commercial filming permit administrator means the Community Development Director or his designee. 
(9)  Operational commercial filming permits are permits for commercial filming activity that exceed four consecutive weeks. 
(10)  Permit means a permit validly issued by the city that authorizes commercial filming activity. 
(11)  Producer means an individual, organization, corporation or any other entity that is ultimately responsible for the filming that is the subject of the application and the permit (where applicable). 
(12)  Public property means real property owned by the city or for which the city is a lessee, including, without limitation, parks, streets, sidewalks, other rights-of-way, and buildings. Public property shall not include real property which is being leased by the city to a lessee. 
(13)  Traffic control plan means a drawing that is submitted with a request for a sidewalk, lane and or street closure that details the location of the closures, the alternative routes that will be utilized for the detoured vehicular and/or pedestrian traffic, and the mechanisms (including without limitation barricades and signage and the locations thereof) for implementing the closures and alternatives. 
(c)  Commercial filming permit administrator. The Community Development Director is hereby appointed as the commercial filming permit administrator. All applications for commercial filming permits shall be submitted to the Community Development Director. The City Manager may appoint one or more city employees to form a committee to review the applications and make recommendations to the Community Development Director. The Community Development Director has authority suspend or revoke any commercial filming permit for failure to strictly follow the requirements of this article. 
(d)  Commercial filming permits. 
(1)  Administrative commercial filming permits are permits for commercial filming activity not to exceed four consecutive weeks. Applications for administrative permits are reviewed and approved by the Community Development Director; provided however, that the City Manager may require a committee of city employees to review said application and make a recommendation to the Community Development Director to approve or deny such application. 
(2)  Operational commercial filming permits are permits for commercial filming activity that exceed four consecutive weeks. Applications for operational permits are reviewed by the Community Development Director and a committee appointed by the City Manager. After reviewing the application for compliance with this article, the Community Development Director shall make a recommendation to the Mayor and City Council to approve or deny such application. All operational filming permits must be approved by the Mayor and City Council in a public meeting. 
(e)  Application for commercial filming permits. 
(1)  Any person desiring a commercial filming permit under the provisions of this article shall make application on the approved form provided by the city. The form must be signed and accompanied by all required fees, deposits, hold harmless agreement and insurance certificates required by this article before any such permit will be considered for approval. 
(2)  Said application shall contain, at a minimum, the following information: 
a.  The number of people involved in the activity. 
b.  A narrative describing the activities to take place. 
c.  A schedule of the activities to take place. 
d.  A location map showing the area where the activities will take place. 
e.  A narrative describing the anticipated impact on the public at each location, including, but not limited to, the anticipated impact on local businesses, charitable or religious organizations, vehicle and pedestrian traffic. 
f.  A narrative describing the vehicles and equipment involved at each location. 
g.  A narrative describing any barricades or other obstructions to pedestrian or vehicle traffic that may or will be required at each location, and, if so, a plan showing the location and a description of such barricades or obstructions. 
h.  A narrative describing all special effects, including stunts and pyrotechnics to be used at each location, including, but not limited to, simulated explosions, fires, gunfire, vehicle chase scenes and stunts. 
i.  A narrative describing the applicant's plan for emergency medical personnel or fire-suppression equipment for its employees and the public in each such location where special effects such as stunts, pyrotechnics, simulated explosions, fires, gunfire, vehicle chase scenes and stunts. 
j.  A copy of a safety plan prepared by the applicant to protect the health, safety and welfare of its employees and the public in each such location. 
k.  Copies of any licenses or permits issued by the state or federal government for the possession and use of pyrotechnics. Explosive devices or restricted weapons to be used by the applicant, its employees, subcontractors, agents and suppliers. 
l.  A narrative describing the anticipated decibel level and duration of noise at each location. 
m.  A traffic control plan. 
n.  The method of giving notice to the public of the planned commercial filming activity, as required by subsection (f)(1) below. 
o.  A written acknowledgement executed by the applicant declaring and acknowledging that any commercial filming permit issued pursuant to such application is not transferable and vests no property rights in the applicant. 
p.  Applications may be submitted with a general, rather than a specific, description of the information required in subsections (e)(2)a. through (e)(2)n. above if the anticipated filming will involve multiple locations over a period of time exceeding two consecutive weeks and the specific identification of the such details is impractical at the time of submitting the application. Such applications shall be submitted with a narrative describing the particular logistics and other reasons for being unable to give the specific information required in subsections (e)(2)a. through (e)(2)n. above at the time of submitting the application. 
q.  If a commercial filming permit is issued with general descriptions of the information required in subsections (e)(2)a. through (e)(2)n. above instead of specific descriptions, the applicant shall be required to: 
i.  Supplement the application with specific information as set forth in subsections (e)(2)a. through (e)(2)n. above to the Community Development Director and the Chief of Police in writing not less than ten business days prior to the date on which such person desires to conduct an activity for which a permit is required for commercial filming purposes, and 
ii.  Provide the notice to the public of the planned commercial filming activity, as required by this subsection (e) not less than three business days prior to the date on which such person desires to conduct an activity for which a permit is required for commercial filming purposes by a method approved by the Community Development Director. 
r.  A commercial filming permit may be issued with general descriptions of the information required in subsections (e)(2)a. through (e)(2)n. above if the applicant shows good cause for applying for a commercial filming permit with general information. 
s.  Failure to provide the specific supplemental information and notices required as set forth in subsection (f)(1) of this article shall be just cause for immediate revocation of the commercial filming permit by the Community Development Director. 
(3)  Deadline for filing applications for commercial filming permits. 
a.  Applications for administrative commercial filming permits shall be submitted to the Community Development Director at least ten business days prior to the date on which such person desires to conduct the first activity for which a permit is required. 
b.  Applications for operational commercial filming permits shall be submitted to the Community Development Director at least ten business days prior to the prior to the deadline for submitting an agenda item to the City Clerk for preparation of the agenda for each meeting of the Mayor and City Council. All operational commercial filming permits must be approved by the Mayor and Council in a public meeting before any commercial filming activity is conducted. 
(4)  Operational commercial filming permits shall not exceed six months from the date of the first scheduled commercial filming activity. 
(f)  Issuance of permit; conditions. 
(1)  The commercial filming permit holder shall give notice of the permitted filming activity to all persons residing, owning property or regularly operating a business or religious institution located directly adjacent to the anticipated location of such activity not less than three business days prior to each permitted filming activity as set forth below. 
a.  Said notice shall include the name, telephone number and address of the commercial filming permit holder. 
b.  Said notice shall contain a summary description including, at a minimum the following information. 
i.  The number of people involved in the activity; 
ii.  A description of the activities to take place; 
iii.  A schedule of the activities to take place; and 
iv.  A description of the area where the activities will take place. 
c.  Said notice shall inform the public that any objections and concerns should be set forth in writing and mailed to the Community Development Director who will forward such written objections and concerns to the commercial filming permit holder, with the name and address of the person or persons making such objection/concern redacted. 
d.  The notice may be given by mobile illuminated signs, leaflets, mailed notice, by temporary signage in the public right-of-way or any other means designed to effectuate the notice requirements of this subsection. The method of giving such notice shall be subject to the approval of the Community Development Director. 
(2)  A permit for commercial filming activity shall be issued as provided for in this article, when, after consideration of the application, the recommendations from staff and any committee appointed by the City Manager, input from the public and private businesses, and information from such other sources as may be otherwise obtained, it is found that: 
a.  The conduct of such activity will not unduly interfere with normal traffic or pedestrian movement or endanger public safety and that no streets will be completely closed to traffic for an unreasonable period of time. The permit holder shall submit a street closure request in writing to the Community Development Director and the Director of Public Works not less than five business days advance notice of the date the street is to be closed. 
b.  The conduct of such activity will not result in the city incurring costs or expenditures in either money or personnel not reimbursed in advance or otherwise paid by the applicant. 
c.  The Chief of Police, or his appointed representative, after investigation, has issued a written determination that he/she has determined that the conduct of such activity will not unduly interfere with normal governmental or city operations, threaten to result in damage or detriment to public property, or result in damage or detriment to public property. 
d.  The conduct of such activity will not constitute a fire hazard or any other type of hazard and that all safety precautions will be taken as determined necessary by the Community Development Director and the Chief of Police. 
(3)  Any permit issued hereunder is non-transferable. 
(4)  Issuance of any commercial filming permit shall not vest any property rights in the applicant. 
(5)  Any commercial filming permit issued hereunder is non-transferable. 
(g)  Bond, insurance, hold harmless and indemnification . 
(1)  As a condition of issuing such a permit, the applicant shall furnish a bond, insurance or both in an amount not less than $500,000.00, to protect the city against claims of third persons for personal injury, wrongful death and property damage and to indemnify the city for damage to city property arising out of the applicant's activities. 
(2)  A minimum of $5,000,000.00 of such bond, general liability insurance coverage or both shall be required in the event aircraft, helicopters, pyrotechnics or automobile chase scenes are used in the activity. Such insurance shall be evidenced by the standard general liability special endorsement form mandated by this article. City shall be listed as additional insured and applicant shall have primary coverage. 
(3)  The applicant shall execute an indemnity and hold harmless agreement as provided by the city prior to the issuance of any permit that shall hold the city harmless against any claims, liability or judgments arising out of the applicant's activities. 
(h)  Suspension or revocation of permit. The Community Development Director and/or the Chief of Police shall have the authority to suspend any commercial filming permit issued hereunder where the terms and conditions of said permit have been violated or ignored, including the timely payment of all required fees and deposits, or suspend any permit where the public health, safety or welfare is endangered by the permitted activity. The City Manager shall schedule a meeting with the permit holder, the Community Development Director (or his/her designee) and the Chief of Police (or his/her designee) within five business days of such suspension to make a final determination on whether such commercial filming permit should be revoked. The City Manager shall have authority to determine whether the commercial filming permit should be revoked or the conditions under which the suspension of the commercial filming permit may be lifted. The revocation of a commercial filming permit by the City Manager is final. 
(i)  Fees and costs of additional services. Each application shall be accompanied by the following nonrefundable fees: 
(1)  A processing fee in the amount specified in the City Fee Schedule. 
(2)  Upon approval of an application for a Commercial Filming Permit, the Community Development Director shall provide the applicant with a statement of the estimated cost of providing public works and other city employees and services for public safety for the production. The applicant shall directly pay off duty police personnel approved by the Chief of Police for traffic control and security. The number of police required for each such activity must be approved by the Chief of Police for such activity. The cost of such city services shall be borne by the applicant and shall be paid to the city prior to the conducting of a production, other than the payment for off duty police officers. The amount of such fees shall be based on the city's actual cost of providing the required number of police and other city employees and services necessary to ensure the safety of both the participants of the production and the community. 
(3)  If the actual cost for public services is more than the estimated cost as set forth above, the difference shall become due and payable to the city immediately upon the applicant's receipt of a statement of actual costs by the city. 
(4)  All fees may be waived for wholly charitable or educational purposes and from which no profit is derived, either directly or indirectly. Tax-exempt and nonprofit organizations must qualify under section 501(c)(3) of the United States Internal Revenue Code and proof of such status must be provided to the city in order for said fees to be waived by the city. 
(j)  Regulations and conditions. 
(1)  The applicant shall: 
a.  Maintain a copy of the commercial filming permit on site at all times. 
b.  Comply with any and all conditions or restrictions the city may impose as a condition to issuing a commercial filming permit. No changes to the conditions or restrictions shall be made without the written approval of the Community Development Director. 
c.  Have nonexclusive use of facilities and public right-of-way unless otherwise granted in writing. 
d.  Comply with all City of Norcross Ordinances, including, but not limited to, the nuisance, noise control and litter ordinances. See Norcross Code of Ordinances, chapter 26, section 26-1 et seq. 
(2)  The Community Development Director may promulgate and enforce additional regulations as necessary and appropriate in the implementation and enforcement of this chapter. 
(k)  Filming on private property. 
(1)  An applicant is required to obtain the property owner's permission, consent, and/or lease for use of property not owned or controlled by the city. Written permission of the property owner must be presented at time of commercial filming permit application. 
(2)  An applicant is required to minimize interference with the normal activities of a neighborhood or commercial area, including access to private or public property. 
(l)  Filming at city facilities or on the public right-of-way. In the event that the applicant desires to locate their production event at a facility owned or managed by the city, or on the public right-of-way, the city shall charge a daily fee in an amount determined by the Community Development Director not to exceed $1,000.00 per day. If an existing facility charge has been established by the city at a facility owned or managed by the city, that fee will be charged to the applicant. 
(m)  Traffic control. The city retains the right and the authority to regulate traffic and require vehicles to be moved or towed (at the owner's expense) to protect the health, safety and welfare of the community. 
(n)  Faithful performance bond; clean up and restoration. To ensure cleanup and restoration of any site on public property or public right-of-way used by applicant within the city limits, said applicant may be required to post a refundable faithful performance bond (in an amount to be determined by the Community Development Director) at the time the application is submitted. Upon completion of the production and upon the finding by the city that the site has been satisfactorily cleaned up and restored, the bond may be returned to the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 07-2014, § I, 10-6-2014) 
Sec. 8-114. - Conditions precedent to issuance of commercial filming permit. 
Prior to issuing a commercial filming permit the following conditions shall be met: 
(1)  The city must find that the commercial filming operation does not compromise the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city. 
(2)  At least one or more off-duty police officers must be employed by the film company to control traffic as determined by the Chief of Police. 
(3)  A certificate of insurance including general liability coverage must be provided naming the city as an additional insured for this purpose. 
(4)  An indemnification and hold harmless agreement in the form proposed by the city shall be supplied to the city before the commencement of any commercial filming activity. 
(5)  A minimum notice of three days must be delivered to all businesses and/or residences in the immediate vicinity of the proposed filming site. 
(6)  The filming permit fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges must be paid. 
(Ord. No. 07-2014, § I, 10-6-2014) 
Secs. 8-115—8-141. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - ESCORTS AND ESCORT SERVICES[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Local government authorized to require a business or practitioner of a profession or occupation to pay a regulatory fee where the local government performs investigation or inspection of such businesses or practitioners of such profession or occupation as protection of the public health, safety, or welfare or in the course of enforcing a state or local building, health, or safety code, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(a); escort service is the type of business or practitioner of profession or occupation which may be subject to regulatory fees of local governments, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(b)(29). 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 8-142. - Statement of purpose. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is to ensure the public health, welfare and freedom from the use of ostensibly legitimate businesses to further criminal activities such as pandering and prostitution and also to protect minors from involvement with such business practices. 
(b)  In enacting this article with regards to licensing, the Mayor and Council recognize that an individual's past actions are very often the best indicators of that person's future actions. Denying licenses to individuals who have recently committed a felony offense or misdemeanor of moral turpitude is a reasonable means to ensure that those licensed to operate escort bureaus or services will respect and abide by these provisions. 
Sec. 8-143. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Consideration means money or money's worth. 
Escort means any person who, for monetary consideration in the form of a fee, commission, or salary, is held out to the public as available for hire or consort with or to accompany another to other's social affairs, places of amusement or entertainment, within any place or public resort, or within any private quarters. 
Escort bureau means any person who for a fee, commission, profit, payment or other monetary consideration, furnishes, refers, or offers to furnish or refer escorts, or provide, or offers to introduce patrons to escorts. 
Escort bureau runner means any person, not an escort, who, for a salary, fee, hire, reward, or profit, as the agent for either an escort bureau or a patron, contacts or meets with the escort or patrons or escort bureaus at any location other than the established open office, whether that person is employed by the escort bureau or any business, or is self-employed. 
Licensee means a person who is the holder of a valid license under this article. A licensee includes an agent, servant, employee, or other such person while acting on behalf of that licensee whenever such licensee is or would be prohibited from doing or performing an act or acts under this article. 
Offer to provide acts of sexual conduct means to offer, propose, or solicit to provide sexual conduct to a patron. Such definitions include all conversations, advertisements and acts which would lead a reasonably prudent person to conclude that acts were to be provided. 
Open office means an office at a licensed escort bureau address from which escort business is transacted. To qualify as an open office it is required that: 
(1)  Business hours be established and posted and that the office be open to the public and patrons or prospective patrons during such business hours and that the office be accessible to business invitees, business license officials and law enforcement officers through a security system during all other hours that escorts are working. 
(2)  The office be managed by the owner or a management employee of the owner having authority to bind the bureau to escort and patron contracts and adjust patron and consumer complaints. 
(3)  All telephone lines and numbers listed to the escort bureau or advertised as escort bureau numbers terminate at the open office and at no other location. 
(4)  An index of all employees and escorts be kept in the open office. 
(5)  All business records be kept in the open office, including records of escort calls and referrals, stating the name and address, including hotel or motel room, of the patron, the date and time of the referral, name of the escort sent, and whether the referral resulted in an escort service and the total fee received from the patron, if any. 
Person financially interested means, for a corporation, any person who is an officer or Director or any shareholder holding more than five percent of the shares thereof; for a noncorporation business, any person who shares in any financial gain attributable to the business as a proprietor or owner or on the basis of a percentage in excess of five percent of gross or ten percent of net revenue. 
Service-oriented escort means an escort who: 
(1)  Operates from an open office; 
(2)  Does not employ or use an escort runner; 
(3)  Does not advertise that sexual conduct will be provided or work for an escort bureau which so advertises; and 
(4)  Does not offer, solicit, agree to provide or provide sexual conduct. 
Service-oriented escort bureau means an escort bureau which: 
(1)  Maintains an open office at an established place of business; 
(2)  Does not use an escort bureau runner; 
(3)  Does not advertise, offer, solicit, agree to, or provide sexual conduct to a patron; and 
(4)  Employs or provides only escorts who possess escort identification cards. 
Sexual conduct means engaging in or the commission of an act of sexual intercourse, oral/genital conduct, or the touching of the sexual organs, pubic regions, buttocks or female breasts of a person for the purpose of arousing or gratifying sexual desire of another person. 
Sexual gratification means sexual conduct. 
Sexual stimulation means to excite or arouse the prurient interests or to offer or solicit acts of sexual conduct. 
Sexually oriented acts means acts of sexual conduct. 
Sexually oriented escort means an escort who: 
(1)  Employs an escort bureau runner as an employee, agent, or independent contractor; 
(2)  Works for, as an agent, employee or independent contractor, or is referred to a patron by a sexually oriented escort bureau; 
(3)  Advertises that sexual conduct will be provided or works for an agent, employee or independent contractor, or is referred to a patron by an escort bureau which so advertises; 
(4)  Solicits, offers, agrees to provide, or does provide, acts of sexual conduct to an escort patron; or 
(5)  Accepts an offer or solicitation to provide acts of sexual conduct for a fee in addition to the fee charged by the escort bureau. 
Sexually oriented escort bureau means an escort bureau which: 
(1)  Engages in advertising to make the prospective patron believe the acts of sexual conduct or sexual stimulation will be provided; 
(2)  Uses as escorts persons known to have violated the law regarding prostitution; 
(3)  Does not maintain an open office; 
(4)  Employs as an employee, agent, or independent contractor, or uses an escort bureau runner; 
(5)  Advertises that sexual conduct will be provided or that escorts which provide such sexual conduct will be provided, referred, or introduced to a patron; 
(6)  Solicits, offers, or agrees to provide, or does provide acts of sexual conduct to a patron; 
(7)  Employs, contracts with, or provides or refers escorts who do not possess escort identification cards as required in this article; 
(8)  Does not deliver contracts to every patron or customer; or 
(9)  Employs, contracts with, or refers or provides to a patron a sexually oriented escort. 
(Code 1979, § 9-6-1; Code 1998, § 14-271) 
Sec. 8-144. - Activity restricted. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to work or perform services as an escort within the city unless employed by a licensed escort bureau or licensed as an escort. It shall also be unlawful for any person to work or perform services as a sexually oriented escort, regardless of license. 
(Code 1979, § 9-6-5; Code 1998, § 14-272) 
Sec. 8-145. - Identification cards. 
(a)  Each escort bureau licensee shall be issued identification cards in this name and in the name of each person who shall engage in the activity of an escort on its behalf. This card shall contain the following information: 
(1)  A photograph of the escort; 
(2)  The escort's name, address and social security number; 
(3)  The escort's date of birth, height, weight and gender. 
(b)  The card must be carried on the person of an individual while such person is engaged in the activity of an escort within the city. Such identification card shall be displayed upon request of any police officer or other law enforcement official. 
(Code 1979, § 9-6-7; Code 1998, § 14-273) 
Sec. 8-146. - Contract required. 
The escort bureau shall provide to each patron a written contract and receipt of payment for services. The contract shall clearly state the type of services to be performed, the length of time such services shall be performed, the total amount of money such services shall cost the patron, and any special terms or conditions related to the services to be performed. 
(Code 1979, § 9-6-8(a); Code 1998, § 14-274) 
Sec. 8-147. - Office required, restrictions. 
The escort bureau shall maintain an open office at the licensed location. The address of that office shall be included in all patron contracts and public advertisements. Private rooms or booths where the patron may meet with an escort shall not be provided in the open office or at any other location by the escort bureau. 
(Code 1979, § 9-6-8(b); Code 1998, § 14-275) 
Sec. 8-148. - Liability of bureau. 
The escort bureau, in terms of licensing consequences, is responsible and liable for the acts of all its employees and subcontractors including, but not limited to, telephone receptionists and escorts who are referred by that bureau, while the escort is with the patron. 
(Code 1979, § 9-6-8(c); Code 1998, § 14-276) 
Sec. 8-149. - Advertising. 
It is unlawful to advertise or hold out to the public the availability of an escort bureau without obtaining a license therefor as provided in this article, whether the actual business of escorts or escort bureaus is performed. The escort bureau license number must be prominently displayed in all advertisements. 
(Code 1979, § 9-6-9; Code 1998, § 14-277) 
Sec. 8-150. - Service for minors. 
It is unlawful for a licensee to provide escort services to individuals under 18 years of age, unless written authorization by a parent or legal guardian is issued to the escort when acting as such. The escort bureau must keep a copy of any such written authorization from a parent or guardian on file in the escort bureau's open office. Such written authorization must include the parent or guardian's name, address, social security number, phone number, and signature. 
(Code 1979, § 9-6-11; Code 1998, § 14-278) 
Secs. 8-151—8-168. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 8-169. - Required. 
It is unlawful for any person to work or perform services as, conduct, manage, operate, or maintain an escort bureau unless licensed pursuant to this division. It shall also be unlawful for any person to work or perform services as, conduct, operate, manage, or maintain a sexually oriented escort bureau, regardless of license. A separate license is required for each location or type of activity coming under this article within the city. 
(Code 1979, § 9-6-2; Code 1998, § 14-311) 
Sec. 8-170. - Application. 
(a)  An applicant for an escort bureau license shall file an application with the General Government Administration Department, accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee. 
(b)  Unless otherwise provided in this section, the application shall contain the name and address of the activity and the following information about the activity to be licensed, any authorized local agents, and any managing employee of the activity to be licensed: 
(1)  The name, including any aliases, business trade names or styles. 
(2)  Present residence of the owner or principal officer/partner and business address and telephone numbers of both. 
(3)  Each residence and business address for the five-year period immediately preceding the date of filing of the application and the inclusive dates of each such address. 
(4)  A valid state driver's license and the applicant's social security number. 
(5)  Valid proof of age that the applicant is at least 21 years of age. 
(6)  The height, weight, color of eyes and hair, and date of birth of each applicant. 
(7)  Two current color photographs, front view. 
(8)  The business, occupation, or employment history for the three-year period immediately preceding the date of filing of application. 
(9)  Information as to whether such individual or business has ever been refused any similar license or permit or has had any similar license or permit issued to such individual or business in the state or elsewhere revoked or suspended, and the reason therefor. 
(10)  All prior criminal convictions, guilty pleas, or nolo contendere pleas, including misdemeanors and traffic violations. 
(11)  The applicant's fingerprints. 
(12)  If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in the articles of incorporation or charter, together with the state and date of incorporation, and the names, residence addresses, and dates of birth of each of its current officers and Directors, and each stockholder holding more than five percent of the common shares issued by the corporation. If the applicant is a partnership, the application shall set forth the names, residence addresses, and dates of birth of each partner, including limited partners and profit interest holders. If the applicant is a limited partnership, the applicant shall furnish a copy of the certificate of limited partnership. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this section pertaining to a corporation shall apply. The corporation or partnership applicant shall designate one of its officers or general partners to act as its responsible managing officer. Each designated person shall complete and sign all application forms required of an individual applicant under this article, but only one application fee shall be charged. 
(13)  A description of any service to be provided, together with a declaration that the services to be provided shall not involve those of a sexually oriented escort bureau. 
(14)  The names and residential addresses of all persons employed as escorts. 
(Code 1979, § 9-6-4(a), (b); Code 1998, § 14-312) 
Sec. 8-171. - Information updates. 
Any changes in information required to be submitted by this division must be given to the General Government Administration Department within ten days of any such change. 
(Code 1979, § 9-6-10; Code 1998, § 14-313) 
Sec. 8-172. - Investigation. 
The Police Department shall have a reasonable period of time in which to investigate the application for a license under this division through various city departments. Such reasonable period shall not exceed 30 days. 
(Code 1979, § 9-6-4(c); Code 1998, § 14-314) 
Sec. 8-173. - Conditions for issuance. 
(a)  The General Government Administration Department shall grant a license under this division on the following circumstances: 
(1)  Required fees have been paid. 
(2)  The application conforms in all respects to the provisions of this article. 
(3)  The applicant has not made any material misrepresentation of fact on the application. 
(4)  That neither the applicant, if an individual; nor any person financially interested, if a corporation; nor any of the partners, including limited partners; nor the holder of any profit interest; nor the manager or other principal in charge of the operation of the existing or proposed escort bureau; nor any individual employed or contracted with to be an escort or to provide escort services has been convicted of, pleaded nolo contendere or guilty to any felony, or to a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, within ten years prior to the issuance of the license. 
(5)  The applicant has not had a license similar to the one issued pursuant to the provisions of this division issued by another local authority, suspended or revoked within a five-year period immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application. 
(6)  The escort bureau complies with all applicable city, county, state and federal laws. 
(7)  The applicant, manager or other person principally in charge of the operation of the business is at least 21 years of age. 
(b)  The General Government Administration Department shall deny the license application if all the requirements set forth in this section have not been met. Upon denial, the applicant shall be notified by mail of the denial and reasons thereof. The applicant may appeal such denial to the municipal court. 
(Code 1979, § 9-6-4; Code 1998, § 14-315) 
Sec. 8-174. - Fees. 
The fee for a license required by this division, and for a renewal thereof, and for each escort, shall be as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges. 
(Code 1979, §§ 9-6-3, 9-6-12; Code 1998, § 14-316; Ord. No. 23-95, § IV, 12-4-1995) 
Sec. 8-175. - Duration. 
Every license issued under the provisions of this division shall expire on December 31 of the year in which the same was issued. 
(Code 1979, § 9-6-3; Code 1998, § 14-317; Ord. No. 23-95, § IV, 12-4-1995) 
Sec. 8-176. - Transfer. 
All licenses issued under the provisions of this division are personal and nontransferable. 
(Code 1979, § 9-6-3; Code 1998, § 14-318; Ord. No. 23-95, § IV, 12-4-1995) 
Sec. 8-177. - Renewal. 
Licensees should contact the General Government Administration Department on or before December 15 of each year for renewal scheduling. In order to have his license renewed, an escort must show that he is currently licensed in good standing with the city. 
(Code 1998, § 14-319; Ord. No. 23-95, § IV, 12-4-1995) 
Sec. 8-178. - Revocation. 
(a)  Any license issued pursuant to this division shall be revoked upon one or more of the following grounds: 
(1)  The licensee, any employee, agent, or other person connected or associated with the licensee as a partner, Director, officer, stockholder, or manager, or any person financially interested, has violated the provisions of this article in conducting an activity licensed under the provisions of this article. 
(2)  The licensee, any employee, agent or other person connected or associated with the licensee as a partner, Director, officer, stockholder or manager or any person financially interested, has made a material misrepresentation of fact in the application for any license required by this article. 
(3)  The licensee has been convicted, subsequent to the issuance of any license, of a crime which is either a felony or a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude or has offered or agreed to or rendered the service of a sexually oriented escort. 
(4)  The licensee has violated a provision of this article in conducting a licensed activity pursuant to this article. 
(5)  The licensee is a corporation that is no longer qualified to transact business in the state or is no longer in good standing. 
(b)  To revoke a license, the General Government Administration Department head shall notify the licensee in writing by mail at the address as shown on the application or otherwise as most recently of record that such license or permit is revoked. The cause for such revocation shall be set forth in the notice. Service shall be complete upon mailing to the address of record. 
(c)  The license shall terminate if the licensee fails to pay any license fee owed either when due or by the end of any renewal period. 
(d)  Licensee may appeal any revocation of its license to the municipal court. 
(e)  A revoked license shall be surrendered to the Police Department on demand. 
(Code 1979, § 9-6-13; Code 1998, § 14-320) 
Secs. 8-179—8-209. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - PAWNBROKERS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 04-2010, adopted April 12, 2010, amended art. VII in its entirety and enacted similar provisions as set out herein. The former art. VII derived from Code 1979, §§ 9-2-2(a)—9-2-2(e), 9-2-2(g)—9-2-2(i), 9-2-2(j)(2), 9-2-2(j)(3), and 9-9-2(l)—9-9-2(o); Code 1998, §§ 14-411—14-416, 14-351—14-355, and 14-357—14-360; Ord. No. 23-95, § 1, adopted Dec. 4, 1995; Ord. No. 08-96, adopted April 1, 1996; and Ord. No. 09-98, adopted May 4, 1998. 
State Law reference— Pawnbrokers generally, O.C.G.A. § 44-12-130 et seq.; municipal authorities may license pawnbrokers, define their powers and privileges by ordinance, impose taxes upon them, revoke their licenses, and exercise such general supervision, O.C.G.A. § 44-12-136. 

Sec. 8-210. - Definitions. 
Automated reporting system. A computer-based system specified by the Chief of Police designed to record and transmit data and information electronically. 
Employee. 
(1)  Any owner or pawnbroker who, in the performance of his or her duties or the management of the business affairs of a pawnshop, comes into contact with members of the public; or 
(2)  Any person working for an owner or pawnbroker; or 
(3)  Any person who is employed on a part-time or full-time basis, either with or without remuneration, by a pawnshop. 
Pawn or pledge. A bailment of personal property as security for any debt or engagement, redeemable upon certain terms and with the power of sale on default. 
Pawnbroker. Any person, whether an owner or not, who works in a pawnshop on a regular basis and in a managerial capacity whereby he or she has charge of the business or daily operations of the pawnshop, and whose business or occupation it is to take or receive, by way of pledge, pawn, or exchange, any goods, wares, or merchandise, or any kind of personal property whatever, as security for the repayment of money lent thereon. 
Pawnshop. Any business wherein a substantial part thereof is to take or receive, by way of pledge, pawn, consignment or exchange, any goods, wares, merchandise, or any kind of personal property whatever, as security for the repayment of money lent thereon. 
(Ord. No. 04-2010, 4-12-2010; Ord. No. 20-2011, 10-3-2011) 
Sec. 8-211. - Hours of operation. 
The hours during which pawnbrokers may conduct business shall be from no earlier than 7:00 a.m. to no later than 9:00 p.m. 
(Ord. No. 04-2010, 4-12-2010) 
Sec. 8-212. - Pawn license required, supplementary to business license or occupational tax. 
All persons, before beginning the business of operating a pawnshop or similar place where money is advanced on goods or other effects, or merchandise of any kind is taken in pawn, shall first file an application with the City Police Department for an annual pawn license to conduct such business. The issuance of said pawn license shall be a requirement in addition to a business license or occupational tax certificate required by the Planning and Zoning Department of the City, and no business license or occupational tax certificate shall issue prior to the applicant successfully receiving a pawn license from the Norcross Police Department. 
(1)  Form of application. The application for pawn license shall be completed on a form prescribed by the Chief of Police or his designee. At minimum, the application shall include the physical address at which the business is proposed to be operated and the full name, address, phone number, date of birth, photograph and Social Security number of pawnbrokers and managerial employees of the business. Additionally, the permit shall list the owner or owners of the business. In the event the business is owned by a partnership or corporation, the partners or officers and registered agent shall be listed. 
(2)  License fee; separate license required for each physical location. The completed form must be accompanied by an application and license fee of $100.00. In the event an owner has more than one physical business location, each location will be required to obtain a separate permit. The application fee is nonrefundable in the event the applicant, for any reason, is not issued a license, business license, or occupational tax certificate. 
(3)  Background check required. Upon receipt of the application and fee, the Chief of Police, or his designee, shall conduct a background check on the applicant. A pawn license may not be issued where the applicant has been convicted, pled guilty, or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any crime involving moral turpitude, illegal gambling, any felonies, or any crime involving theft or fraudulent practices within a period of ten years immediately prior to the filing of such application. 
(4)  Falsified applications. No license shall issue if it is found that the applicant falsified, concealed or misrepresented any material fact in the application. 
(5)  Denial of license; appeal process. If an application for pawn license is denied for any reason, the applicant will be notified in writing of such denial and the reason for the denial. The applicant may appeal the decision of the Police Department to the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
(6)  Renewal. Owners are required to renew the license upon expiration thereof and shall be required to pay a renewal fee of $100.00. 
(7)  Replacement license. In the event a license is lost or destroyed, a replacement license may be issued for the unexpired term of the initial license. 
(8)  Display of license. Operators of pawn businesses shall conspicuously display the license at all times while the business is in operation. 
(9)  License issued in error; license the property of the City. Any pawn license issued through administrative oversight or error may be terminated and seized by the Chief of Police or his designee. All pawn licenses remain the property of the City of Norcross. Upon notice by the Norcross Police Department, the holder of a pawn license must surrender said license. 
(10)  Suspension or revocation of license; appeal. The Chief of Police or his designee may suspend or revoke any license issued under this section for falsifying an application, violation of this section, or if the applicant has otherwise become ineligible to hold a license under this section. The license holder may appeal the decision of the Chief of Police to the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
(Ord. No. 04-2010, 4-12-2010) 
Sec. 8-213. - Work permits required of employees. 
No person shall be employed by a pawnshop in any capacity until such person has obtained a work permit from the Norcross Police Department. 
(1)  Form of application; fee required. An application for a work permit shall be made on a form prescribed by the Chief of Police or his designee. Such application form shall include, at a minimum, the applicant's name, date of birth, and Social Security number. Applicant must also provide positive identification (only official government issued pictured identification accepted, e.g. driver's license, passport, military card, or state-issued I.D. card) at the time of application. 
(2)  Fee for permit. The completed permit application form must be accompanied by an application and permit fee of $100.00. The application fee is nonrefundable. 
(3)  Background check required. Upon receipt of the application and fee, the Chief of Police or his designee shall conduct a background check on the applicant. A permit may not be issued where the applicant has been convicted, pled guilty, or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any crime involving moral turpitude, illegal gambling, any felonies, or any crime involving theft or fraudulent practices within a period of five years immediately prior to the filing of such application. 
(4)  Falsified applications. No permit shall issue if it is found that the applicant falsified, concealed or misrepresented any material fact in the application. 
(5)  Denial of permit; appeal process. If an application for work permit is denied for any reason, the applicant will be notified in writing of such denial and the reason for the denial. The applicant may appeal the decision of the police department to the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
(6)  Renewal. Permit holders are required to renew the permit upon expiration thereof and shall be required to pay a renewal fee of $50.00. 
(7)  Replacement permit. In the event a permit is lost or destroyed, a replacement permit may be issued for the unexpired term of the initial license upon the payment of a permit replacement fee of $20.00. 
(8)  Permit in possession while working; inspection by Police Department. Permit holders must have a valid permit on their person at all times while working within a pawn establishment. The permit shall be displayed upon the request of a Norcross Police Officer. 
(9)  Permits issued in error; permit the property of the City. Any work permit issued through administrative oversight or error may be terminated and seized by the Chief of Police or his designee. All permits remain the property of the City. Upon notice by the Norcross Police Department, the holder of a permit must surrender said permit. 
(10)  Suspension or revocation of permit; appeal. The Chief of Police or his designee may suspend or revoke any permit issued under this section for falsifying an application, violation of this section, or if the applicant has otherwise become ineligible to hold a license under this section. The permit holder may appeal the decision of the Chief of Police to the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
(Ord. No. 04-2010, 4-12-2010) 
Sec. 8-214. - Records of pawn transactions; required information; method of transmittal. 
Engaging in the business of pledging, trading, pawning, exchanging, or selling used or previously owned merchandise, furniture, machinery, appliances, utensils, firearms, gold, silver, coins, precious metals, jewelry and precious stones within the City limits of Norcross is hereby declared to be affected with the public interest due to the opportunity it affords for the disposal of stolen property. In the public interest and as set forth herein, all pawnbroker and pawnshop operators shall document all transactions as required by this article. A transaction number will be assigned to every transaction to document the transaction. 
(1)  Identification of persons pledging items. Employees of pawnshops shall require all persons pledging, trading, pawning, exchanging, or selling property to show proper identification prior to conducting a transaction. For purposes of this section, proper identifications shall consist of a government-issued identification document such as a driver's license, state identification card, military identification card or passport. 
(2)  Required documentation of identifying data. Employees of pawnshops shall document the name, address, telephone number, race, gender, height, weight, driver's license number, date of birth, Social Security number, and identifying number from the presented identification of the person pledging, trading, pawning, exchanging, or selling property along with the date and time of the transaction. This documentation shall be made at the time of the transaction. 
(3)  Photographs required. Employees of pawnshops shall photograph all persons pledging, trading, pawning, exchanging, or selling property. Such photograph will be made with a digital camera or web camera. Such photograph shall clearly show a frontal view of the subject's face along with the pawnshop transaction number. Additionally, photographs of the items being pledged, traded, pawned, exchanged or sold. The photographs shall be appended to the record of the pawn transaction in a manner prescribed by the Chief of Police or his designee. 
(4)  Fingerprint and signature required. Employees of pawnshops shall obtain from all persons pledging, trading, pawning, exchanging, or selling property the fingerprint of the right-hand index finger. The fingerprint shall be appended to the record of the pawn transaction in a manner prescribed by the Chief of Police or his designee. The subject shall also sign the pawn transaction. In the event the indicated finger is missing, the next finger available on the right hand will be used and the finger used will be noted on the pawn transaction record. If the right hand is amputated, congenitally deformed, or otherwise unavailable due to medical condition, the left hand may be used and noted on the record. If neither hand is available due to medical condition, amputation or congenital deformity, that fact will be noted on the transaction record. Fingerprints and the information required herein shall be obtained each time such person pledges, trades, pawns, exchanges, or sells any property. 
(5)  Accurate property descriptions required. Employees of pawnshops shall document an accurate description of all items pledged, traded, pawned, exchanged or sold to the pawnshop. Such description shall include, at a minimum and to the extent possible, manufacturer, model, serial number, style, material, kind, color, design, number of stones (if jewelry), and any identifying names, marks, numbers or engravings. 
(6)  Tags required. Each item received by a pawnshop as a pledge, trade, pawn, exchange, or purchase shall be tagged with the pawnshop transaction number. Such tag must remain attached to the item until the item is disposed of by sale, trade or other lawful means. 
(7)  Wholesale purchases excluded. The requirements of this section shall not apply to property purchased from licensed wholesale or distributor businesses for the purpose of retail sale; however, the pawnshop employees shall be maintain purchasing records for property exempted under this paragraph while the property remains in inventory. 
(8)  Special requirements for new or unused goods. Items of property that appear to be new, unused, and in their original packaging may not be accepted by a pawnbroker unless the customer can supply a copy of the original sales receipt or other proof of purchase. Pawnshops shall retain a copy of such receipt or proof of purchase on file while the item is in inventory. 
(9)  Entry of transactions for electronic transmittal. Each pawnshop shall enter each transaction into the electronic automated reporting system as it occurs. In the event the electronic transmittal system is unavailable, pawnshops shall make records in paper form as prescribed by the Chief of Police or his designee. Such paper forms shall include all information otherwise required. Pawnshops shall keep a supply of paper forms available at all times. 
(10)  Automated reporting system; mandatory use. The Chief of Police or his designee shall select and designate an automated electronic reporting system for use by pawnshops to record and transmit pawn transaction. The pawnshop will be assessed a fee for each transaction entered into the system. This fee may be assessed to the person pledging, trading, pawning, exchanging, or selling property. Said fee will be collected by the Chief of Police or his designee, which may be a third party administrator of the automated reporting system. 
(Ord. No. 04-2010, 4-12-2010) 
Sec. 8-215. - Retention of property; storage; police holds. 
(a)  All property received through any pawnshop transaction shall be held for at least 30 days before being disposed of by sale, transfer, shipment, or otherwise, except when property is redeemed as per a pawn transaction contract. 
(b)  All property pledged, traded, pawned, exchanged or sold to the pawnshop shall be held and maintained on the premises of the licenses pawnshop that completed the transaction, or, if impractical, at such other location as may have been previously approved in writing by the Chief of Police or his designee. No off-site locations will be approved which are outside of the City limits of Norcross. 
(c)  The Norcross Police Department shall have the authority to place property that is the subject of a law enforcement investigation on "police hold." In that event, the police department shall notify the pawnshop of the need for the police hold and identify all property subject to the police hold. Such notification may be made verbally; however, written notice shall be provided within 24 hours of the verbal hold. Upon notification, it shall be the responsibility of the pawnshop to maintain the subject property until such time as the property is released from the police hold or the property is confiscated as evidence. 
(Ord. No. 04-2010, 4-12-2010) 
Sec. 8-216. - Dealing with minors. 
It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker, his or her agents or employees, to receive in pawn, from minors, goods of any character or description. A minor, for the purpose of this section, is an individual under the age of 18. 
(Ord. No. 04-2010, 4-12-2010) 
Sec. 8-217. - Responsibility for enforcement. 
The Norcross Police Department shall have the responsibility for the enforcement of this section. Sworn officers of the Norcross City Police Department and civilian employees designated by the Chief of Police shall have the authority to inspect establishments licensed under this section during the hours in which the premises are open for business. These inspections shall be made for the purpose of verifying compliance with the requirements of this section and state law. 
(Ord. No. 04-2010, 4-12-2010) 
Sec. 8-218. - Penalty for violation. 
Any person, firm, company, corporation or other entity who violates any provision of this chapter [article] may be subject to arrest or summoned to appear in the Norcross Municipal Court and upon conviction or other finding of guilt, be punished by a fine of up to $1,000.00 or six months' imprisonment, or both. 
(Ord. No. 04-2010, 4-12-2010) 
Sec. 8-219. - Severability. 
If any portion of the chapter [article] shall be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, unconstitutional or unenforceable, such declaration shall not be deemed to affect the remaining portions of this chapter [article]. 
(Ord. No. 04-2010, 4-12-2010) 
Secs. 8-220—8-282. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - PRECIOUS METALS DEALERS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference— Duties of purchasers of gold bullion, gold dust, etc., O.C.G.A. § 12-4-120 et seq.; dealers in precious metals and gems, O.C.G.A. § 43-37-1 et seq.; dealers in used watches, O.C.G.A. § 43-49-1 et seq. 

Sec. 8-283. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Automated reporting system. A computer based system specified by the Chief of Police designed to record and transmit data and information electronically. 
Employee. 
(1)  Any owner or precious metals dealer who, in the performance of his or her duties or the management of the business affairs of a pawnshop, comes into contact with members of the public; or 
(2)  Any person working for an owner or precious metals dealer; or 
(3)  Any person who is employed on a part-time or full-time basis, either with or without remuneration, by a precious metals dealer. 
Precious metals. Gold, silver, or platinum or any alloy containing gold, silver, or platinum. Precious metals also include other jewelry, gems, or stones exchanged for any value of money. 
Precious metals dealer. 
(1)  Any person operating or engaged in the business of purchasing precious metals or gems or goods made from precious metals or gems from persons or sources other than manufacturers, manufacturers' representatives, or other dealers in precious metals or gems; or 
(2)  A person operating or engaged in any other business if, in conjunction with such business, precious metals or gems or goods made from precious metals or gems are purchased from persons or sources other than manufacturers, manufacturers' representatives, or other dealers in precious metals or gems where such purchase is for resale in its original form or as changed by remounting, melting, reforming, remolding, or recasting or for resale as scrap or in bulk. 
(Ord. No. 20-2011, 10-3-2011) 
Sec. 8-284. - Compliance with article. 
All persons operating a place of business establishment where gold, silver, or other precious metals are purchased, traded, or sold shall comply with the provisions of this article. This article applies to businesses located at a permanent location and/or nonpermanent location as defined in this article. 
(Code 1979, § 9-2-3; Code 1998, § 14-446; Ord. No. 20-2011, 10-3-2011) 
Sec. 8-285. - Form of individual articles. 
This article shall apply to any items containing precious metals regardless of their form: e.g., class rings, silverware, coins, etc. 
(Code 1979, § 9-2-3(5); Code 1998, § 14-447) 
Sec. 8-286. - Exemptions. 
Dentists and dental laboratories are hereby specifically exempt from the requirements of this article. 
(Code 1979, § 9-2-3(6); Code 1998, § 14-448) 
Sec. 8-287. - Regulatory fee. 
All persons operating a place of business establishment where gold, silver, or other precious metals are purchased, traded or sold shall, in addition to paying a regular business license fee, shall pay a regulatory fee in the amount set forth in the schedule of regulatory fees which is maintained on file in the Office of the General Government Administration Department where it shall be available for inspection by the public. 
(Code 1979, § 9-2-3; Code 1998, § 14-449) 
Sec. 8-288. - Records of transactions; required information; method of transmittal. 
Engaging in the business of purchasing precious metals, jewelry and precious stones within the City limits of Norcross is hereby declared to be affected with the public interest due to the opportunity it affords for the disposal of stolen property. In the public interest and as set forth herein, all precious metals dealers shall document all transactions as required by this article. A transaction number will be assigned to every transaction to document the transaction. 
(1)  Identification of persons pledging items. Employees of precious metals dealers shall require all persons pledging, trading, pawning, exchanging, or selling property to show proper identification prior to conducting a transaction. For purposes of this section, proper identifications shall consist of a government-issued identification document such as a driver's license, state identification card, military identification card or passport. 
(2)  Required documentation of identifying data. Employees of precious metals dealers shall document the name, address, telephone number, race, gender, height, weight, driver's license number, date of birth, Social Security number, and identifying number from the presented identification of the person selling property along with the date and time of the transaction. This documentation shall be made at the time of the transaction. 
(3)  Photographs required. Employees of precious metals dealers shall photograph all persons pledging, trading, pawning, exchanging, or selling property. Such photograph will be made with a digital camera or web camera. Such photograph shall clearly show a frontal view of the subject's face along with the precious metals dealers' transaction number. Additionally, photographs of the items being sold will be made at the time of the transaction. The photographs shall be appended to the record of the pawn transaction in a manner prescribed by the Chief of Police or his designee. 
(4)  Fingerprint and signature required. Employees of precious metals dealers shall obtain from all persons selling property the fingerprint of the right-hand index finger. The fingerprint shall be appended to the record of the transaction in a manner prescribed by the Chief of Police or his designee. The subject shall also sign the transaction. In the event the indicated finger is missing, the next finger available on the right hand will be used and the finger used will be noted on the transaction record. If the right hand is amputated. congenitally deformed, or otherwise unavailable due to medical condition, the left hand may be used and noted on the record. If neither hand is available due to medical condition, amputation or congenital deformity, that fact will be noted on the transaction record. Fingerprints and the information required herein shall be obtained each time such person sells any property. 
(5)  Accurate property descriptions required. Employees of precious metals dealers shall document an accurate description of all items exchanged with the precious metals dealer. Such description shall include, at a minimum and to the extent possible, manufacturer, model, serial number, style, material, kind, color, design, number of stones, and any identifying names, marks, numbers or engravings. 
(6)  Tags required. Each item received by precious metals dealers shall be tagged with the precious metals dealer transaction number. Such tag must remain attached to the item until the item is disposed of by sate, trade or other lawful means. 
(7)  Wholesale purchases excluded. The requirements of this section shall not apply to property purchased from licensed wholesale or distributor businesses for the purpose of retail sale; however, the precious metals dealer shall maintain purchasing records for property exempted under this paragraph while the property remains in inventory. 
(8)  Special requirements for new or unused goods. Items of property that appear to be new, unused, and in their original packaging may not be accepted by a precious metals dealer unless the customer can supply a copy of the original sales receipt or other proof of purchase. Precious metals dealers shall retain a copy of such receipt or proof of purchase on file while the item is in inventory. 
(9)  Entry of transactions for electronic transmittal. Each precious metals dealer shall enter each transaction into the electronic automated reporting system as it occurs. In the event the electronic transmittal system is unavailable, precious metals dealers shall make records in paper form as prescribed by the Chief of Police or his designee. Such paper forms shall include all information otherwise required. Precious metals dealers shall keep a supply of paper forms available at all times. 
(10)  Automated reporting system; mandatory use. The Chief of Police or his designee shall select and designate an automated electronic reporting system for use by precious metals dealers to record and transmit the transaction. The precious metals dealer will be assessed a fee for each transaction entered into the system. This fee may be assessed to the person selling the property. Said fee will be collected by the Chief of Police or his designee, which may be a third party administrator of the automated reporting system. 
(11)  Retention of records. Transaction records covered under this chapter (article) shall be kept by the precious metals dealer for a period of not less than four years. 
(12)  Compliance with pawnbrokers ordinance. Nothing in this article shall relieve any precious metals dealer from complying with the City of Norcross Pawnbrokers Ordinance (Chapter 8 Article VII) if such precious metals dealer is acting as both a pawnbroker and precious metals dealer. 
(Code 1979, § 9-2-3(1); Code 1998, § 14-450; Ord. No. 20-2011, 10-3-2011) 
Sec. 8-289. - Retention period. 
(a)  All property received through any pawnshop transaction shall be held for at least 30 days before being disposed of by sale, transfer, shipment, or otherwise, except when property is redeemed as per a pawn transaction contract. 
(b)  All property pledged, traded, pawned, exchanged or sold to the pawnshop shall be held and maintained on the premises of the licenses [licensed] pawnshop that completed the transaction, or, if impractical, at such other location as may have been previously approved in writing by the Chief of Police or his designee. No off-site locations will be approved which are outside of the City limits of Norcross. 
(c)  The Norcross Police Department shall have the authority to place property that is the subject of a law enforcement investigation on "police hold". In that event, the Police Department shall notify the pawnshop of the need for the police hold and identify all property subject to the police hold. Such notification may be made verbally or electronically via the automated reporting system; however, written notice shall be provided within 24 hours of any verbal hold. Upon notification, it shall be the responsibility of the pawnshop to maintain the subject property until such time as the property is released from the police hold or the property is confiscated as evidence. 
(Code 1979, § 9-2-3(4); Code 1998, § 14-453; Ord. No. 20-2011, 10-3-2011) 
Sec. 8-290. - Precious metals dealer license required, supplementary to business license or occupational tax. 
All persons, before operating a precious metals dealer business, shall first file an application with the City Police Department for an annual precious metals dealer license to conduct such business. The issuance of said precious metals dealer license shall be a requirement in addition to a business license or occupational tax certificate required by the Planning and Zoning Department of the City, and no business license or occupational tax certificate shall issue prior to the applicant successfully receiving a precious metals dealer license from the Norcross Police Department. 
(1)  Form of application. The application for pawn license shall be completed on a form prescribed by the Chief of Police or his designee. At minimum, the application shall include the physical address at which the business is proposed to be operated and the full name, address, phone number, date of birth, photograph and Social Security number of precious metals dealers and managerial employees of the business. Additionally, the permit shall list the owner or owners of the business. In the event the business is owned by a partnership or corporation, the partners or officers and registered agent shall be listed. 
(2)  License fee; separate license required for each physical location. The completed form must be accompanied by an application and license fee of $100.00. In the event an owner has more than one physical business location, each location will be required to obtain a separate permit. The application fee is nonrefundable in the event the applicant, for any reason, is not issued a license, business license, or occupational tax certificate. 
(3)  Background check required. Upon receipt of the application and fee, the Chief of Police, or his designee, shall conduct a background check on the applicant. A precious metals dealer license may not be issued where the applicant has been convicted, pled guilty, or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any crime involving moral turpitude, illegal gambling, any felonies, or any crime involving theft or fraudulent practices within a period of ten years immediately prior to the filing of such application. 
(4)  Falsified applications. No license shall issue if it is found that the applicant falsified, concealed or misrepresented any material fact in the application. 
(5)  Denial of license; appeal process. If an application for precious metals dealer license is denied for any reason, the applicant will be notified in writing of such denial and the reason for the denial. The applicant may appeal the decision of the Police Department to the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
(6)  Renewal. Owners are required to renew the license upon expiration thereof and shall be required to pay a renewal fee of $100.00. 
(7)  Replacement license. In the event a license is lost or destroyed, a replacement license may be issued for the unexpired term of the initial license. 
(8)  Display of license. Operators of precious metals dealer businesses shall conspicuously display the license at all times while the business is in operation. 
(9)  License issued in error; license the property of the City. Any precious metals dealer license issued through administrative oversight or error may be terminated and seized by the Chief of Police or his designee. All precious metals dealer licenses remain the property of the City of Norcross. Upon notice by the Norcross Police Department, the holder of a precious metals dealer license must surrender said license. 
(10)  Suspension or revocation of license; appeal. The Chief of Police or his designee may suspend or revoke any license issued under this section for falsifying an application, violation of this section, or if the applicant has otherwise become ineligible to hold a license under this section. The license holder may appeal the decision of the Chief of Police to the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
(Ord. No. 20-2011, 10-3-2011) 
Sec. 8-291. - Work permits required of employees. 
No person shall be employed by a precious metals dealer in any capacity until such person has obtained a work permit from the Norcross Police Department. 
(1)  Form of application; fee required. An application for a work permit shall be made on a form prescribed by the Chief of Police or his designee. Such application form shall include, at a minimum, the applicant's name, date of birth, and Social Security number. Applicant must also provide positive identification (only official government issued pictured identification accepted, e.g. driver's license, passport, military card, or state-issued 1.0. [I.D.] card) at the time of application. 
(2)  Fee for permit. The completed permit application form must be accompanied by an application and permit fee of $100.00. The application fee is nonrefundable. 
(3)  Background check required. Upon receipt of the application and fee, the Chief of Police or his designee shall conduct a background check on the applicant. A permit may not be issued where the applicant has been convicted, pled guilty, or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any crime involving moral turpitude, illegal gambling, any felonies, or any crime involving theft or fraudulent practices within a period of five years immediately prior to the filing of such application. 
(4)  Falsified applications. No permit shall issue if it is found that the applicant falsified, concealed or misrepresented any material fact in the application. 
(5)  Denial of permit; appeal process. If an application for work permit is denied for any reason, the applicant will be notified in writing of such denial and the reason for the denial. The applicant may appeal the decision of the police department to the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
(6)  Renewal. Permit holders are required to renew the permit upon expiration thereof and shall be required to pay a renewal fee of $50.00. 
(7)  Replacement permit. In the event a permit is lost or destroyed, a replacement permit may be issued for the unexpired term of the initial license upon the payment of a permit replacement fee of $20.00. 
(8)  Permit in possession while working; inspection by police department. Permit holders must have a valid permit on their person at all times while working within a precious metals dealer establishment. The permit shall be displayed upon the request of a Norcross Police Officer. 
(9)  Permits issued in error; permit the property of the City. Any work permit issued through administrative oversight or error may be terminated and seized by the Chief of Police or his designee. All permits remain the property of the City. Upon notice by the Norcross Police Department, the holder of a permit must surrender said permit. 
(10)  Suspension or revocation of permit; appeal. The Chief of Police or his designee may suspend or revoke any permit issued under this section for falsifying an application, violation of this section, or if the applicant has otherwise become ineligible to hold a license under this section. The permit holder may appeal the decision of the Chief of Police to the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
(Ord. No. 20-2011, 10-3-2011) 
Sec. 8-292. - Hours of operation. 
The hours during which a precious metal dealer may conduct business shall be from no earlier than 7:00 a.m. to no later than 9:00 p.m. 
(Ord. No. 20-2011, 10-3-2011) 
Sec. 8-293. - Dealing with minors. 
It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker, his or her agents or employees, to receive in pawn, from minors, goods of any character or description. A minor, for the purpose of this section, is an individual under the age of 18. 
(Ord. No. 20-2011, 10-3-2011) 
Sec. 8-294. - Responsibility for enforcement. 
The Norcross Police Department shall have the responsibility for the enforcement of this section. Sworn officers of the Norcross City Police Department and civilian employees designated by the Chief of Police shall have the authority to inspect establishments licensed under this section during the hours in which the premises are open for business. These inspections shall be made for the purpose of verifying compliance with the requirements of this section and state law. 
(Ord. No. 20-2011, 10-3-2011) 
Sec. 8-295. - Penalty for violation. 
Any person, firm, company, corporation or other entity who violates any provision of this article may be subject to arrest or summoned to appear in the Norcross Municipal Court and upon conviction or other finding of guilt, be punished by a fine of up to $1,000.00 or six months' imprisonment, or both. 
(Ord. No. 20-2011, 10-3-2011) 
Sec. 8-296. - Severability. 
If any portion of the article shall be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, unconstitutional or unenforceable, such declaration shall not be deemed to affect the remaining portions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 20-2011, 10-3-2011) 
Secs. 8-297—8-315. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - TEMPORARY OUTDOOR ACTIVITY AND RETAIL SALES DISPLAY[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 21-2009, pt. I, adopted Dec. 7, 2009, amended art. IX in its entirety and enacted the provisions set out herein. The former art. IX, titled Transient, Temporary Retail Sales, derived from Code 1979, §§ 9-2-6(a), 9-2-6(a)(1)—9-2-6(a)(3), 9-2-6(a)(5)—9-2-6(a)(7), 9-2-6(b), and 9-2-6(c); Code 1998, §§ 14-486—14-496; and Ord. No. 23-95, § I, adopted Dec. 4, 1995. 

Sec. 8-316. - Title. 
This article shall be known as the "Temporary Outdoor Activity and Retail Sales Display Ordinance of the City of Norcross." 
(Ord. No. 21-2009, pt. I, 12-7-2009) 
Sec. 8-317. - Purpose and intent; definitions. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose and intent of this section shall be to regulate special temporary outdoor events associated with holidays and special events which are not intended to serve the primary use of the lot, temporary outdoor display and sale of merchandise associated with an established business, limited outdoor display on site, and mobile vending activities which are held in open areas or within temporary structures in association with a temporary outdoor event. Such uses shall be limited in time and thus their impacts on surrounding properties are not permanent. A temporary outdoor retail sales event or temporary outdoor display of merchandise shall not be held unless the necessary permit is obtained from the Community Development Department and any other applicable agency which may require review prior to issuance of permits. 
(b)  Definitions. As used in this article, the phrases used herein shall be defined as follows: 
Goods and merchandise means tangible or movable personal property, other than money. 
Holiday activities means seasonal activities associated with federally recognized holidays and Halloween. 
Temporary means for a period of time not to exceed a specified number of consecutive days. 
Temporary mobile pushcart vending means a mobile, hand-pushed cart selling only prepackaged, nonhazardous individual refreshment items, sold only in association with a permitted temporary outdoor activity, as defined, permitted in the commercial designations. Handling of raw foodstuff, preparation or cooking of food, other than heating of prepackaged or preassembled items, is prohibited. Subject to both a temporary mobile vending permit and a temporary outdoor activity permit for each activity attended. 
Temporary mobile pushcart vending permit is issued by the General Government Administration Department with written authorization by the Community Development Director, or designee, for the applicant to engage in temporary outdoor sale of prepackaged, nonhazardous individual food items from a mobile pushcart or similar device, within the commercial designations, only in association with a temporary outdoor activity, for a period commensurate with the approved terms of the temporary outdoor activity permit. 
Temporary outdoor retail display means activities involving the temporary outdoor display of retail goods and merchandise in association with an existing business located on the premises of the principal use, limited to properties within the C1, C2 and C3 commercial land use districts. Display items may be sold. Sales shall be conducted by employees of the principal use and owned by the owner of the principal use, not a consignment operation or transient vendor/merchant. Temporary outdoor retail display activities are subject to a temporary outdoor activity permit, limited to a continuous period of seven days, and shall not occur more than three times per calendar year, with a minimum separation of seven days between each permitted period. 
Temporary outdoor activity means the sale of retail merchandise associated with seasonal/holiday activities, the operation of a carnival, or sale of farm produce, occurring on a commercially zoned lot with a minimum of two acres in size, which is vacant or which contains a separate and distinct primary use from the merchandise being sold. Temporary outdoor activities shall occur in non-enclosed areas or utilize a temporary open air portable structure such as a tent, awning, or sunshade. Temporary outdoor activity shall be subject to a temporary outdoor activity permit, limited to a continuous period of 20 days within a six-month period, unless specified otherwise in this section. 
Temporary outdoor activity permit is issued by the General Government Administration Department with written authorization by the Community Development Director, or designee, for the applicant to engage in temporary outdoor activities at a specified, fixed, location for a specified period of consecutive days within each calendar year. Such permit is required for temporary outdoor activities, mobile pushcart vendors in association with a specified temporary outdoor activity, and temporary outdoor retail display. 
(Ord. No. 21-2009, pt. I, 12-7-2009) 
Sec. 8-318. - Temporary outdoor activities. 
Temporary outdoor activities shall be governed by the following regulations: 
(a)  [Temporary outdoor activities.] Temporary outdoor activities shall include the sale of retail merchandise associated only with recognized seasonal federal holiday activities, Halloween, the sale of farm produce, and carnivals from a property which is vacant or which contains a separate and distinct primary use from the merchandise being sold. 
(1)  Mobile food services and the preparation of raw foodstuff on site shall not be permitted as a temporary outdoor sales activity, with the following exemptions: 
a.  Food and concessions associated with carnivals shall be conducted under the liability umbrella of the operator's license; 
1.  Sale of preprepared and prepackaged items or other nonhazardous food items and food service typically associated with a seasonal/holiday activity [and] requiring minimal handling and preparation shall be permitted subject to review on a case by case basis, and licensing requirements as set forth in subsections 8-320(a)(3), and 8-320(b)(1) through (5), 
2.  Retail sales of beverages, [pre]prepared and prepackaged foods, individually wrapped ice cream and snack-type edibles, or other commissary-wrapped food maintained at proper temperatures is permitted. 
3.  Cooking of food from a raw state shall not be allowed. The heating of preassembled, prepackaged and/or precooked food is allowed. 
(2)  All proposed food service is subject to review and approval by Gwinnett County Environmental Health Department. 
a.  The Food and Drug Administration has published laws and regulations regarding approved food and beverage items which may be sold by pushcart operators and temporary outdoor activity vendors. No items of any kind, other than those food and beverage items allowed in Food and Drug Administration regulations shall be sold or dispensed by pushcart operators and/or temporary outdoor activity vendors. 
b.  Each temporary outdoor activity or mobile pushcart vendor shall meet the Food and Drug Administration Food Service Sanitation Standards and state applicable rules and/or regulation for food storage and dispensing. 
(3)  Sale of goods and services not customarily associated with seasonal holiday activities, Halloween, farm produce, or carnivals is prohibited. 
(4)  No operator, employee, or representative of the operator of a temporary outdoor activity shall solicit directly from the motoring public. 
(b)  Permit required. 
(1)  A temporary outdoor activity permit shall be required, issued and approved by the Community Development Department. The issuance of such a permit shall require an initial fee of $50.00. 
a.  Applicant shall be required to submit, as a condition of the application, a dimensioned site plan or legal survey clearly showing building location, striped parking spaces, distances of building to right-of-way and parcel lines. 
b.  Applicant shall be required to submit, as a condition of the application, the following information: parcel acreage; linear dimension of building and/or suite frontage; square footage of building and/or suite, whichever is applicable. 
c.  Applicant will be required to submit, as a condition of the application, proof of insurance. 
1.  Proof of insurance can be satisfied by documentation of an insurance policy issued by an insurance company licensed to do business in the state protecting the licensee and the city from all claims for damages to property and bodily injury which may arise from operations in connection with the temporary outdoor activity. 
2.  Such insurance shall provide that the policy shall not terminate or be cancelled prior to the expiration date without two weeks' advance notice to the city. 
(2)  A valid business license shall be required in conjunction with the temporary outdoor activity permit. 
(3)  Written notarized permission from the property owner shall be obtained and submitted by the applicant to the City of Norcross Community Development Department prior to issuance of a temporary outdoor activity permit. 
(4)  A temporary outdoor activity license shall be issued by the licensing and revenue manager of the City of Norcross General Government Administration Department, and must be displayed in a visible location at all times during the period of the event. 
(5)  Temporary signage is not permitted unless a separate temporary sign permit is acquired per section 115-188 of the Norcross Zoning Code. 
a.  The 15-day limitation on temporary signage associated shall be waived to allow temporary signage to run concurrently only with the specific temporary outdoor activity, subject to Community Development Director approval. 
(6)  Events associated with charitable or nonprofit organizations are subject to the following additional requirements: 
a.  Submittal of a notarized affidavit identifying a bona fide nonprofit organization status. 
b.  Exempt from the fee requirements as set forth herein. 
(c)  [Coordination of certain events.] Special annual events which are conducted on public property and City-sponsored activities are coordinated through the Cultural Arts and Community Center Department. 
(d)  [ Where permitted.] Temporary outdoor activities shall be permitted only within the city's C2 and C3 zoning districts. 
(e)  Lot and parcel restrictions. 
(1)  A minimum lot size of two acres is required for any temporary outdoor activity. 
(2)  A temporary outdoor activity may be held on a vacant parcel. 
(3)  A temporary outdoor activity may be held on parcels where the temporary outdoor activity is not associated with the principal use of the property. 
(4)  On a parcel size of five acres or larger, two temporary outdoor activities may be permitted simultaneously, to be determined by the Community Development Department on a case-by-case basis. 
(5)  Temporary outdoor activities other than the exemption of an activity held on a vacant, undeveloped lot shall be conducted on a paved surface only. 
(6)  Temporary outdoor activities shall be permitted only on property where such activities shall not disrupt controlled vehicular ingress and egress. 
(7)  Temporary outdoor activities shall not occupy required off-street parking spaces in association with a principal building on the subject site. Required parking spaces shall be calculated on principal building square footage. 
(8)  All exterior lighting utilized in conjunction with temporary outdoor activities shall not be visible beyond the limits of the immediate site from which it originates. 
a.  Spotlights and/or high-temperature process lighting is prohibited. 
(f)  Setback and structure requirements. 
(1)  All temporary outdoor activities, including installation or erection of associated temporary display and sales structures, must be set back 50 feet from a county or state right-of-way. 
(2)  All temporary outdoor activities, including installation or erection of associated temporary display and sales structures, must be set back 30 feet from a local right-of-way. 
a.  Temporary structures and coverings, such as umbrellas, shade structures, and open-sided tents are permitted associated with seasonal and holiday activities. 
b.  Temporary mobile buildings are permitted only in association with a carnival, and are exempt from the requirements of Zoning Code section 115-14, Modular or mobile buildings. 
(3)  Carnivals may be permitted as a temporary outdoor activity so long as no structure or equipment is located within 500 feet from the closest boundary of a residential property. 
(4)  Temporary outdoor activities may not be located within or encroach upon any drainage easement, public sidewalk or right-of-way, fire lanes, designated loading areas, driveways, maneuvering aisles, or ADA minimum four-foot sidewalk width within private sidewalks or other areas intended for pedestrian movement. 
(g)  Duration of temporary outdoor activities. 
(1)  All temporary outdoor activities, with the following exemptions for Christmas tree sales and Halloween/pumpkin patch sales, are permitted for a period of 20 consecutive days from the date of initiation of the temporary outdoor activity. 
a.  Christmas tree sales shall be permitted between November 1 and December 31 due to the seasonal nature of such sales. 
b.  Pumpkin and Halloween seasonal sales shall be permitted between September 15 and October 31 due to the seasonal nature of such sales. 
(2)  A second permit for a temporary outdoor activity on the same property within a calendar year may not be applied for or renewed within six months from the date of a prior approval of a temporary outdoor activity. 
(3)  Operations are limited to a maximum 12-hour period per day. 
(4)  Operations must cease by 9:00 p.m. on weekday evenings (Sunday through Thursday) and 10:00 p.m. on weekend evenings (Friday and Saturday). 
(5)  The premises shall be cleaned and cleared of all litter, trash and debris and restored by the last day specified for such use. 
(Ord. No. 21-2009, pt. I, 12-7-2009) 
Sec. 8-319. - Temporary outdoor retail display. 
Temporary outdoor retail display shall be governed by the following regulations: 
(a)  [Defined.] Temporary outdoor retail display shall include the display and sale of retail merchandise associated only with the principal use of the primary business on the property for a limited period of time. 
(1)  Mobile food services and the preparation of food on site shall not be permitted as a temporary outdoor retail sales display activity. 
(2)  Only the sale of goods and services customarily sold on a day-to-day basis by the on-site business which constitutes the principal use of the premises is permitted. 
(3)  Sales shall be conducted by employees of the principal use and goods shall be owned by the owner or tenant of the principal use, not a consignment operation or temporary arrangement with a transient merchant/vendor. 
(4)  Sales must be made inside of building housing principal use of site. 
(5)  Temporary signage is not permitted unless a separate temporary sign permit is acquired per section 115-188 of the Norcross Zoning Code. 
a.  The six-month interval limitation on temporary signage shall be waived to allow temporary signage to run concurrently only with the permitted temporary outdoor retail display, subject to Community Development Director approval. 
(6)  No operator, employee, or representative of the operator of a temporary outdoor retail sales display activity shall solicit directly from the motoring public. 
(b)  Permit required. 
(1)  A temporary outdoor activity permit shall be required and approved by the Community Development Department for a temporary outdoor retail sales display. The issuance of such a permit shall require an initial fee of $50.00. 
a.  Applicant shall be required to submit, as a condition of the application, a dimensioned site plan or legal survey clearly showing building location, striped parking spaces, distances of building to right-of-way and parcel lines. 
b.  Applicant shall be required to submit, as a condition of the application, the following information: parcel acreage; linear dimension of building and/or suite frontage; square footage of building and/or suite, whichever is applicable. 
c.  Applicant shall be required to submit, as a condition of the application, a valid business license for the subject principal business on the site requesting a temporary outdoor retail sales display permit. 
(2)  Applicant will be required to submit, as a condition of the application, proof of insurance. 
a.  Proof of insurance can be satisfied by documentation of an insurance policy issued by an insurance company licensed to do business in the state protecting the licensee and the city from all claims for damages to property and bodily injury which may arise from operations in connection with the temporary outdoor retail sales display activity. 
b.  Such insurance shall provide that the policy shall not terminate or be cancelled prior to the expiration date without two weeks' advance notice to the city. 
(3)  Notarized written permission from the property owner, as applicable, shall be obtained and submitted by the applicant to the City of Norcross Community Development Department prior to issuance of a temporary outdoor sales display permit. 
(c)  Lot and parcel restrictions. 
(1)  Temporary outdoor retail sales display activities shall be permitted only within the city's C1, C2 and C3 zoning districts. 
(2)  The use of any parts of the public sidewalks or streets of the city for display of goods or merchandise is prohibited in C1, C2 and C3 districts outside of the National Historic Downtown District (as depicted on the Zoning Map and per article II, section 32-20 of the City Municipal Code). 
a.  Goods and merchandise may be displayed on public sidewalks in the C3 National Historic Downtown District provided such display does not interfere with pedestrian travel and the minimum four-foot ADA-required sidewalk width clearance is maintained. 
(3)  Temporary outdoor retail sales display activities are prohibited on a vacant parcel. 
(4)  Temporary outdoor retail sales display may not exceed a space equivalent to ten percent of the gross floor area of the ground floor of the building or individual suite of the business sponsoring the activity, as applicable. 
(5)  Temporary outdoor retail sales display activities shall be conducted only on a paved surface. 
(6)  Temporary outdoor retail sales display shall be permitted only on property where such activities shall not disrupt controlled vehicular ingress and egress, nor within areas required, set aside or designated for loading and maneuvering areas, emergency accessways, off-street parking, driving aisles and driveways. 
(7)  Temporary outdoor retail sales display items may be located on a privately owned sidewalk, courtyard or building apron or other areas intended for pedestrian movement provided an unobstructed, continuous path with a four-foot minimum width is maintained. 
(8)  Temporary outdoor retail sales display activities shall not occupy required off-street parking spaces except as authorized by Community Development Director or designee of the Department. 
a.  Required parking spaces shall be calculated on square footage of principal building or suite, whichever is applicable. 
b.  Where excess parking spaces over the required number of spaces are not available, no more than five percent of the required parking spaces provided may be used for temporary outdoor retail display, or as determined by the Community Development Director or designee of the Department. 
(d)  Setback and display requirements. 
(1)  All temporary outdoor retail display activities, including installation or erection of associated temporary display and sales structures, must be set back 50 feet from a county or state right-of-way. 
(2)  All temporary outdoor retail display activities, including stand-alone merchandise, display tables, or display racks must be set back 30 feet from a local right-of-way, with the exception of businesses in the C3 zone within the National Historic Downtown District (as depicted on the Zoning Map), subject to the restrictions of subsection 8-319(c)(2)b. and section 32-20 of the Municipal Code. 
(3)  No temporary modular structure, tent, tilt-up, umbrella or covering shall be erected as a part of the temporary outdoor retail sales display activity. 
(4)  Display tables, racks or shelves may be used as part of a temporary outdoor retail sales display activity. 
(5)  Outdoor display items shall not exceed six feet above grade. 
(6)  The Community Development Director, or designee, is authorized to determine retail items to be displayed. The following items, such as, but not limited to, are prohibited: mattress and box springs, couches or sofas, large pieces of furniture, refrigerators, washers/dryers and other large appliances. 
(e)  Duration of temporary outdoor activities. 
(1)  All temporary outdoor retail sales display activities are permitted for a period of seven consecutive days from the date of initiation of the temporary outdoor retail sales display activity. 
(2)  Temporary outdoor retail sales display periods are limited to three times per calendar year. 
(3)  Periods of outdoor retail sales display may not be applied for or renewed within seven days from the date of a prior approval of a temporary outdoor retail sales display activity. 
(4)  Temporary outdoor retail display activities are limited to 12 hours of operation per permitted calendar day. 
a.  All evidence of the temporary retail sales display activity must be removed from the parcel by the end of each 12-hour period. 
b.  All operations must cease by 9:00 p.m. 
(Ord. No. 21-2009, pt. I, 12-7-2009) 
Sec. 8-320. - Temporary mobile pushcart vendors. 
Temporary mobile pushcart vendors shall be governed by the following regulations: 
(a)  [Permitted activity.] Temporary mobile pushcart vendors may engage in the transient sale of prepackaged, nonhazardous food and beverage items from nonmotorized pushcart vehicles designed to be moved by hand, only in association with a permitted temporary outdoor activity. 
(1)  Temporary mobile pushcart vendors may set up on private property only in limited circumstances, as determined by the Community Development Department on a case-by-case basis in conjunction with an approved and permitted temporary outdoor activity, subject to the standards established in subsections 8-318(a)(1) through (3) and 8-318(2)a. and b. 
(2)  Each temporary mobile pushcart vendor shall meet the Food and Drug Administration food service sanitation standards and state applicable rules and/or regulations for food storage and dispensing. 
a.  Temporary mobile pushcart vendors shall provide only single-service food articles (intended for one-time, one person use or consumption and then discarded). 
b.  Retail sales of beverages, [pre]prepared and prepackaged foods, individually wrapped ice cream and snack-type edibles, or other commissary-wrapped food maintained at proper temperatures are permitted. 
c.  Cooking of food from a raw state shall not be allowed. The heating of preassembled, prepackaged and/or precooked food is allowed. 
d.  The Food and Drug Administration has published laws and regulations regarding approved food and beverage items which may be sold by pushcart operators and vendors. 
e.  No items of any kind, other than those food and beverage items allowed in Food and Drug Administration regulations shall be sold or dispensed by temporary mobile pushcart vendors at temporary outdoor activities. 
(3)  No operator, employee, or representative of the operator of a temporary mobile pushcart vendor activity shall solicit directly from the motoring public. 
(4)  Street and sidewalk canvassing is prohibited. 
(b)  Permit required. 
(1)  A temporary mobile pushcart vendor may operate at a temporary outdoor activity in limited circumstances on private property in association with a licensed temporary outdoor activity. A temporary outdoor activity permit and associated fee is required in addition to the temporary mobile pushcart vendor permit, subject to the approval of the Community Development Department. 
(2)  A temporary mobile pushcart vending permit shall be required and approved by the Community Development Department. The issuance of such a permit shall require an initial fee of $100.00. 
a.  Applicant will be required to submit, as a condition of the application, a valid business license to operate in the city. 
b.  Written notarized permission from the property owner shall be obtained and submitted by the applicant to the City of Norcross Community Development Department as part of the required temporary outdoor activity permit. 
(3)  The temporary mobile pushcart vending permit shall be issued by the licensing and revenue manager of the City of Norcross General Government Administration Department. 
(4)  A temporary mobile pushcart vendor may operate at a public event if given written permission by the manager of the City of Norcross Cultural Arts and Community Center Department per subsection 8-318(c), subject to valid licensing requirements of subsection 8-320(b)(2). No additional permit is required. 
(5)  Original licenses must be displayed and visible at all times. 
(c)  Duration of temporary mobile pushcart vendor permit. 
(1)  A temporary mobile pushcart vendor permit is valid for one 90-consecutive-day period, two times per a calendar year timeframe. 
(2)  Within that 90-day period, a mobile pushcart vendor may operate only within the specified time period associated with each temporary outdoor activity permit. 
(3)  Temporary mobile pushcart vendor activities are limited to 12 hours of operation per permitted calendar day. 
(4)  All operations must cease by 9:00 p.m.. 
(Ord. No. 21-2009, pt. I, 12-7-2009) 
Sec. 8-321. - Food trucks. 
Food trucks are subject to all of the following regulations: 
(a)  As used in this section, the terms below shall be defined as follows: 
(1)  Commissary shall mean an approved catering establishment, restaurant, or other approved place in which food, containers or supplies are kept, handled, prepared, packaged or stored. 
(2)  Menu change shall mean a modification of a food establishment's menu that requires a change in the food establishment's food preparation equipment or storage requirements previously approved by the Gwinnett County Health Department. The term "menu change" shall include, but is not limited to, the addition of potentially hazardous food to a menu, installation of new food preparation or storage equipment, or increasing storage capacity. 
(3)  Mobile food truck shall mean a retail food establishment that reports to and operates from a commissary and is readily moveable. Said mobile food truck shall be a motorized wheeled vehicle which includes a self-contained kitchen where food is prepared or stored and from which food products are sold or dispensed. 
(4)  Mobile food truck vendor ("vendor") shall mean the registered owner of a mobile food truck or the owner's agent or employee. 
(5)  Mobile food truck vendor permit ("vendor permit") shall mean a document indicating the owner of an established mobile food truck has met the requirements of this ordinance and is licensed to operate within the City of Norcross. 
(6)  Mobile food truck vendor site ("vendor site") shall mean a location where one or more mobile food trucks are located at any one time specifically for the purpose of selling merchandise in accordance with the provisions set forth within this section. 
(b)  Vendor permit required. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, or offer for sale, food or beverages of any type from a commissary or mobile food truck without first obtaining a vendor permit as described herein. 
(2)  Approved vendors shall only sell, or offer for sale, merchandise from approved vendor sites as described herein. 
(c)  Vendor permit application requirements. An application for a mobile food truck vendor permit as described herein shall be submitted to the Community Development Director or his or her designee for review and consideration and shall include, at a minimum, the following information: 
(1)  Name of the mobile food truck vending business. 
(2)  Owner's contact information. 
(3)  Operator's contact information. 
(4)  Make, model, dimensions and license plate number of the mobile food truck. 
(5)  Photographs of food truck, to include all sides and all signage. 
(6)  Location, dates and times of vending site operation. 
(7)  A copy of approved permit from the Gwinnett County Health Department. 
(8)  A copy of the current occupational tax certificate from where the business is licensed. 
(9)  A copy of current liability insurance policy, issued by an insurance company licensed to practice in the state. Each vendor shall maintain no less than a $1,000,000.00 liability insurance policy, protecting the vendor, the public and the city from all claims for damage to property and bodily injury, including death, which may arise from operation under or in connection with the permit. 
(10)  Signature of applicant indicating agreement to the listed regulations. 
(d)  A mobile food truck vendor permit shall be valid for not more than four months from the date of issuance. 
(e)  Vendor site application requirements. An application for a mobile food truck vendor site as described herein shall be submitted to the Community Development Director or his or her designee and shall include, at a minimum, the following information: 
(1)  Vendor sites: 
a.  Vendor sites on private tracts of land shall be limited to private tracts of land within the OI, Office-institutional district, C2; General business district; C3, Central business district; M1, Light industry district; and ODW, Office-distribution-warehouse district. 
b.  Vendor sites for city sponsored events may be on private tracts of land or on public property, or in the public right-of-way and shall be limited to the duration of the event and only at such places and during such times as are specifically designated by the city in the resolution establishing the event. 
(2)  The application shall include all dates and hours of operation proposed for the vendor site. Each vendor site shall be limited to operating no more than two days per week for no longer than six hours per day; provided however, that vendor sites for city sponsored events shall be limited to the duration of the event and only at such places and during such times as are specifically designated by the city in the resolution establishing the event. 
(3)  A separate application for each vendor site shall be submitted for approval prior to establishing a vendor site. 
(4)  Written consent from the property owner(s), property manager(s), leasing agent(s) and/or lessee(s) indicating their approval of each vendor site located on private property. 
(5)  A detailed site plan of the proposed vendor site indicating the location of each mobile food truck, generators, tables, trash cans, parking areas and traffic flow. 
(f)  Each mobile food truck shall be located: 
(1)  On paved surfaces only and shall not block drive aisles, access to loading/ service areas, emergency access or fire lanes. 
(2)  No closer than 30 feet from the right-of-way of an arterial highway and shall not be located within a landscape buffer or sight triangle; provided however, that vending sites for city sponsored events may be located in the public right-of-way or on public property when specifically designated by the city in the resolution establishing the event. 
(3)  No closer than 15 feet from existing fire hydrants or transformers. 
(4)  Parking. 
a.  The overall vendor site shall include no less than 15 off-street parking spaces for each mobile food truck. This subsection (f)(4)a. shall not apply to permits issued for city sponsored events. 
b.  If adequate on-site parking is not available, the parking requirements must be met by designating parking spaces in an off-site parking area abutting the vendor site. Written consent from the owner(s) of adjoining private property must be provided indicating they have approved off-site parking on their property. 
(5)  No closer than 200 feet from an existing brick-and-mortar restaurant during the hours when such restaurant is open to the public for business. 
(6)  No closer than 300 feet from a school or day care facility while that facility is in session unless written approval is established with that facility. 
(g)  A mobile food truck vendor site permit shall be valid for the dates identified on the application only. Any changes to the approved permit shall be approved in advance by the community development director. 
(h)  Aesthetic/signage requirements. 
(1)  Absolutely no flashing, blinking or strobe lights shall be used on or within mobile food trucks or related signage. All exterior lights with over 60 watts shall contain opaque hood shields to direct the illumination downward. 
(2)  All signs used must be permanently affixed to or painted on the mobile food truck and shall extend no more than six inches from the vehicle. No sign shall flash, produce or reflect motion pictures; emit visible smoke, vapor, particles or odor; be animated or produce any rotation, motion or movement. No sign shall be internally illuminated. 
(3)  A portable menu board measuring no more than six square feet in size may be placed on the ground within the customer waiting area. This sign shall be located no more than ten feet from the edge of the mobile food truck. In no instance shall the portable menu board be located between the mobile food truck and any adjoining public road. 
(4)  Mobile food trucks shall be maintained in good condition and appearance with no structural damage, holes, or visible rust, and shall be fully street legal. All vehicles shall be free of debris and shall be serviced regularly so as to prevent spills/deposits of oil/fuel, coolant, grease or other material. 
(i)  Operational requirements. 
(1)  Mobile food trucks shall not conduct business within the city limits unless a valid permit has been issued as described herein. 
(2)  The vendor permit shall be firmly attached to the window adjacent to the ordering or serving window and visible on the mobile food truck at all times. 
(3)  Any driver of a mobile food truck must possess a valid driver's license issued by the state. 
(4)  No sales or offers for sale shall be made from any mobile food truck between 9:00 p.m. and 5:30 a.m. unless such sale is in conjunction with a city-approved special event. 
(5)  No structure, vehicle or equipment shall be left unattended or stored at any time on the vending site when sales are not taking place or during restricted hours of operation. 
(6)  Each vendor shall comply with all state, federal and local health and safety regulations and requirements and shall obtain and maintain any and all licenses required by any other health organization or governmental organization having jurisdiction over this subject matter. 
(7)  Vendors may sell food and non-alcoholic beverage items only; the sale of alcoholic beverages from a mobile food truck is prohibited. 
(8)  The following safety regulations shall apply to any and all vehicles operating under this article or used for mobile food truck establishments: 
a.  Vehicles shall be equipped with a reverse gear signal alarm with a sound distinguishable from the surrounding noise level. 
b.  Vehicles shall be equipped with two rear-vision mirrors, one at each side, firmly attached to the outside of the vehicle, and so located as to reflect to the driver a view of the street to the rear, along both sides of the vehicle. 
(9)  Customers shall be provided with single service articles such as plastic utensils and paper plates. Each vendor shall provide no less than one waste container for public use. 
Each vendor shall provide for the sanitary collection of all refuse, litter and garbage generated by the patrons using that service and shall remove all such waste materials from the vendor site before the vehicle departs. This includes, but is not limited to, physically inspecting the general area surrounding the vendor site for such items prior to the vehicle's departure. 
Absolutely no dumping of gray water on public or private property shall be permitted. 
(10)  The issuance of a permit does not grant or entitle the vendor to the exclusive use of any property or parking space. 
(11)  All power required for the mobile food truck shall be self-contained. Mobile food trucks shall not use utilities drawn from the public right-of-way. No power cable or equipment shall extend across any city street, multi-use path, or sidewalk. 
(j)  Fees. Permit fees shall be as adopted by city council in the schedule of fees and kept on file in the city clerk's office. 
(k)  Indemnity. As a part of the permitting process set forth herein, any person or entity receiving a permit shall execute an indemnity agreement indemnifying and releasing the city, its agents, employees and elected officials from any and all liability against any and all claims, actions and suits of any type whatsoever. 
(l)  Review of permit application. In determining whether or not to approve a specific vendor permit or the location of a vendor site, the Community Development Director may consider any factors reasonably deemed relevant for the application including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Information contained in the application, or supplemental information requested from the applicant, is false in any material detail; 
(2)  The applicant failed to complete the application form after having been notified of the need for additional information or documents; 
(3)  Another permit or application has been received prior in time or has already been approved at the same time and location requested by the applicant; 
(4)  The size, nature or location of the vendor site will present a substantial risk to the health or safety of the public or participants in the event or other persons; 
(5)  The location of the vendor site will substantially interfere with any construction or maintenance work scheduled to take place upon or along the city streets. 
(m)  Revocation and suspension. Any permit granted pursuant to the provisions of this section may be subject to revocation for cause by the Community Development Director (or his/her designee), including but not limited to the failure to comply with this section or any other applicable provisions of the Norcross Code of Ordinances. 
( Ord. No. 05-2015 , § II, 6-1-2015) 
Sec. 8-322. - Artisan and craft sales. 
Artisan and craft sales shall be permitted within the R100 residential district as an accessory use under the following regulations. It shall not be the intention of this regulation to prohibit the occasional sale of personal belongings on one's property. 
(1)  Permit required. 
a.  All artisan and craft sales shall require a permit, which shall be obtained from the Community Development Department by personal application. This permit will contain the name and address of the applicant, and the time frame for which the applicant wishes to sell merchandise and the permit number. 
b.  No permit shall be issued for more than four times in any calendar year for a street address. 
c.  The property owner and all sellers must obtain the appropriate business license from the General Government Administration Department. 
d.  It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to obtain the permit and to post said permit in full view of the public at the place of the artisan and craft sale. It shall be a violation of this regulation to sell merchandise in an artisan or craft market without a proper permit. 
e.  Sales are allowed from 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. on Saturdays only. 
f.  Adequate off-street parking must be provided for all sites. No parking in street rights-of-way will be allowed. 
g.  Amplified music is not allowed. Acoustic music will be allowed from noon until 6:00 p.m. 
(2)  Exclusions . This section shall not regulate the private sale of major possessions such as homes and personal autos. 
(Ord. No. 04-2018 , § 1, 5-7-2018) 
Secs. 8-323—8-355. - Reserved 
ARTICLE X. - HORSE-DRAWN CARRIAGES FOR HIRE 

Sec. 8-356. - Short title and definitions. 
(a)  Short title. This article shall be known and recited as "The Horse-Drawn Carriages for Hire Ordinance." 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Company means the holder of a license to operate a horse-drawn carriage business under the provisions of this article, whether a person, firm, partnership or corporation. 
Driver means any person who drives or operates a horse-drawn carriage on the streets of the city for a licensed company. 
Driver's permit means the written authority granted by the city for an individual to drive or operate a horse-drawn carriage within the city. 
Horse-drawn carriage means any hack or carriage which is operated by being drawn by a horse, mule or other beast of burden, for the transportation for hire of passengers. 
Inspector (City Manager or his designee) means the individual employee or organizational unit of the city charged with the responsibility for enforcing this article, except for specific responsibilities otherwise provided herein. 
License means the right and privilege granted by the city for the operation of a business incorporating the use of one or more horse-drawn carriages within the corporate limits of the city. 
Stand means a public place alongside the curb of a street or elsewhere which has been designated by the City Manager as reserved exclusively for the use of horse-drawn carriages. 
Street means and includes any street, alley, lane, avenue, court or public place in the city. 
(Code 1998, § 14-521; Ord. No. 18-98, 11-2-1998) 
Sec. 8-357. - Licensing of carriage companies; headquarters. 
(a)  License required. 
(1)  No person shall operate a business involving the use of one or more horse-drawn carriages on the streets of the city unless a license for such business has first been granted by the city in accordance with this article and the provisions contained herein. The license shall be effective only for the calendar year stated in the license, unless suspended or revoked sooner as provided by ordinance. 
(2)  Application for the license shall be made on forms provided by the General Government Director and shall provide such information as is required for other business license applications, and such additional information as may be necessary to define completely the business operation. 
(3)  Each license application must include a complete description of each animal to be used to pull a horse-drawn carriage. Additionally, a color photograph no less than three inches by five inches must be provided for each horse correspondingly. The aforementioned items must be presented to the Inspector prior to the use of any horse. 
(4)  Each applicant must produce, if demanded by the Business License Manager or Inspector, a valid equine infectious anemia (EIA) certification. 
(b)  Operating regulations. In addition to the license requirements imposed herein, no license shall be permitted any carriage operator, unless the operator complies with the following operating regulations: 
(1)  A licensed veterinarian shall certify, after due and proper inspection, the good health of each draft animal before it is placed into service. A minimum of two such health inspections shall be required for each animal each calendar year. 
(2)  No single animal shall pull a carriage holding more than ten people, including the driver. 
(3)  Unless written approval is given by a licensed veterinarian, no animal having open sores or wounds or any disease or ailment shall be permitted to be in service on the streets of the city. 
(4)  Each draft animal shall have its hooves properly trimmed and shod for street surfaces. 
(5)  Each animal shall be groomed daily and not have fungus, dandruff, or a dirty coat. 
(6)  Harnesses shall be properly fitted, maintained, and oiled so that no irritating material will come in direct contact with the animal. 
(7)  No driver may use more than a light touch of the whip upon any animal, and no driver or other persons may forcefully strike an animal, and make movements or noise intended to frighten or harm an animal. 
(8)  No driver shall permit an animal to pull a carriage at a speed faster than a slow trot, except in extreme emergency situations. 
(9)  No animal shall be subject to any condition or treatment, whether in service or out of service, which will impair the good health and physical condition of that animal. 
(10)  Adequate water shall be provided. 
(11)  Ventilation adequate to ensure the health and comfort of animals shall be provided. 
(12)  Food shall be free of contamination. 
(13)  All laws as cited as the Humane Care for Equines Act (O.C.G.A. § 4-13-1 et seq.), as well as all other state and federal laws governing equines. 
(14)  No one animal may be worked more than eight hours per day. The driver must keep a log of the starting and ending times for each animal. Said log should be kept in a bound book form and stored on the carriage being pulled. 
(15)  No driver shall work an animal pulling a horse-drawn carriage when the outside temperature exceeds 95 degrees Fahrenheit. The temperature reading may be obtained at the communications desk of the Police Department. 
(c)  Inspections. The Inspector shall be empowered to inspect all operating practices of any carriage company to ensure continuous compliance with this article. 
(d)  Refusal or failure to comply with article provisions. Any applicant who refuses or fails to comply with the requirements of this article shall not be issued a business license until proof of compliance is presented by the applicant and certified by the Inspector. The foregoing licensing requirements shall be ongoing as requirements for continuous operation. 
(e)  Temporary suspension after inspection. The General Government Director may, upon recommendation of the Inspector, temporarily suspend any carriage company license for violation of the provisions of this article, subject to license revocation action. 
(Code 1998, § 14-522; Ord. No. 18-98, 11-2-1998) 
Sec. 8-358. - Insurance. 
(a)  Indemnity for benefit of city. Any horse-drawn carriage company operating under this article shall hold the city, its officers, agents, servants and employees, harmless against any and all liability, loss, damages or expense which may accrue to the city by reason of negligence, default or misconduct of the company in connection with the rights granted to such company hereunder. Nothing in this article shall be considered to make the city, its officers, agents, servants or employees liable for damages because of any negligent act or omission or commission by any horse-drawn carriage company, its servants, agents, drivers, or other employees, during the operation by the company of a horse-drawn carriage business or service, either in respect to injury to persons or with respect to damage to property which may be sustained. 
(b)  Insurance for benefit of passengers. Any horse-drawn carriage company desiring a license to do business shall give and maintain a policy of indemnity from an insurance company authorized to do business in the state for each vehicle in use as a horse-drawn carriage. The minimum coverage shall be $100,000.00 for bodily injury to any one person, $300,000.00 for injury to more than one person which are sustained in the same accident, and $25,000.00 for property damage resulting from one accident. The indemnity insurance shall inure to the benefit of any person who shall be injured or who shall sustain damage to property caused by the negligence of a horse-drawn carriage company, its servants or agents. 
(c)  Blanket policy. Any company or person operating a horse-drawn carriage in the city shall give a separate policy of indemnity insurance for each separate horse-drawn carriage for hire, except where such company or person actually owns or holds legal title to more than one horse-drawn carriage, in which event such company or person may give one policy of indemnity insurance covering all the horse-drawn carriages actually owned. This latter provision, however, shall not apply to any group of persons separately owning horse-drawn carriages who may be jointly operating or doing business under a license horse-drawn carriage name. 
(d)  Notice when voided. Before any policy of insurance required by this article is voided for any cause, nonpayment of premium or otherwise, notice thereof shall be given, by the licensee in writing, to the Mayor and Council at least five days before the same shall take effect. 
(Code 1998, § 14-523; Ord. No. 18-98, 11-2-1998) 
Sec. 8-359. - Driver's permit. 
(a)  Permit required. No person shall operate a horse-drawn carriage for hire upon the streets of the city, and no person who owns or operates a horse-drawn carriage company shall permit a horse-drawn carriage to be driven, and no horse-drawn carriage operating under a horse-drawn carriage company licensed by the city shall be driven at any time for hire, unless the driver of the horse-drawn carriage shall first have obtained and shall have then in force a horse-drawn carriage driver's permit issued under the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Application. Any person desiring a permit required by this article shall submit an application in writing to the Business License Manager on a form to be furnished by the General Government Director. The application shall be made under oath and shall state the age of the applicant, date of birth, his address, and whether he has been convicted of a violation of any of the laws of the state or of this Code or other ordinances of the city, and if so, when and of what offense, and the sentence of the court. 
(c)  Physician's certificate required. Each application for a driver's permit shall be accompanied by a certificate from a licensed state physician certifying that, in his opinion, the applicant is not afflicted with any disease or infirmity which might make him an unsafe or unsatisfactory driver. In the case of renewal of a driver's permit, the certificate shall be updated every two years. 
(d)  Qualifications of applicant. An applicant for a driver's permit under this article must not be less than 18 years of age, with no physical infirmities which might make the applicant an unsafe or unsatisfactory horse-drawn carriage driver. No permit shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of intoxicating beverages or drugs within one year prior to the date of the application for such permit, or who has been convicted of the offenses three or more times within five years prior to the date of the application for the permit. For the purpose of this section, a nolo contendere shall be considered a conviction. 
(e)  Driver's permit fee. Before any permit is granted under this article, a driver's permit fee of $25.00 shall be paid by the applicant. 
(f)  Current state driver's license required. Any person applying for a horse-drawn carriage driver's permit under this article must show that he has a current motor vehicle operator's license issued or approved by the state, and that the license is not under suspension or revocation. 
(g)  Examination of applicant; issuance or denial of permit. It shall be the duty of the Inspector to examine the applicant, his references, police and traffic record, and other vouchers and thereafter recommend, to the General Government Director, to grant or refuse the permit. In the event of a refusal by the General Government Director to grant a permit, the applicant shall have the right to enter an appeal to the Mayor and Council. Such appeal shall be filed in writing to the Mayor and Council within ten calendar days from the date of the refusal to grant the permit. The Mayor and Council must convene an appeals hearing within 20 calendar days from receipt of the filing by the City Clerk of the written appeal. Within five calendar days from the appeals hearing, the Mayor shall render a written decision as to the Mayor and Council's decision on the appeal. 
(h)  Permit to be displayed in horse-drawn carriage. The permit issued under the provisions of this article shall be placed on display in the horse-drawn carriage to be operated by the holder of the permit, where the permit will be in clear view of the passengers at all times when the horse-drawn carriage is for hire. 
(i)  Alteration of permits prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to alter, deface, obliterate or destroy a horse-drawn carriage driver's permit, or cause or allow the same. 
(j)  Permit not transferable. Any horse-drawn carriage driver's permit issued under this article is not transferable, and is to be used solely by the person to whom it is issued. 
(k)  Duration of permit. Any horse-drawn carriage driver's permit shall be valid for that calendar year. Permits may be renewed, upon application and payment of the required fee, unless the permit for the preceding period has been revoked or is under suspension. 
(l)  Suspension of the driver's permit. The Inspector shall recommend to the Mayor and Council to suspend a driver's permit for the following reasons: 
(1)  Making any false statement in the application for the permit; or 
(2)  Operating a horse-drawn carriage in violation of any provision of this article or of state law. 
The suspension by the General Government Director shall be lifted upon dismissal or dropping of the charges described, upon satisfactory correction of any false statement in the application, upon correction of the violation of any provision of this article, upon ruling in favor of the driver in any appeal hearing before the Mayor and Council, or at the expiration of 60 days from the date of suspension. From the decision to suspend a permit, the holder of such permit shall have the right to appeal the decision of the General Government Director to the Mayor and Council. All suspension appeals must be filed in writing with the Mayor and Council within ten calendar days from the date of the suspension, and the Mayor and Council must convene an appeals hearing within 20 calendar days from receipt of the filing by the City Clerk of the written appeal. Within five calendar days from the appeals hearing, the Mayor shall render a written decision as to the Mayor and Council's decision on the appeal. 
(m)  Revocation of driver's permit. In the event that any driver holding a permit under this article at any time ceases to meet the qualifications described in subsection (d) of this section or fails to correct satisfactorily any false statement made in the application for the permit, or fails to operate his horse-drawn carriage in accordance with the provisions of this article, the General Government Director shall be empowered to revoke permanently the permit or to restore the same. The holder of such permit shall have the right to appeal the decision of the General Government Director to the Mayor and Council in the manner prescribed in this section. 
(n)  Driving after suspension or revocation. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a horse-drawn carriage for hire for the carriage of passengers during any period in which his permit to do so is suspended or revoked in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(o)  Appeals. Any appeal of a decision made by the General Government Director to revoke a horse-drawn carriage driver's permit, pursuant to subsection (m) of this section, shall be made in writing to the Mayor and Council within ten days of the ruling. The Mayor and Council must convene an appeals hearing within 20 calendar days from the filing by the City Clerk of the written appeal. The appellant shall have the right to present evidence, examine the evidence of the appellee, and to cross examine. The appellant shall have the right to be represented by counsel. Within five calendar days from the appeals hearing, the Mayor shall render a written decision as to the Mayor and Council's decision on the appeal. 
(Code 1998, § 14-524; Ord. No. 18-98, 11-2-1998) 
Sec. 8-360. - Identification and marking. 
Every horse-drawn carriage shall have a sign plainly painted on the rear of each vehicle. The sign shall contain the full name of the horse-drawn carriage company operating the vehicle. Additionally, the sign shall conform with all sign standards for the city and be approved by the city. 
(Code 1998, § 14-525; Ord. No. 18-98, 11-2-1998) 
Sec. 8-361. - Numbers. 
There shall be painted on each side and on the rear of each horse-drawn carriage a number at least six inches high, the number to be a separate and distinct number from that on any other public vehicle in the city. The number shall be assigned to such horse-drawn carriage and the owner thereof by the General Government Director and shall not be altered or changed without consent of the Mayor and Council. Said numbers shall be of Roman bold design. 
(Code 1998, § 14-526; Ord. No. 18-98, 11-2-1998) 
Sec. 8-362. - Safe mechanical condition required. 
Every horse-drawn carriage operated on the streets of the city shall be maintained in a safe mechanical condition, with all safety equipment remaining intact and operative at all times when the horse-drawn carriage is in service. 
(Code 1998, § 14-527; Ord. No. 18-98, 11-2-1998) 
Sec. 8-363. - Cleanliness requirement. 
Each vehicle operating under this article shall be kept painted, and in clean and sanitary condition, free of litter and debris, and at all times suitable for public transportation of passengers. 
(Code 1998, § 14-528; Ord. No. 18-98, 11-2-1998) 
Sec. 8-364. - Vehicle inspections required. 
Each horse-drawn carriage may be inspected by the Inspector for compliance with the provisions of the article and shall pass the inspection before the vehicle may be used as a horse-drawn carriage in the city. Each horse-drawn carriage involved in an accident shall be inspected by the Inspector before it may be returned to service transporting passengers for hire. Inspections of the horse-drawn carriages may be done at any time by the Inspector. 
(Code 1998, § 14-529; Ord. No. 18-98, 11-2-1998) 
Sec. 8-365. - Authority for removal of horse-drawn carriages from streets. 
The Inspector shall have the authority to remove from operation on the streets of the city any vehicle used as a horse-drawn carriage which is in violation of this article, and to prohibit operation of the horse-drawn carriage until all deficiencies have been corrected. An order of the Inspector to remove a vehicle from the streets may be appealed to the General Government Director, and then the Mayor and Council, as provided for in section 8-359(o). The appeal must be made in writing to the Mayor and Council no later than ten days after the Inspector has exercised his authority in removing a horse-drawn carriage from the street for violation of this article. The Mayor and Council must convene a hearing within ten calendar days of receipt of the appeal, and must render a written decision to the appellant within five calendar days of the close of the hearing. 
(Code 1998, § 14-530; Ord. No. 18-98, 11-2-1998) 
Sec. 8-366. - Rates of fare; rate card required. 
No owner or driver of a horse-drawn carriage shall charge a greater sum for the use of the horse-drawn carriage than in accordance with the published and advertised rates which shall be displayed in each vehicle. Rates shall be displayed in such place as to be conspicuous and to be in clear view of all passengers. 
(Code 1998, § 14-531; Ord. No. 18-98, 11-2-1998) 
Sec. 8-367. - Driver not to leave vehicle while waiting to be hired. 
It is unlawful for any driver of any horse-drawn carriage to leave the vehicle, or the immediate premises thereof, while the vehicle is parked and while waiting to be hired. 
(Code 1998, § 14-532; Ord. No. 18-98, 11-2-1998) 
Sec. 8-368. - Soliciting passengers prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit passengers verbally or by gesture, directly or indirectly. 
(Code 1998, § 14-533; Ord. No. 18-98, 11-2-1998) 
Sec. 8-369. - Restriction on number of passengers. 
No driver shall permit more persons to be carried in a horse-drawn carriage as passengers than the seating capacity of his horse-drawn carriage. 
(Code 1998, § 14-534; Ord. No. 18-98, 11-2-1998) 
Sec. 8-370. - Refusal to carry orderly passengers prohibited. 
No driver shall refuse or neglect to convey any orderly persons, upon request, unless previously engaged or unable or forbidden by the provisions of this article to do so. 
(Code 1998, § 14-535; Ord. No. 18-98, 11-2-1998) 
Sec. 8-371. - Weight restrictions. 
The aggregate weight of the carriage, passengers and driver shall not exceed two times the body weight of the horse. 
(Code 1998, § 14-536; Ord. No. 18-98, 11-2-1998) 
Sec. 8-372. - Horse-drawn carriage movement prohibited under certain circumstances. 
No driver shall collect fares, make change, or take on or discharge passengers while his horse-drawn carriage is in motion. 
(Code 1998, § 14-537; Ord. No. 18-98, 11-2-1998) 
Sec. 8-373. - Property left by passenger. 
Any horse-drawn carriage driver or operator, discovering in any horse-drawn carriage under his control, personal property which was lost or left therein by a passenger of such horse-drawn carriage, shall report the loss, and deliver all the property to the Police Department within two hours after the discovery of the property. 
(Code 1998, § 14-538; Ord. No. 18-98, 11-2-1998) 
Sec. 8-374. - Safety equipment required. 
(a)  Each horse-drawn carriage shall be equipped with electrically powered lights or lanterns and reflectors. Such lights shall be in use when operating during the hours of darkness and when raining. The lights and reflectors shall be mounted so that they are visible from a distance of 500 feet in all directions. Each horse-drawn carriage shall have on board at all times a first aid kit. 
(b)  Each horse-drawn carriage shall be equipped with a suitable friction braking system which will enable the carriage to stop. Said braking system shall be functional and operative at all times. 
(Code 1998, § 14-539; Ord. No. 18-98, 11-2-1998) 
Sec. 8-375. - Area of operation. 
The Mayor and Council may elect to set a route for horse-drawn carriages. 
(Code 1998, § 14-540; Ord. No. 18-98, 11-2-1998) 
Sec. 8-376. - Sanitation requirements. 
Manure and urine must be immediately treated with a chemical deodorizing solution, and manure must be removed immediately from the street by the carriage operator. Each carriage must be equipped with a suitable scoop shovel and airtight container. Horse diapers, which prevent excrement from being deposited on the street surface, may be used in lieu of a scoop shovel and an airtight container at the option of the operator. In the case of horse diapers, the diapers must be approved for efficiency by the Inspector before they are used. 
(Code 1998, § 14-541; Ord. No. 18-98, 11-2-1998) 
Sec. 8-377. - Traffic violations. 
(a)  Horse-drawn carriages shall be prohibited from stopping in traffic or delaying any on-street traffic for the purposes of loading or unloading passengers or for any other purposes. 
(b)  Every person riding any animal upon a roadway and every person driving any animal-drawn vehicle within the city limits shall be subject to the provisions of this article and shall operate the vehicles in accordance with the traffic laws of the city, as well as the state. 
(c)  Due to the nature of operating animal-drawn vehicles in areas of congestion and heavy traffic within the city, it shall be unlawful to operate the animal-drawn vehicles except when the animals are under complete control at all times and shall be operated with extra caution and due care for the safety of others. 
(Code 1998, § 14-542; Ord. No. 18-98, 11-2-1998) 
Sec. 8-378. - Impediment of traffic flow. 
It shall be unlawful for any horse-drawn carriage to willfully impede the normal flow of traffic on any city street, alley or thoroughfare at any time. Horse-drawn carriages will be required to pull immediately to the nearest curb area when one or more vehicles are unable to safely pass or continue in normal traffic flow. 
(Code 1998, § 14-543; Ord. No. 18-98, 11-2-1998) 
Sec. 8-379. - Limits to the number of horse-drawn carriages. 
It shall be unlawful for any horse-drawn carriage company to operate more than two horse-drawn carriages for hire on the streets of the city at any given time. The Mayor and Council may authorize more than two carriages to operate upon the company's request. Said request shall be in writing indicating the company's needs for an additional carriage. The Mayor and Council may approve the request for special events or with respect to special circumstances. 
(Code 1998, § 14-544; Ord. No. 18-98, 11-2-1998) 
Sec. 8-380. - Compliance required. 
Failure to comply with this article or any of the laws, ordinances and regulations of this city can result in the revocation of the permit and punishment in municipal court. Any ordinance or laws of this city, county, state, or federal agency which governs the treatment of animals, including horses or other animals of burden, must be complied with by the horse-drawn carriage operator, passengers or agents of the horse-drawn carriage company. 
(Code 1998, § 14-545; Ord. No. 18-98, 11-2-1998) 
Sec. 8-381. - Violations; penalty. 
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable as provided in section 1-11. In addition, violation of this article shall also be grounds for immediate suspension or revocation of the license issued under this chapter. 
(Code 1998, § 14-546; Ord. No. 18-98, 11-2-1998) 
Secs. 8-382—8-405. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - MASSAGE THERAPY[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Massage Therapy Practice Act, O.C.G.A. § 43-24A-1 et seq.; municipal ordinances in effect before July 1, 2005, relating to the practice of massage therapy or requiring licensure of a massage therapist are preempted from enforcement against persons issued a license under Georgia Massage Therapy Practice Act, O.C.G.A. § 43-24A-22. 

Sec. 8-406. - Statement of purpose. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is to ensure the public health, welfare and freedom from the use of ostensibly legitimate businesses to further criminal activities such as pandering and prostitution and also to protect minors from involvement with such business practices. 
(b)  In enacting this article with regards to licensing, the Mayor and Council recognize that an individual's past actions are very often the best indicators of that person's future actions. Denying licenses to individuals who have recently committed a felony offense or misdemeanor of moral turpitude is a reasonable means to ensure that those licensed to operate establishments will respect and abide by these provisions. 
Sec. 8-407. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Massage or massage therapy means the manipulation and/or treatment of soft tissues of the body including, but not limited to, the use of effleurage, petrissage, pressure, friction, tapotement, kneading, vibration, range of motion stretches, washing, scrubbing and any other soft tissue manipulation whether manual or by use of massage apparatus, and may include the use of oils, lotions, creams, salt glows, hydrotherapy, heliotherapy, hot packs, and cold packs. This term shall not include diagnosis, the prescribing of drugs or medicines, spinal or joint manipulations, or any service or procedure for which a license to practice chiropractic, physical therapy, podiatry, or medicine is required by the state. 
Massage apparatus means any manual, mechanical, hydraulic, hydrokinetic, or electric device or instrument or any device or instrument operated by manual, mechanical, hydraulic, hydrokinetic or electric power, which is utilized by a massage therapist for the purpose of administering a massage. 
Massage establishment means any business established for profit which employs or contracts with one or more massage therapists, or operates or maintains for profit one or more massage apparatus, and which, for good or valuable consideration, offers to the public facilities and personnel for the administration of massages. This term "massage establishment" shall not include hospitals or other professional health care establishments separately licensed as such by the state. 
Massage therapist means any person whom for goods or valuable consideration administers a massage. 
Tax and Licensing Manager means the city License and Tax Manager of the General Government Administration Department, or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 15-2003, § 14-581, 10-6-2003) 
Sec. 8-408. - Licenses required. 
(a)  Massage therapist license. It shall be unlawful for any natural person who has not been issued a license by the Georgia Board of Massage Therapy to administer massages without having obtained a license issued in accordance with the requirements of this article. 
(b)  Massage establishment license. It shall be unlawful for any person, natural, corporate, or other business entity to operate a massage establishment without having obtained a license therefor; or for any person, natural, corporate or other business entity, to allow a massage therapist to administer massages without having obtained a license in accordance with the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 15-2003, § 14-582, 10-6-2003) 
Sec. 8-409. - Scope of regulations. 
(a)  All licenses issued under this article shall constitute a mere privilege to conduct the business so authorized during the term of the license or permit only and subject to all terms and conditions imposed by the city and state law. 
(b)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to regulate, prevent, or restrict in any manner any of the practice, services, or activities enumerated under O.C.G.A. § 43-24A-19 (Massage Therapists - Exceptions to this chapter). 
(c)  Except as specified in subsection (b) of this section, the requirements of this article shall be in addition to all other licensing, taxing, and regulatory provisions of local, state or federal law, and shall not authorize violations of said other applicable laws. 
(Ord. No. 15-2003, § 14-583, 10-6-2003) 
Sec. 8-410. - Application. 
(a)  Requirements. Any person desiring to obtain a massage establishment license or massage therapist license shall make application to the Tax and Licensing Manager. All applications shall be sworn to by the applicant as true, correct and complete before a notary public or other officer authorized to administer oaths. All applications shall be in writing and shall set forth the following information: 
(1)  The full legal name of the applicant, including all aliases, nicknames, pseudonyms or trade names currently or heretofore used by the applicant. 
(2)  The current and all previous business and residence addresses of the applicant within the three years immediately preceding the date of application. 
(3)  Sworn affidavits of at least three bona fide residents of the county that the applicant is personally known to them and they believe the person to be of good moral character. 
(4)  Written proof that the applicant is over the age of 18 years. 
(5)  The applicant's height, weight and color of eyes and hair. 
(6)  Two current photographs of the applicant at least two inches by two inches in size. 
(7)  The business, occupation or employment of the applicant for three years immediately preceding the date of the application. 
(8)  Any massage or similar business license history of the applicant, including whether such person, in any previous operation in any jurisdiction, has had such a license revoked or suspended, the reason therefor, and any business activity or occupation subsequent to the action of suspension or revocation. 
(9)  All convictions, pleas of guilty, or pleas of nolo contendere for violations of any law or ordinance and the grounds therefor. 
(10)  The applicant shall be fingerprinted by the Police Department and such fingerprint card and record shall be attached as an exhibit to the application. Payment of all fees charged by the Police Department in connection with this requirement shall be the responsibility of the applicant. 
(11)  Applicants for a massage therapist license shall provide a certificate dated within 30 days of application from a physician licensed in the state, certifying that the applicant is in sound mental and physical health, and free of all contagious or communicable diseases. 
(12)  Applicants for a massage therapist license must furnish a certified copy of a diploma or certificate of graduation, demonstrating compliance with section 8-411(a)(2), along with a certified statement from the National Certification Board of Therapeutic Massage and Body Work evidencing passage by the applicant thereof of the exam for massage therapists administered by said board. Applicants for a massage establishment license must furnish an affidavit demonstrating compliance with section 8-411(b)(2) and (b)(3). 
(13)  If the applicant is a corporation or partnership, such corporation or partnership shall submit the foregoing information and exhibits with regard to each employee, independent contractor agent and partner, general or limited, associated with the operation of the licensed establishment. 
(14)  If the applicant is a corporation or a limited liability company, such corporation shall, in addition to the foregoing information, submit a complete list of the stockholders of said corporation or members of the limited liability company, including names, current addresses and current occupations, and provide the name and address for its registered agent in the county. 
(15)  If the applicant is an individual, the applicant must reside in the county and must submit written, reliable proof thereof. 
(b)  Fees. All license applications shall be accompanied by a fee as elsewhere established by the City Council to defray the costs associated within insurance of said licenses. All fees associated with the background check required by subsection (a)(10) of this section shall be the responsibility of the applicant and shall be in addition to the application fee. 
(Ord. No. 15-2003, § 14-584, 10-6-2003) 
Sec. 8-411. - Minimum standards. 
(a)  Massage therapist. No applicant shall be issued a license as a massage therapist, unless both of the following standards are first met: 
(1)  The applicant must be of good moral character. For purposes of this subsection, the term "good moral character" means professional integrity and a lack of any conviction for acts involving moral turpitude where the underlying conduct relates to the applicant's fitness to practice massage therapy. No applicant shall be found to have met this requirement if said applicant has been convicted, pled guilty, or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any felony, or to any misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, within a period of five years prior to the filing of the application, where the underlying offense relates to the applicant's fitness to practice massage therapy; and 
(2)  The applicant must be the holder of a diploma or certificate earned by the applicant from a state certified school, representative of the fact that the applicant attended a course of massage therapy education and study of not less than 600 classroom hours consisting of a curriculum of anatomy and physiology, basic massage theory, technique and clinical practice, approach to massage, allied modalities and disease awareness, and other such subjects and has passed the National Certification Board of Therapeutic Massage and Body Work exam for massage therapists. 
(b)  Massage establishment. No applicant shall be issued a license for a massage establishment, unless all of the following standards are first met: 
(1)  The applicant, including the partner applying on behalf of a partnership and an agent applying on behalf of a corporation, must be of good moral character. No applicant shall be found to have met this requirement if said applicant has been convicted, pled guilty, or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any felony, or to any misdemeanor involving moral turpitude within a period of four years prior to the filing of the application, where the underlying offense relates to the applicant's fitness to practice massage therapy; 
(2)  A corporate or limited liability company applicant must be chartered under the laws of the state or authorized by the Georgia Secretary of State to do business in the state and must be in good standing. The applicant shall be the owner or legal agent of the establishment. The corporate or limited liability company applicant must identify an agent for service of process in the county; 
(3)  The owner/applicant, or corporate or limited liability agent must be a resident of the state; 
(4)  A readable sign shall be posted at the main entrance identifying the establishment, provided also that all such signs shall comply with the sign requirements of this Code; 
(5)  Minimum lighting shall be provided in accordance with the Uniform Building Code, and, additionally, at least one artificial light of not less than 40 watts shall be provided in each enclosed room or booth; 
(6)  Ordinary beds or mattresses shall not be permitted in any licensed massage establishment; 
(7)  Minimum ventilation shall be provided in accordance with the Standard Mechanical Code and the Georgia Energy Code; and 
(8)  The establishment, prior to the issuance of any license hereunder, must be in compliance with all applicable building and life safety codes, and the building to be occupied must have a valid, current certificate of occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 15-2003, § 14-585, 10-6-2003) 
Sec. 8-412. - Application processing. 
(a)  Review. If a license application is submitted in proper form, including all information and exhibits required herein and accompanied by the correct fees, the application shall be accepted and a review of the application and an inspection and investigation shall be conducted by the Tax and Licensing Manager. The Tax and Licensing Manager shall transmit a copy of the completed application to the City Manager. Upon the payment by the applicant of the required fees, the City Manager, or his designee, shall cause to be conducted a background investigation of the police record of the applicant, and shall transmit a summary of the investigation results to the Tax and Licensing Manager. 
(b)  Action on application. Within 30 days of receipt of an application and upon receipt of this background investigation, and completion of review of the application in accordance with the terms of this article, the Tax and Licensing Manager shall act on the application. The Licensing and Tax Manager shall deny any application that: 
(1)  Fails to meet each of the application requirements specified herein; 
(2)  Fails to meet each of the minimum standards specified in section 8-411; 
(3)  Contains false information in the application or attached documents; or 
(4)  The application is not complete. 
Otherwise, the Tax and Licensing Manager shall approve the application and the license shall be issued by the General Government Administration Department upon the payment of any applicable city business or occupation tax. All licenses issued pursuant to this article shall be valid for a period of one year. If an application for license is denied under this article, the applicant shall not be authorized to reapply for said denied license for a period of one year from the date of denial. 
(c)  Denial of application; hearing. In the event the Tax and Licensing Manager denies a license, such denial shall be in written form, addressed to the applicant at the application address, and shall state the grounds upon which the denial is based. It shall be delivered to the applicant in person or by certified mail within five business days of such denial. Within 15 days of the date of issuance of such notice, the applicant may appeal such denial by submitting a written notice of appeal to the Director of the General Government Administration Department. The city shall schedule a hearing on the appeal within 30 days of receipt of the notice of appeal, unless a continuance of such date is agreed to by the parties. The city shall appoint a hearing officer to consider the denial and shall notify the appellant at least 20 days prior to the date of the hearing of the time and date of the hearing. At the hearing, the appellant and the city may each present evidence relating to the grounds for denial. The appellant may be represented by counsel at the expense of the appellant, and shall have the right to present evidence and cross examine the witnesses, with or without legal counsel. The hearing officer shall make his decision within ten days of the hearing and shall notify the appellant within five business days of the decision. The findings of the hearing officer shall be final, unless appealed within 30 days of the date of the findings by certiorari to the superior court of the county. 
(Ord. No. 15-2003, § 14-586, 10-6-2003) 
Sec. 8-413. - Licenses nontransferable. 
All licenses issued pursuant to this article are nontransferable. 
(Ord. No. 15-2003, § 14-587, 10-6-2003) 
Sec. 8-414. - Change of location. 
A change of location of massage establishment premises may be approved by the finance department provided all general ordinances are complied with and a change of location fee as elsewhere established by the City Council is first paid. 
(Ord. No. 15-2003, § 14-588, 10-6-2003) 
Sec. 8-415. - Renewals. 
(a)  All valid licenses may be renewed for additional one-year periods provided a renewal application meeting all of the requirements for an initial license application is submitted prior to expiration of the existing license and approved by the Tax and Licensing Manager according to the same standards for initial licenses. 
(b)  The fee for said annual renewal shall be as elsewhere established by the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 15-2003, § 14-589, 10-6-2003) 
Sec. 8-416. - Additional requirements. 
The following additional requirements shall apply to all license holders and establishments: 
(1)  All massage therapists and all other persons on the premises, with the exception of the customers, shall be completely clothed at all times when administering a massage. For the purposes of this provision, the term "completely clothed" means having on the upper portion of the body appropriate undergarments and either blouse or shirt which shall cover all the upper body save the arms and neck and means having on the lower body appropriate undergarments plus either pants or skirt, and said pants or skirt must cover from the waist down to a point at least two inches above the knee. All clothes worn in compliance with this subsection shall be entirely nontransparent. 
(2)  Massage of the human genitals or anus within massage establishments is expressly prohibited. 
(3)  The storing, serving, sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages within massage establishments is expressly prohibited. 
(4)  Every person to whom a license shall have been granted shall display said license in a conspicuous place on the premises that is clearly visible to the visiting public. 
(5)  The city, through the General Government Administration Department, the City Manager or the Police Department, shall have the right to inspect any licensed massage premises and its records at any time with or without notice, during business hours to ensure compliance with this article. 
(6)  It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to patronize any massage establishment unless such person carries with him at the time of such patronage a written order directing the treatment to be given by a regularly licensed physician. It shall be the duty of the operator of such massage establishment to determine the age of each person patronizing such massage establishment and a violation of this section shall be grounds for revocation of the license of such massage establishment and/or massage therapist administering massage to an underage patron. 
(7)  It shall be the duty of all persons holding a license for a massage establishment under this article to file with the General Government Administration Department the names of all employees and independent contractors other than those holding massage therapist licenses, their home addresses, home telephone numbers and places of employment. Changes in the list of said employees and independent contractors with the names of new employees and independent contractors must be filed with said city department within ten days from the date of any such change. 
(8)  It shall be the duty of any person granted a license under this article to maintain correct and accurate records of the names and addresses of the persons receiving treatment at such establishment, and the name of the person at the establishment administering the treatment. The records shall be subject to inspection at any time by the city through the General Government Administration Department or the City Manager or the Police Department. 
(9)  It shall be the duty of the licensee establishment to actively supervise and monitor the conduct of any and all employees, independent contractors, customers and all other persons on the premises in order to ensure compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(10)  Any massage therapy establishment may be open and conduct business only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. 
(Ord. No. 15-2003, § 14-590, 10-6-2003) 
Sec. 8-417. - Revocation of license. 
(a)  No license issued hereunder shall be revoked except for due cause as herein defined without the opportunity for a hearing as hereinafter set forth. Notice of such hearing shall be given in writing and served at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing thereon. In the event the license holder cannot be found, and the service of notice cannot be otherwise made in the manner herein provided, a copy of such notice shall be mailed registered postage fully prepaid, addressed to the license holder or the registered agent thereof at his place of business or residence at least ten days prior to the date of such hearing. The notice shall state the grounds for revocation of such license and shall designate the time and place where such hearing will be held. 
(b)  Due cause for revocation of such license shall be as provided in section 8-418. 
(c)  In all hearings pursuant to this section, the following procedures shall prevail, and the proceeding shall be as informal as compatible with justice: 
(1)  The charges and specifications against the licensee shall be read along with any response filed by the licensee. 
(2)  A hearing officer appointed by the city shall hear the evidence upon the charges and specifications as filed against the licensee and shall not consider any additional evidence beyond the scope of the charges, and may exclude evidence which is purely cumulative. 
(3)  The order of proof shall be as follows: The city representative shall present his evidence in support of the charges; the licensee shall then present his evidence. Evidence of each party may be supported by submission of pertinent documents. Each party shall be allowed to present pertinent rebuttal evidence. 
(4)  The licensee and city may be represented by counsel, and may present, examine and cross examine witnesses. Additionally, the hearing officer may interrogate all parties and witnesses to obtain necessary information. Following the presentation of evidence, the hearing officer may have a reasonable time within which to issue his decision. 
(5)  The findings of the hearing officer will be final unless within 30 days of the date of the decision, the applicant files a petition for writ of certiorari to the superior court of the county. 
(Ord. No. 15-2003, § 14-591, 10-6-2003) 
Sec. 8-418. - Grounds for revocation. 
(a)  The license of a massage therapist may be revoked upon one or more of the following grounds: 
(1)  Failure of the holder to maintain or have the initial requirements for obtaining the license; 
(2)  The holder is guilty of fraud in the practice of massage, or fraud or deceit in his being licensed in the practice of massage; 
(3)  The holder is engaged in the practice of massage under a false or assumed name, or is impersonating another therapist of a like or different name; 
(4)  The holder is addicted to the habitual use of intoxicating liquors, narcotics or stimulants to such an extent as to incapacitate such person to the extent that he is unable to perform his professional duties; 
(5)  The holder is guilty of fraudulent, false, misleading or deceptive advertising or practices any other licensed profession without legal authority therefor; 
(6)  The holder has violated any of the provisions of this article; 
(7)  The holder has violated any laws relating to sodomy, aggravated sodomy, solicitation of sodomy, public indecency, prostitution, pimping, pandering, pandering by compulsion, masturbation for hire, distribution of obscene materials, distribution of material depicting nudity, or sexual conduct as defined under state law; or has been convicted, pled guilty, or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any felony, or to any misdemeanor involving moral turpitude; 
(8)  The original application, or renewal thereof, contains materially false information; or the applicant has deliberately sought to falsify information contained therein; or 
(9)  There has been the occurrence of a fact which would have barred the issuance of the original license. 
(b)  The license of a massage establishment may be revoked upon one or more of the following grounds: 
(1)  Failure of the holder to maintain or have the initial requirements for obtaining the license; 
(2)  The holder allows or permits any person who is not a licensed massage therapist to administer a massage in said establishment; 
(3)  The premises in which the massage establishment is located are in violation of any federal, state, or city laws designated for the health, protection and safety of the occupants or general public; 
(4)  The premises are in violation of the city building or life safety codes; 
(5)  The original application or renewal thereof, contains materially false information; or the applicant has deliberately sought to falsify information contained therein; 
(6)  The holder of the license, including any person with an ownership interest in the license, has been convicted, pled guilty, or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any felony, or to any misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, or has violated any laws where the underlying offense relates to the applicant's fitness to practice massage therapy; 
(7)  Any of the license holder's employees, independent contractors or agents has been convicted, pled guilty, or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any felony, or to any misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, or has violated any laws in connection with the operation of the massage establishment or on or about the premises of the massage establishment, where the underlying violation relates to the applicant's fitness to practice massage therapy; 
(8)  Failure of the holder to actively supervise and monitor the conduct of the employees, independent contractors, agents, customers, or others on the premises in order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the general public and the customers; or 
(9)  The holder, his employees, agents, or independent contractors associated with the establishment have allowed to occur or have engaged in a violation of any part of this article. 
(c)  Any massage therapist or massage establishment who has his or its license or permit revoked shall be disqualified from reapplying for such a license or permit for a period of 12 months immediately following the date of revocation. 
(Ord. No. 15-2003, § 14-592, 10-6-2003) 
Sec. 8-419. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  Any person or other entity violating the provisions of this article shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 60 days, or by both such fine or imprisonment. Violation of this article shall also be grounds for immediate suspension or revocation of the license issued hereunder. 
(b)  The violation of the provisions of this article may be abated as a nuisance. 
(c)  The violation of all provisions of this article by any person may be enjoined by instituting appropriate proceedings for injunction in any court of competent jurisdiction. Such actions may be maintained notwithstanding that other adequate remedies at law exist. Such actions may be instituted in the name of the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 15-2003, § 14-593, 10-6-2003) 
Sec. 8-420. - Unlawful operation declared nuisance. 
(a)  Any massage establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this article shall be and the same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The city may, in addition, or in lieu of all other remedies, commence actions or proceedings for abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof, in the manner provided by law. 
(b)  No massage establishment shall operate at any location nor on any premises which does not comply with all zoning, building code, fire safety code, and other ordinances and laws of the city and the state. 
(Ord. No. 15-2003, § 14-594, 10-6-2003) 
Sec. 8-421. - Location and distance requirements. 
(a)  After December 1, 2018, there shall be no more than one massage establishment per 5,000 persons living within the city limits based on the most current U.S. Census and calculated on a pro-rata basis. Further, there shall be a 250 foot buffer from any massage establishment to any residentially zoned property, property occupied by a house of worship, public or private elementary or secondary school, public park, state licensed child care facility, truck terminal or bus terminal as measured from the front door of the structure where massage establishment occurs to the nearest parcel boundary line of the aforementioned uses as measured by a straight line on the ground. 
(b)  Upon application for a massage establishment license and/or occupation tax placard, the applicant will provide to the city a survey prepared by a licensed surveyor showing the distances to each of the uses mentioned in section 8-421(a) within a 250 foot radius of the massage establishment. 
(c)  The city council recognizes that upon the adoption and effective date of this section, there appear to be active massage establishments with physical facilities in existence in the city limits. Without waiving any illegality of such physically existing structures based on zoning or other laws and without de facto or specifically granting any "grandfathered," "vested," or "legal non-conforming" (as those terms are defined in state zoning law) status by virtue of adoption of this purely regulatory section, it is the intention of the city council to allow the continued operation of the existing massage establishments provided the same otherwise comply with all other applicable laws and regulations of the city and state. 
(d)  Any licensed massage establishments legally operating prior to December 1, 2018 shall be exempt from the distance and population cap regulations of this section until the licensee of such massage establishment no longer holds a valid massage establishment license from the city. Any massage establishment that reapplies for a business license after license revocation shall be considered a new applicant. 
(e)  Exemptions shall be granted to physicians, nurses, surgeons, chiropractors, occupational therapists, and physical therapists duly licensed by the state to practice their professions as well as barbers, cosmetologists and nail technicians duly licensed by the state to practice their profession only for face, neck, scalp, feet and hands reflexology for cosmetic purposes. 
(Ord. No. 18-2018 , § I, 11-5-2108) 
Secs. 8-422—8-499. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - HOTELS/MOTELS[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1-2017, § I, adopted Feb. 6, 2017, amended art. XII in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. XII, §§ 8-500—8-508, 8-520—8-522, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 12-2016 , § I, adopted Dec. 5, 2016. 

Sec. 8-500. - Purpose and definitions. 
(a)  Purpose . The purpose of this article is to ensure the continued availability of transient lodging within the City of Norcross, proper maintenance of hotels, motels, and extended-stay hotels and to protect the health, safety and welfare of hotel, motel, and extended-stay hotel inhabitants. The requirements of this article apply to those who occupy, visit, patronize, frequent, operate, keep, conduct, or own a hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel within the City of Norcross regardless of the date of the hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel's construction. This article is essential to the public's interest, safety, health, and welfare, and this article shall be liberally construed to effectuate its purposes. 
(b)  Definitions . 
Extended-stay hotel shall mean any structure consisting of one or more buildings, with more than five dwelling units with provisions for living, sanitation, and sleeping, that is specifically constructed, kept, used, maintained, advertised, and held out to the public to be a place where temporary residence is offered for pay to persons for non-transient extended stays and/or stays longer than 30 days, regardless of the presence of rentals or leases for shorter periods of time. 
Guest shall mean a person who is not a patron who is present on the premises of a hotel, motel or extended stay hotel with the express permission of (a) a guest or patron of the hotel, motel or extended stay hotel and (b) the owner, operator, keeper or proprietor of the hotel, motel or extended stay hotel. 
Hotel or motel shall mean any structure consisting of one or more buildings, with more than five dwelling units with provisions for transient living, sanitation, and sleeping, that is specifically constructed, kept, used, maintained, advertised, and held out to the public to be a place where temporary lodging of 15 days or less is offered for pay to persons, is not intended for long-term occupancy, and does not otherwise meet the definition of an extended-stay hotel as defined in this section. 
Loitering is defined in section 28-2 of this Code. 
Patron shall mean a person who pays a fee to the owner, operator, keeper or proprietor of the hotel, motel or extended stay hotel. 
Vehicle is any car, truck, trailer, motorcycle, or other machinery used for transporting people or goods and is normally required to be registered with the state in order to be legally operated or towed on a public roadway. 
Visitor shall mean a person who is not a patron or guest who is on the premises of a hotel, motel or extended stay hotel at the invitation of a patron or guest, but without the express permission of the owner, operator, keeper or proprietor of the hotel, motel or extended stay hotel. 
(Ord. No. 1-2017, § I, 2-6-2017) 
Sec. 8-501. - Provisions applicable to hotels, motels, and extended-stay hotels. 
No owner, operator, keeper or proprietor of a hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel shall provide lodging at an hourly rate. 
(Ord. No. 1-2017, § I, 2-6-2017) 
Sec. 8-502. - Responsibilities, access, and registration requirements. 
(a)  Every owner, operator, keeper or proprietor of any hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel shall, without delay, report violations of law to the Norcross Police Department that were either witnessed or made known to them by an employee, patron, guest, visitor or other person on the premises. 
(b)  Every owner, operator, keeper or proprietor of any hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel shall, at all times during which the premises accommodates patrons, guests, or visitors maintain on duty a responsible front desk clerk capable of assisting, communicating, and cooperating with the police or other law enforcement officials in maintaining the public health, welfare, and safety. 
(c)  All information required to be procured and kept pursuant to this article shall be provided to any federal, state, or local sworn law enforcement officer having the lawful power to arrest, upon demand of the officer and a representation by said officer that a reasonable suspicion exists that such information is relevant to a then-pending inquiry or investigation. Nothing in this requirement shall be construed as giving any such officer any greater right or license to enter a room or invade privacy than the officer shall otherwise possess as a matter of law, probable cause, constitutional law, statutory right, or warrant. 
(d)  Every owner, operator, keeper or proprietor of any hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel shall keep a record of all rental agreements between the hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel and all patrons and their guests. For the purposes of this section, the term "record" shall mean the hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel's electronic guest registration system which stores guest identifying information. In the event the hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel does not have an electronic guest registration system, the hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel shall record the guest, patron and their guest's information in a paper record or reservation book. 
The following information, at a minimum, must be recorded at the time of registration and maintained for a period of no less than 180 days after the rental agreement's termination: 
(1)  The full name, phone number, and home address of each patron and guest; 
(2)  The total number of occupants (patrons and guests) registered in each room; 
(3)  The room number assigned to each patron and guest; 
(4)  The day, month, year and time of arrival of each patron and guest; 
(5)  The day, month, year each patron and each guest is scheduled to depart; 
(6)  The rate charged and amount collected for rental of the room; 
(7)  The method of payment for each room; and 
(8)  The make, model, color, license plate number, and license plate state of the patron and guest's vehicle if the vehicle will be parked on the premises. 
(e)  Every owner, operator, keeper or proprietor of any hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel shall require each patron to provide proper identification prior to renting a room. Proper identification is defined as a current and valid government issued photo identification card such as a driver's license, military identification card, state identification card, or passport. A record and a photocopy of the provided identification shall be kept on file for the duration of the occupancy and for 180 days thereafter. 
(f)  No person shall procure or provide lodging in any hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel, or any services therefrom, through misrepresentation or production of false identification, or identification which misrepresents the identity of the person procuring or sharing in such lodging or service. 
(Ord. No. 1-2017, § I, 2-6-2017) 
Sec. 8-503. - Vehicles, parking, and registration. 
(a)  All patrons and guests who wish to park a vehicle on hotel premises must register said vehicle with the hotel operator upon initial registration, during any future re-registration, or at any time after registration when they begin parking a vehicle on hotel premises. Hotel operators must record the vehicle's information in accordance with section 8-502. 
(b)  Every owner, operator, keeper or proprietor of a hotel, motel, and extended-stay hotel must provide patrons and guests registering a vehicle with a standardized placard that must at all times be hung from the vehicle's rear view mirror, placed on the vehicle's front dash, or affixed to the vehicle in a way that can be easily seen. At a minimum, the placard will contain the following information: hotel, motel, and extended-stay hotel name, vehicle registration number and state, and date of check-out. Any hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel with gated and controlled access parking accessible only to employees and registered guests are exempt from this subsection (b). 
(c)  All vehicles must be parked in designated parking spaces. All vehicles must be parked nose-in (backed in parking is not permitted) such that the vehicle's rear license plate is visible. This section does not apply to oversized vehicles or trailers. Every owner, operator, keeper or proprietor of a hotel, motel and extended-stay motel must provide patrons and guests who have registered oversized vehicles or trailers a separate designated parking area for their vehicles. 
(d)  All handicap parking must be in compliance with state and local laws. 
(e)  All vehicles parked on any hotel's premises must be in good working order. 
(f)  Vehicle maintenance in hotel parking lots is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 1-2017, § I, 2-6-2017) 
Sec. 8-504. - Room requirements, equipment and services. 
(a)  Every operator, owner, keeper, or proprietor of any hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel shall keep and maintain in each and every rental unit, a telephone equipped to place a direct call to 911. 
(b)  No operator, owner, keeper or proprietor of any hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel shall rent or provide a room for any number of persons greater than the sleeping accommodations provided within the particular rental unit or temporary sleeping accommodations provided by the hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel. 
(c)  No operator, owner, keeper, or proprietor, patron, visitor or guest of any hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel shall be allowed to congregate within any room or single rental unit a number of persons which is greater than two times the number of persons for whom sleeping accommodations are provided within the single room or rental unit. 
(d)  All extended-stay hotels must have enclosed, heated and air conditioned laundry space containing at least three clothes washers and three clothes dryers for guests. Such clothes washers and clothes dryers shall be in good working order. 
(e)  Daily maid service shall be included within the standard room rate of any hotel or motel. Maid service shall be provided no less than two times per week for each occupied guest room as part of the standard room rate at any extended-stay hotel when there exists a rental agreement of seven days or longer. 
(f)  No occupational tax certificate shall be issued for conduct of business from a guest room of a hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel, and no home occupation shall be conducted from such room. 
(g)  Each guest room of a hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel shall be equipped with a sprinkler system and hard wired smoke detector approved by the fire marshal. 
(Ord. No. 1-2017, § I, 2-6-2017) 
Sec. 8-505. - Common area requirements and parking illumination. 
(a)  Exterior doors (other than lobby doors) shall be locked between the hours of 9:00 pm and 6:00 am and shall be equipped with an alarm or other device that will alert hotel, motel or extended-stay hotel security or other employees the door has been opened. 
(b)  The open parking area and all areas surrounding any building or proposed building being a hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel shall have an average maintained foot-candle intensity of at least one foot-candle with a minimum allowable intensity of three-tenths of a foot-candle. The covered parking area of any hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel shall have an average maintained foot-candle intensity of five-tenths of a foot-candle. 
(c)  Graffiti and markings or insignia that may indicate the presence or association of a street gang shall be removed within 24 hours. 
(Ord. No. 1-2017, § I, 2-6-2017) 
Sec. 8-506. - Smoking. 
(a)  Smoking is prohibited in all hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel spaces with the exception of designated smoking rooms. Designated smoking rooms in hotels rented by guests shall not comprise more than 25 percent of the total number of rooms available for rent. 
(b)  Smoking is prohibited in exterior breezeways, stairwells, or within 25 feet of any guest room. 
(Ord. No. 1-2017, § I, 2-6-2017) 
Sec. 8-507. - Video surveillance systems. 
(a)  For the purpose of this section, "video surveillance system" (VSS) means a continuous digital surveillance system including cameras, cabling, monitors, and digital video recorders (DVR) which has been approved by the chief of police or his/her designee in accordance with this section. 
(b)  Every owner, operator, keeper or proprietor of any hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel is required to install a VSS. All hotels, motels, and extended-stay hotels which have installed a VSS prior to the effective date of this article shall ensure said systems are in full compliance with this section and request an approval assessment from the chief of police or his/her designee within 30 days of the effective date of this article. 
(c)  All VSS shall be maintained in proper working order at all times, be kept in continuous operation 24 hours a day, seven days a week, and meet the minimum technological standards established in this section. The hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel shall retain the continuous digital images recorded by this system for no less than thirty days. 
(d)  All VSS shall have no less than one camera dedicated to each register or check-out stand, entrance/exit, interior hallway and lobby, swimming pool area, exercise facility, loading dock, and parking lots or areas designated for customer and/or employee parking use. The placement of cameras included in VSS required under this section must be approved by the police department. The chief of police or his/her designee will conduct an assessment of each site required to install a VSS prior to installation of said system, and upon approval will issue an approval notice which will be placed in plain view inside the common area of the hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel. This approval notice will also inform customers and employees of the presence of the VSS. Existing VSS at any hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel as of the effective date of this article will be evaluated to ensure full compliance with this section. 
(e)  The VSS shall be subject to regular inspection by the chief of police or his/her designee, who is authorized to inspect any such system at reasonable times to determine whether it conforms with this section. If the VSS does not conform, the hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel in question shall take immediate steps to bring the system back into compliance. 
(Ord. No. 1-2017, § I, 2-6-2017) 
Sec. 8-508. - Loitering. 
(a)  All hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel operators will advise patrons and guests, in writing upon registration, that loitering on or about hotel property by patrons, guests and their visitors is prohibited. 
(b)  No person(s) shall loiter in or upon any hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel parking lot, public parking structure or in or around any building to include breezeways, stairwells or hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel rooms either on foot or in or upon any conveyance being driven or parked thereon, without the permission of the owner, operator, keeper or proprietor or the hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel. 
(Ord. No. 1-2017, § I, 2-6-2017) 
Sec. 8-509—8-519. - Reserved. 
Sec. 8-520. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  Any person or other entity violating the provisions of this article shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 180 days, or by both such fine or imprisonment. Such persons shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during which any violation of any provision of this article is committed, continued, or permitted by that person and shall be punished accordingly. 
(b)  The violation of the provisions of this article may be abated as a nuisance. 
(c)  The violation of all provisions of this article by any person may be enjoined by instituting appropriate proceedings for injunction in any court of competent jurisdiction. Such actions may be maintained notwithstanding that other adequate remedies at law exist. Such actions may be instituted in the name of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1-2017, § I, 2-6-2017) 
Sec. 8-521. - Responsibility for enforcement. 
(a)  The Norcross Police Department shall have the responsibility for the enforcement of this section. Sworn officers of the Norcross City Police Department and civilian employees designated by the chief of police shall have the authority to inspect establishments governed under this section during the hours in which the premises are open for business. 
(b)  These inspections shall be made for the purpose of verifying compliance with the requirements of this section and state law. 
(Ord. No. 1-2017, § I, 2-6-2017) 
Sec. 8-522. - Unlawful operation declared nuisance. 
(a)  Any hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this article may be declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The city may, in addition, or in lieu of all other remedies, commence actions or proceedings for abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof, in the manner provided by state law and the City of Norcross Code of Ordinances. 
(b)  No hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel shall operate at any location nor on any premises which does not comply with all zoning, building code, fire safety code, and other ordinances and laws of the city and the state. 
(Ord. No. 1-2017, § I, 2-6-2017) 
Chapter 10 - COURTS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Establishment of municipal courts authorized and jurisdiction thereof, Ga. Const. art. VI, § I, ¶ I; municipal courts, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-1 et seq. 

Sec. 10-1. - Chief Judge; associate judge; solicitor. 
(a)  The municipal court shall be presided over by a chief judge and such parttime, fulltime, or standby judges as may be necessary as provided in section 4.11 of the Charter. 
(b)  A solicitor and an assistant solicitor may be appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the City Council. 
(Code 1979, § 2-5-1; Code 1998, § 22-1) 
Sec. 10-2. - Sessions of court. 
Regular sessions of the municipal court shall be held each month in sufficient frequency to meet the needs of the city. Each session shall be held at a fixed hour of a fixed day as may be determined by the judge, provided any session may be dispensed with when there is no business pending in the court or no cases are ready for trial. 
(Code 1979, § 2-5-2; Code 1998, § 22-2; Ord. No. 18-95, § III, 11-6-1995) 
Sec. 10-3. - Special sessions of court. 
The judge may hold special sessions of court when, in their judgment, it is necessary or there is urgent cause for the trial of accused persons, before the next regular sitting of the court. The necessity or urgency of the cause shall be presumed from the fact of a session being held. All defendants shall have at least six hours' notice of the session. 
(Code 1979, § 2-5-3; Code 1998, § 22-3) 
Sec. 10-4. - Police attendance. 
It shall be the duty of the Police Chief or designee to attend each session of the court to act as bailiff, and where necessary, the duty of each police officer making the arrest or having knowledge of the case for or against the defendant, to attend the trial of any person brought before the judge. 
(Code 1979, § 2-5-4; Code 1998, § 22-4; Ord. No. 18-95, § III, 11-6-1995) 
Sec. 10-5. - Clerk of the court; subpoenas; dockets. 
The Clerk of the Court shall be nominated by the City Manager with confirmation of the appointment by the City Council. The Clerk of the Court shall: 
(1)  Maintain a record of all warrants issued by the court and the disposition of same. The Clerk shall issue subpoenas as provided by law. 
(2)  Maintain all original records filed with or submitted to the court, including, but not limited to, citations, orders, bonding agreements, motions, evidence and exhibits as well as records concerning the receipt of fines, fees, surcharges and bonds. The Clerk of the Court shall also maintain a docket, which shall contain a summary record of all citations, accusations and complaints filed with the Clerk and the disposition of same, including, but not limited to sentences and fines, nolle prosequi orders and dead docket orders. The Clerk may keep and produce such docket and any other records through the use of a computer, provided that any automated or computerized recordkeeping system shall provide for the systematic and safe preservation and retrieval of all documents, records and indices. When the Clerk elects to store for computer retrieval any or all records, the same data elements used in a manual system shall be used and the same integrity and security maintained. 
(3)  Be authorized to make continuations of a case for good cause shown. 
(Code 1979, § 2-5-5; Code 1998, § 22-5; Ord. No. 19-95, 11-6-1995) 
Sec. 10-6. - Continuance of cases. 
Continuances shall be made only for good cause shown. Prior to the scheduled court appearance the Clerk of the Court, or a designee, or the judge may grant continuations of a case. 
(Code 1979, § 2-5-6; Code 1998, § 22-6) 
Sec. 10-7. - Appearance bond; procedure for accepting. 
Offenses against the ordinances of the city shall be bailable as follows: 
(1)  The arresting officer, Chief of Police, judge or any other officer designated by the Chief of Police, may accept bond of the accused payable to the city conditioned upon the appearance of the accused at the next session or any subsequent session of the municipal court as stated in the bond, to answer the charge. 
(2)  The bond shall be in writing in an amount established in a schedule approved by the Chief Judge of the municipal court. 
(3)  A person arrested for violation of a city ordinance may be released on his own recognizance or may deposit, in lieu of an appearance bond, his driver's license with the arresting officer, the Police Chief or the judge if, in any of these officials' determination, the person will appear at the time set for the court appearance in view of the following considerations: 
a.  The seriousness of the offense charged; 
b.  The penalty provided by law; 
c.  The number of charges pending against the defendant; 
d.  The criminal record of the defendant; 
e.  The residence of the defendant and the length of time of residence; 
f.  The defendant's age; 
g.  Marital status and number of children; 
h.  Residency of the relatives of the defendant; 
i.  Employment of defendant (by whom, nature of work and how long employed); 
j.  Former employment; 
k.  Amount of earnings; 
l.  The defendant's character, reputation and previous criminal history; 
m.  The defendant's mental condition; and 
n.  Whether the defendant has membership in any clubs or societies, church affiliation and other things which could show that he is a responsible member of the community with established community ties. 
(4)  Any person released under subsection (3) of this section shall receive a receipt for any driver's license deposited, or, if released on the person's own recognizance, shall sign and receive a copy of the citation or ticket describing the violation for which the person was arrested. 
(5)  All persons arrested or notified by citation or ticket of parking violations shall be released on their own recognizance. 
(Code 1979, § 2-5-8; Code 1998, § 22-7) 
State Law reference— Bonds in cases of offenses against municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 17-6-10 et seq. 
Sec. 10-8. - Forfeiture of appearance bonds. 
(a)  The judge or his designee shall call the case in its regular order, and, if the accused is not in court and does not answer the call, and, if no good and sufficient reason is given for nonappearance, the judge shall enter on the docket where the case is stated "Bond forfeited," or similar words. 
(b)  Upon forfeiture of any bond, the cash deposited as security shall be paid to the General Government Administration Department and it shall become the property of the city. 
(c)  Upon the forfeiture of any bond signed by a person as surety, the Clerk of the Court shall issue an execution against the principal and surety on the bond for the amount thereof which shall be collected as tax executions are collected. 
(Code 1979, § 2-5-9; Code 1998, § 22-8) 
Sec. 10-9. - Professional bondsman. 
No professional bondsman shall be accepted as surety on a bail bond unless he holds a current business license in the city, and has also deposited with the General Government Administration Department the sum of $5,000.00 to guarantee the payment of any bond, if forfeited, which he may sign. If the defendant named in any bond signed by a professional bondsman fails to appear according to the conditions of the bond, and the bond is forfeited, the General Government Administration Department shall deduct the amount of the bond from the deposit made and pay the same into the city treasury, and the bondsman shall not be accepted as surety on a bail bond again until he has deposited with the General Government Administration Department an amount sufficient to restore the deposit to the original required amount. 
(Code 1979, § 2-5-10; Code 1998, § 22-9) 
Sec. 10-10. - Other bondsmen. 
No employee or official of the city shall be accepted as surety on any bail bond, except where the principal in the bond is a close relative or an employee of the proposed surety. 
(Code 1979, § 2-5-11; Code 1998, § 22-10) 
Sec. 10-11. - Court dates; contempt warrants. 
(a)  A court date will be made known to the defendant at the time of the arrest process and shall be properly indicated on the copy of charges given to the defendant by the arresting officer. Any changes to the original court date given at the time of arrest may be issued by the Clerk of the Court or his designee. 
(b)  Warrants for contempt of court charges may be issued following each session of court. 
(Code 1979, § 2-5-12; Code 1998, § 22-11) 
Sec. 10-12. - Appearance of complaining witnesses. 
A material or complaining witness in any contested prosecution shall appear at the session at which the prosecution is docketed. The prosecution may be dismissed if the material witness fails to appear. 
(Code 1979, § 2-5-13; Code 1998, § 22-12) 
Sec. 10-13. - Jury trial; bind over. 
(a)  All charges cognizable as violations of state laws shall be handled by a commitment hearing, provided, however, that they may be adjudicated in the municipal court whenever the court would have jurisdiction over the offense, and the defendant, in writing, waives any right to trial by jury. 
(b)  When a defendant is bound over to the appropriate state court, he may be released under any of the following methods: 
(1)  If the defendant has made bond to the city he may be released on the same bond. 
(2)  If the defendant has not made bond before being bound over, he shall make bond at the county jail book-in and an arraignment notice will then be given to the defendant, and the defendant must be delivered, in person, by the police, to the county authorities. 
(Code 1979, § 2-5-14; Code 1998, § 22-13) 
Sec. 10-14. - Pleas. 
The defendant shall enter one of the following pleas: 
(1)  Guilty; 
(2)  Not guilty; 
(3)  Nolo contendere (with the permission of the court); or 
(4)  A former judgment of conviction or acquittal of the offense charged. 
If the defendant refuses to enter a plea, the court shall enter a plea of not guilty and set the case down for trial. 
(Code 1979, § 2-5-15; Code 1998, § 22-14) 
Sec. 10-15. - Acceptance of pleas. 
Before accepting a plea to an offense charged, the court shall in all cases, in language which the defendant can understand, inform the defendant of the nature of the charge and the penalty which may be imposed upon conviction, and shall inform the defendant of his fundamental constitutional rights. The fundamental constitutional rights of the defendant should include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Is not required to make any statement and that anything said by the defendant may be used against him; 
(2)  May have a lawyer; 
(3)  May have the case delayed to give sufficient time to be advised by a lawyer; 
(4)  May have a lawyer present during any questioning and proceeding; 
(5)  May testify in his own behalf; 
(6)  May appeal any final decision rendered by the court; 
(7)  A record of any conviction will become a part of the defendant's record; 
(8)  May be admitted to bail in appropriate cases; 
(9)  Is innocent until proven guilty; 
(10)  May have the complaining or material witness present and right to cross examine; and 
(11)  May bring witnesses in his own behalf. 
(Code 1979, § 2-5-16; Code 1998, § 22-15) 
Sec. 10-16. - Fines; enforcement by levy and execution; payment in advance of court date. 
(a)  For fines that may be due by any defendant, execution may be issued by the Clerk of the Court and collected as tax executions are collected. 
(b)  Persons charged with traffic violations may, prior to the time for their court appearances, plead guilty in writing and pay to the city as their fine the amount set as the appearance bond for the offense charged; except that those persons charged with driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs and those charged with an offense in connection with an automobile collision shall be required in all cases to appear before the court for disposition of the case. 
(Code 1979, § 2-5-17; Code 1998, § 22-16) 
Sec. 10-17. - Judgment and sentences. 
Upon a judgment or plea of guilty the court shall impose sentence. The court may: 
(1)  Impose a fine, with or without a commitment for confinement, compulsory work or both; 
(2)  Commit the defendant to confinement, compulsory work or both; 
(3)  Suspend the execution of the sentence in whole or in part; or 
(4)  Defer the execution of the sentence or any portion thereof to one or more fixed dates in the future. 
(Code 1979, § 2-5-16; Code 1998, § 22-17) 
Sec. 10-18. - Indigent defense system for municipal court. 
(a)  The internal operating procedures of the Gwinnett Judicial Circuit's Indigent Defense Program as accepted by the Gwinnett County Indigent Defense Committee on January 30, 2002, and as ordered by the Superior Court of Gwinnett County on January 30, 2002, the State Court of Gwinnett County on February 7, 2002, the Magistrate Court of Gwinnett County on February 12, 2002, the Gwinnett Circuit Juvenile Court on February 7, 2002, and the Recorder's Court of Gwinnett County on February 7, 2002, a copy of which is hereby set forth as exhibit "A" [attached to Ord. No. 02-2010] is hereby adopted as the official policy of the city as modified herein. 
(b)  All references to the "county" or any office of the county including, but not limited to, the administrative office of the courts, in exhibit "A" shall be considered to be references to the City of Norcross. All references to the "committee" or "governing committee" in exhibit "A" with respect to the selection of panel attorneys for the Municipal Court of the City of Norcross and the processing and consideration of invoices from attorneys shall be considered to be references to the Municipal Court of the City of Norcross. 
(c)  The panel of attorneys from which appointments may be made by the Municipal Court of the City of Norcross may be compiled by periodically soliciting attorneys who are on the panel of qualified attorneys created by the Gwinnett County Indigent Defense Governing Committee. The Norcross panel of attorneys need not be categorized as in part X of exhibit "A". Any attorney on the county's panel of attorneys who is involuntarily removed for cause pursuant to subsection 10.4(B) of exhibit "A" hereto shall be ineligible for appointment by the Municipal Court of the City of Norcross. Any other qualified attorney not appearing on the county's panel of qualified attorneys may request his or her inclusion on the Norcross panel and may be included on the Norcross panel if found to be qualified by the Chief Municipal Court Judge. Any attorney accepting an appointment by the Municipal Court of the City of Norcross shall be required to comply with the guidelines and standards applicable to panel attorneys and other appointed counsel set forth in exhibit "A", as modified or subsequently amended, herein. 
(d)  Any fee or expense invoice submitted by appointed counsel shall be submitted to the Municipal Court Clerk and shall be reviewed by Norcross Municipal Court Judge who made the appointment of the Chief Judge, whose decision regarding Norcross panel attorneys, payment of fees, expenses, and costs shall be final and may not be appealed except as may be provided by law. 
(e)  To the extent that exhibit "A" assumes a standard for determining an indigent defendant's right to appointed counsel inconsistent with the holding of Alabama v. Shelton, it shall be the policy of the city to apply the standards of Alabama v. Shelton. 
(f)  The term "appeal" as used in sections 8.2 and 8.3 of exhibit "A" shall be construed to include a petition for certiorari to be filed in the Superior Court of Gwinnett County after a conviction in the Municipal Court of the City of Norcross. However, unless otherwise ordered by the Municipal Court, any appointment of counsel by the Municipal Court of Norcross shall terminate upon the entry of an order binding the case over to a court of record prior to any adjudication of the merits of the case by the Municipal Court. 
(g)  The Municipal Court Clerk shall maintain a list of attorneys deemed eligible for appointment by the Chief Municipal Court Judge. The Municipal Court Clerk shall provide a form affidavit for requesting appointed counsel to any defendant in a case pending in the Municipal Court and shall forward any such form or other request for appointed counsel to the Chief Judge of the Municipal Court. If no such forms have been developed or are not available at the time a request for appointed counsel is made, the Clerk shall notify the Chief Judge of such request. 
(h)  The Chief Judge of the Municipal Court of Norcross may develop internal operating procedures, forms, and other documents as may be necessary to effectuate this section and/or resolution. 
(Ord. No. 02-2010, §§ 1—8, 1-4-2010) 
Editor's note— Exhibit "A" is not set out herein but is on file and available for inspection in the Office of the City Clerk. 
Chapter 12 - ELECTIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Election Code, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq. 

Sec. 12-1. - District; polling place. 
The area within the corporate limits shall constitute an election district in the city. Those persons living within the designated election district shall vote at the City Hall. 
(Code 1979, § 2-2-1; Code 1998, § 26-1) 
Sec. 12-2. - Officials. 
The Municipal Election Superintendent shall be a person or committee selected by the City Council in a public meeting and such selection shall be recorded in the minutes of such meeting. In the event that the Mayor and Council fails to make an appointment, the City Clerk shall serve as the Municipal Superintendent. 
(Code 1979, § 2-2-2; Code 1998, § 26-2; Ord. No. 19-2008, 7-7-2008) 
Sec. 12-3. - Regular elections; time for holding. 
The City Council shall cause an election to be held at the City Hall or such other place in the city as the City Council shall direct and designate. All general municipal elections shall be held as provided by law, on the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November of each year. 
(Code 1979, § 2-2-4(a); Code 1998, § 26-4) 
State Law reference— Date of municipal elections, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-9. 
Sec. 12-4. - State law applies. 
All elections shall be held and conducted in accordance with the Georgia Election Code (O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq.), as now or hereafter amended. 
(Code 1979, § 2-2-5; Code 1998, § 26-5) 
Chapter 14 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AND SERVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Emergency Management Act of 1981, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq.; Interstate Civil Defense and Disaster Compact, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-70 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Emergency management means the preparation for the carrying out of all emergency functions, other than functions for which military forces are primarily responsible; to prevent, minimize and repair injury and damage resulting from emergencies, energy emergencies, disasters or the imminent threat thereof, of manmade or natural origin caused by enemy attack, sabotage, acts of domestic or international terrorism, civil disturbance, fire, flood, earthquake, wind, storm, wave action, oil spill or other water contamination requiring emergency action to avert danger or damage, epidemic, air contamination, blight, drought, infestation, explosion, riot or other hostile action, radiological action, or other causes. These functions include, without limitation, firefighting services; police services; emergency medical services; medical and health services; rescue; engineering; warning services; communications; defense from radiological, chemical, biological, and other special weapons to include weapons of mass destruction; evacuation of persons from stricken areas; emergency welfare services; consequence management functions to include victim services; emergency transportation; plant protection; temporary restoration of public utility services; and other functions related to civilian protection, together with all other activities necessary or incidental to the preparation for and carrying out of the foregoing functions. 
(Code 1979, § 4-9-1; Code 1998, § 18-1) 
Sec. 14-2. - Unlawful acts during emergencies. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit any of the following acts during an emergency: 
(1)  To willfully obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the emergency management corps in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this article or in the performance of any duty imposed by virtue of this article. 
(2)  To do any act forbidden by any lawful rules or regulations issued pursuant to this article if such act is of such a nature as to give assistance to the enemy, imperil the life or property of any inhabitant of this city, or prevent, hinder or delay the defense or protection thereof. 
(3)  To wear or carry or display without authority any mark or identification specified by the emergency management agency. 
(Code 1998, § 18-2) 
Sec. 14-3. - Penalties. 
Any person violating any provision of this chapter, or any rule, order, or regulation made pursuant to this chapter, shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(Code 1979, § 4-9-6; Code 1998, § 18-3) 
Sec. 14-4. - Liberality of construction of chapter provisions. 
This chapter shall be construed liberally in order to effectuate its purpose. 
(Code 1979, § 4-9-7; Code 1998, § 18-4) 
Secs. 14-5—14-26. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COUNTYWIDE AGENCY 

Sec. 14-27. - Part of county agency. 
It is the desire and intent of the Mayor and Council that the city be a part of the county emergency management agency. 
(Code 1979, § 4-9-2; Code 1998, § 18-36) 
Sec. 14-28. - Director—Designation, appointment. 
The present Emergency Management Director of the county will serve as Director for the entire county. Should that office become vacant, the chairperson and Board of County Commissioners, with concurrence of the Mayors of cities within the county, shall nominate for appointment by the Governor, a Director of Emergency Management for the county. 
(Code 1979, § 4-9-2; Code 1998, § 18-37) 
Sec. 14-29. - Same—Powers. 
When appointed, the Emergency Management Director is charged with the duty to: 
(1)  Represent the Mayor and Council of this city on matters pertaining to emergency management; 
(2)  Assist city officials in organizing city departments for emergency operations; 
(3)  Develop, in conjunction with city and county departments, the county plan for emergency functions set forth in section 14-30. Such plan will be consistent with the state emergency operations plan and shall be submitted to the Board of County Commissioners and the governing bodies of the cities in the county for approval; 
(4)  Maintain the emergency management agency and to oversee the carrying out of the day-to-day administration of the county emergency management program, including the submission of required reports to the state emergency management agency; 
(5)  Submit reports as required by governing officials in keeping with good management practices, e.g., financial, daily activity, etc.; 
(6)  Obtain, with the authority of governing officials, a facility to be used as the county emergency operations center; and 
(7)  Coordinate the activities of the county emergency operating center staff during periods of an emergency, and under the supervision of the Board of County Commissioners. 
(Code 1979, § 4-9-2; Code 1998, § 18-38) 
Sec. 14-30. - Composition, functions of agency. 
(a)  The county emergency management agency shall be established around existing city and county departments, and the emergency functions described in section 14-1 are assigned as follows: 

 
*As appropriate to the local organization, these functions can be assigned to existing departments or may be separate. Functions should be assigned consistent with the local emergency operations plan. 
(b)  Heads of the city departments listed above are responsible for assisting county department heads in developing appropriate annexes to the local emergency operations plan (EOP) for their assigned emergency functions. Such annexes will be submitted to the Emergency Management Director for inclusion in the local EOP for submission to appropriate local officials for approval. 
(Code 1979, § 4-9-3; Code 1998, § 18-39) 
Sec. 14-31. - Additional emergency powers. 
Upon a manmade or natural disaster, actual enemy attack upon the United States, or any other emergency which may affect the lives and property of the citizens of the city, the Mayor separately, or jointly with the chairperson of the Board of County Commissioners, or in their absences their legally appointed successors, may determine that an emergency or disaster exists and thereafter shall have and may exercise for such period as such emergency or disaster exists or continues, the power to: 
(1)  Enforce all rules, laws and regulations relating to emergency management, and to assume direct operational control over all emergency management resources; 
(2)  Seize or take for temporary use, any private property for the protection of the public; 
(3)  Sell, lend, give or distribute all or any such property or supplies among the inhabitants of the county and to maintain a strict accounting of property or supplies distributed and for funds received for such property or supplies; and 
(4)  Perform and exercise such other functions and duties, and take such emergency actions, as may be necessary to promote and secure the safety, protection and well-being of the inhabitants of the city. 
(Code 1979, § 4-9-4; Code 1998, § 18-40) 
Sec. 14-32. - Volunteers. 
All persons, other than officers and employees of the city, performing emergency functions pursuant to this article, shall serve with or without compensation. While engaged in such emergency functions, duly assigned volunteers shall have the same immunities as city officers and employees. 
(Code 1979, § 4-9-5; Code 1998, § 18-41) 
Secs. 14-33—14-52. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ALARM SYSTEMS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Restrictions on operation, installation, maintenance, etc., of electronic security systems by counties and municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-12; Georgia Emergency Telephone Number 911 Service Act of 1977, O.C.G.A. § 46-5-120 et seq. 

Sec. 14-53. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alarm system means an assembly of equipment and devices designated and arranged to detect and signal an unauthorized intrusion into a premises or to signal an attempted robbery at a protected premises, and with respect to such signal, public police are expected to respond. 
False alarm means the activation of a burglary and/or robbery alarm by other than a forced entry or attempted forced entry to the premises and at a time when no burglary or robbery is being committed or attempted on the premises. 
Response means the dispatch of a police officer to the premises where an alarm system has been activated indicating a burglary and/or robbery is presently in progress on those premises. 
(Code 1979, § 4-7-1; Code 1998, § 30-31) 
Sec. 14-54. - Prohibitions. 
It is unlawful for anyone to activate any robbery or burglary alarm for the purpose of summoning police except in the event of an actual or attempted burglary or robbery, or for anyone notifying the police of an activated alarm and having knowledge that such activation was apparently caused by an electrical or other malfunction of the alarm system, or was apparently caused by maintenance or service to the alarm system, to fail at the same time to notify the police of such apparent malfunction or repair. 
(Code 1979, § 4-7-2; Code 1998, § 30-32) 
Sec. 14-55. - Fees. 
For the police response to any false alarm, the city shall charge and collect from the person or business having or maintaining such burglary or robbery alarm system on the premises owned or occupied by him, fees as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges. 
(Code 1979, § 4-7-3; Code 1998, § 30-33) 
Sec. 14-56. - Penalties. 
Any person or business violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this article shall be summoned to the municipal court for each violation and noncompliance, and upon conviction shall be punished as provided by section 1-11. 
(Code 1979, § 4-7-4; Code 1998, § 30-34) 
Chapter 16 - FINANCE AND TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Discretion of governing body as to management and disposition of property, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-2; grants of state funds to municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-40-1 et seq.; accounting for public funds, O.C.G.A. § 45-8-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 16-1. - Collection of taxes, fees and other revenues. 
All taxes, fees, penalties, fines or other revenue due the city shall be paid to the Office of the General Government Administration Department Head or a designee of the General Government Administration Department Head. Any city employee collecting any monies due the city or receiving such monies for any reason shall promptly deliver such monies to the Office of the General Government Administration Department or designee. 
(Code 1979, § 3-1-51(a); Code 1998, § 38-1; Ord. No. 15-96, 7-8-1996) 
Sec. 16-2. - Use of credit cards for collections. 
(a)  All sums due the city including, but not limited to, ad valorem taxes, occupation taxes, fines, forfeitures, penalties, license fees, permit fees and registration fees, may be paid by the use of credit cards. The city General Government Administration Department Head, with the approval of the Mayor and Council, shall establish the procedures for acceptance of credit card payments for amounts due the city. The Mayor is authorized to enter into agreements with credit card issuers to facilitate the acceptance of credit card payment by the city. 
(b)  A credit card agreement may provide for the acceptance of the credit card payments from the credit card company at a discount from the face amount of the payment or for the withholding of administrative fees from the face amount of the payment. Such discounted fee is granted in exchange for the improved government cash flow, reduction of administrative expenses and increased public convenience as a result of credit card payment. 
(c)  A surcharge equal to the administrative fees charged by the credit card issuers to the city may be imposed upon any person making a payment by credit card, when such surcharges are permitted by the operating rules and regulations of the credit card issuer. 
(d)  Any agreement with a credit card issuer for the acceptance or payments via credit shall contain a provision that the agreement may be canceled at any time by the city. 
(e)  No person making payment by credit card to the city is relieved from liability for the underlying obligation except to the extent that the city actually receives final payment of the obligation in cash or its equivalent. If final payment is not made by the credit card issuers or other guarantor of payment in the credit card transaction, the underlying obligation for the money due is not extinguished. All applicable penalties, interest and collection fees on the unpaid amount shall be due from the person making the payment by credit card. 
(f)  Such penalties, interest and fees on an unpaid amount shall accrue from the date the unpaid obligation was first due under the application statute or ordinance. The city shall follow the collection procedures for the unpaid amount that would have otherwise been applicable had the credit card payment not been attempted. 
(Code 1979, § 3-1-51(b)—(g); Code 1998, § 38-2; Ord. No. 18-95, § IV, 11-6-1995; Ord. No. 15-96, 7-8-1996) 
Sec. 16-3. - Delinquent taxes, fees, special assessment tax or other revenue; interest. 
(a)  Any city tax, fee, penalty, fine, special assessment tax or other revenue due the city which has not been paid within the time limits set for payment, may be collected by the city, after providing ten days' written notice, by the issuance of a fi. fa., by the General Government Administration Department Head, or a designee thereof, and execution by the Mayor or his designee on any property, personal or real, of that person located within the county for the amount due. 
(b)  Any debts due the city as described in subsection (a) of this section are hereby declared also to be personal debts of the person owning the taxed property or otherwise owing funds to the city, and the amount due may be collected plus interest, penalties, costs and attorney's fees from that person as provided generally for the collection of personal debts under general state law. 
(c)  Tax bills for property also subject to a special assessment levied by the city shall include, in addition to the information contained in subsection (a) above, a separate sum due as a result of the special assessment. Said tax bill shall further include an adequate description of the basis for said special assessment and the legal authority providing for same. 
(d)  Executions under this section may be assigned, sold or otherwise transferred with the approval of the Mayor and may be collected after the transfer as provided in this section. 
(e)  All delinquent fi. fas. issued under subsection (a) of this section as well as any interest or penalty thereon shall be included as a part of and in addition to the annual ad valorem tax bill. 
(f)  Upon order of the General Government Administration Department and ten days' written notice, any license, privilege or permit granted by the city shall be revoked for the failure to pay any monies due the city for taxes, fees, penalties, interest, fines, special assessment tax, or other revenue; provided that any person aggrieved by the order may, within ten days thereof, appeal to the City Council. After a hearing thereon, the City Council may approve or modify the order, or restore the license, privilege or permit by adopting a motion to that effect by a majority vote of all City Council members present. 
(g)  All fi. fas. issued under this section shall earn interest at the maximum interest rate allowed by state law and such failure to pay shall further incur a penalty in the maximum percentage amount allowed by state law. 
(Code 1979, § 3-1-52; Code 1998, § 38-3; Ord. No. 18-95, § IV, 11-6-1995; Ord. No. 08-2013, 11-4-2013) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 08-2013, adopted Nov. 4, 2013, changed the title of § 16-3 from "Delinquent taxes, fees, or other revenue; interest" to read as herein set out. 
Secs. 16-4—16-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUDGETING AND ACCOUNTING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Minimum budget, accounting, and auditing requirements for local governments, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-1 et seq. 

Sec. 16-25. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accrual basis means the basis of accounting under which revenues are recorded when earned or when levies are made, and expenditures are recorded as soon as each results in liabilities, notwithstanding that the receipt of the revenue or payment of the expenditure may take place, in whole or in part, in another accounting period. 
Appropriation means an authorization granted by the City Council to make expenditures or to incur obligations for specific purposes. 
Appropriation balance means the unencumbered balance of appropriation or allotment, and unexpended balance of appropriation or allotment. 
Asset means property of all kinds of the city, including both current assets and fixed assets. 
Audit means the examination of records, documents, reports, systems or internal control, accounting and financial procedures, and other evidence for one or more of the following purposes: 
(1)  Ascertain whether the statements prepared from the accounts present fairly the financial position and the results of financial operations of the constituent funds and balanced account groups of the governmental unit in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles applicable to governmental units and on a basis consistent with that of the preceding year; 
(2)  Determine the propriety, legality, and mathematical accuracy of a governmental unit's financial transactions; 
(3)  Ascertain whether all financial transactions have been properly recorded; and 
(4)  Ascertain the stewardship of public officials who handle and are responsible for the financial resources of a governmental unit. 
Balance sheet means a statement ordinarily prepared from books kept by double entry showing assets, liabilities, reserves and surplus of a fund of a governmental unit at a specified date properly classified to exhibit the financial position of the fund or unit at that date. 
Budget means a plan of financial operation embodying an estimate of proposed expenditures for a given time and the proposed means of financing them. The annual budget refers to a period of one year. 
Budgetary control means the control or management of a government unit in accordance with an approved budget and keeping expenditures within the limitations of available appropriations or revenues. 
Cash basis means the system of accounting under which revenues are accounted for only when received in cash, and expenditures are accounted for only when paid. 
Contingent account means an appropriation to provide for unforeseen expenditures. 
Current surplus means the excess of the current assets of a fund over its current liabilities and reserves. 
Debit and credit are terms commonly used to indicate the manner in which a transaction is to be recorded. Every entry on the left side of the ledger sheet is called a debit. Every entry on the right side of the ledger sheet is called a credit. 
Debt service means the amount of money necessary annually to pay the interest on the outstanding debt and the principal of maturing bonded debt not payable from a sinking fund and to provide a fund for the redemption of bonds payable from a sinking fund. 
Delinquent taxes means taxes remaining unpaid on and after the date due. Even though a portion of the taxes may be abated or canceled, the unpaid balances continue to be delinquent taxes until abated, canceled, or converted into tax liens. 
Encumbrances means obligations in the form of purchase orders, contracts or salary commitments which are chargeable to an appropriation and for which a part of the appropriation is reserved. 
Fund means a sum of money or other resources (gross or net) set aside for the purpose of carrying on specific activities or to attain certain objectives in accordance with special regulations, restrictions or limitations. A fund is a distinct financial and legal entity. 
Internal audit means an audit made by persons on the staff of the government unit whose accounts are being audited primarily for the purpose of internal control. An internal audit is usually a continuous audit. 
Liabilities means debt owed. 
Millage is a term used to express the property tax rate and derived from the term "mill," which is one-tenth of a cent. Thus, ten mills equal $0.01 or one percent. Millage is determined by dividing the total amount of money to be raised by the total assessed value of taxable property. 
Taxes receivable means the uncollected portion of taxes which a government unit has levied. 
Trust funds means amounts received or appropriated and held in trust in accordance with an agreement or legislative act which may be expended only in accordance with the terms of such trust or act. 
(Code 1979, § 3-1-2; Code 1998, § 38-36) 
Sec. 16-26. - Fiscal year. 
(a)  For 2014 and all prior years, the fiscal year shall begin on January 1 and shall end on December 31 of each year; 
(b)  The city shall adopt an eight-month budget for the fiscal period from January 1, 2015 through August 31, 2015; 
(c)  For the fiscal year beginning September 1, 2015 and for all subsequent fiscal years, the fiscal year shall begin on September 1 of the current year and end on August 31 of the subsequent year. 
(Code 1979, § 3-1-3; Code 1998, § 38-37; Ord. No. 02-2014, 5-5-2014) 
Sec. 16-27. - Annual operating budget; appropriations. 
(a)  For 2014 and all prior fiscal years and for the eight-month period from January 1, 2015 through August 31, 2015, the annual appropriating budget and appropriations shall be as follows: 
(1)  On or before October 1 or another date fixed by resolution by the City Council, but no later than 60 days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the City Manager or his designee, the Financial Director, shall prepare and submit to the City Council a proposed operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year. The budget shall be accompanied by a message from the City Manager containing a statement of the general fiscal policies of the city, the important features of the budget, explanation of major changes recommended for the next fiscal year, a general summary of the budget and such other comments and information as may be deemed pertinent. The public hearing shall take place on the proposed budget at the regular City Council meeting in November, and the proposed budget shall be adopted at the regular City Council meeting in December, unless another date is fixed by resolution of the City Council. 
(2)  The City Council may amend the proposed operating budget, except that the budget as finally amended and adopted must provide for all expenditures required by state law or by the city Charter and for all debt service requirements for the ensuing fiscal year, and the total appropriations from any fund shall not exceed the estimated fund balance, reserves and revenues. 
(3)  On or before July 15 of each year there shall be a mid-year budget review by the Mayor and Council. The Mayor and Council may require department heads to appear before them to review their respective budgets. Such review will be utilized to determine what corrective actions need to be taken, if necessary, to exercise proper budgetary control for the remainder of the fiscal year. 
(b)  For the fiscal year beginning September 1, 2015, and for all subsequent fiscal years, the, the annual appropriating budget and appropriations shall be as follows: 
(1)  On or before June 1 or another date fixed by resolution by the City Council, but no later than 60 days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the City Manager or his designee, the Financial Director, shall prepare and submit to the City Council a proposed operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year. The budget shall be accompanied by a message from the City Manager containing a statement of the general fiscal policies of the city, the important features of the budget, explanation of major changes recommended for the next fiscal year, a general summary of the budget and such other comments and information as may be deemed pertinent. The public hearing shall take place on the proposed budget at the regular City Council meeting in November, and the proposed budget shall be adopted at the regular City Council meeting in December, unless another date is fixed by resolution of the City Council. 
(2)  The City Council may amend the proposed operating budget, except that the budget as finally amended and adopted must provide for all expenditures required by state law or by the city Charter and for all debt service requirements for the ensuing fiscal year, and the total appropriations from any fund shall not exceed the estimated fund balance, reserves and revenues. 
(3)  On or before March 15 of each year there shall be a mid-year budget review by the Mayor and Council. The Mayor and Council may require department heads to appear before them to review their respective budgets. Such review will be utilized to determine what corrective actions need to be taken, if necessary, to exercise proper budgetary control for the remainder of the fiscal year. 
(Code 1979, § 3-1-4; Code 1998, § 38-38; Ord. No. 01-98, § I(3-1-4), 1-5-1998; Ord. No. 21-98, 12-7-1998; Ord. No. 02-2014, 5-5-2014) 
Sec. 16-28. - Capital improvements budget; appropriations. 
(a)  For 2014 and all prior fiscal years and for the eight-month period from January 1, 2015 through August 31, 2015, the capital improvements budget and appropriations shall be established as follows: 
On or before October 1 or another date fixed by resolution by the City Council, but no later than 60 days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the City Manager or his designee, the Financial Director, shall prepare and submit to the City Council a proposed capital improvements budget with recommendations as to the means of financing the improvements proposed for the ensuing fiscal year. The City Council shall have power to accept, with or without amendments, or reject the proposed program and proposed means of financing. The City Council shall not authorize an expenditure for the construction of any building, structure, work or improvement, unless the appropriations for such project are included in the capital improvements budget, except to meet a public emergency. The public hearing shall take place on the proposed budget at the regular City Council meeting in November, and the proposed budget shall be adopted at the regular City Council meeting in December, unless another date is fixed by resolution of the City Council. 
(b)  For the fiscal year beginning September 1, 2015, and for all subsequent fiscal years, the, the annual appropriating budget and appropriations shall be as follows: 
On or before June 1 or another date fixed by resolution by the City Council, but no later than 60 days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the City Manager or his designee, the Financial Director, shall prepare and submit to the City Council a proposed capital improvements budget with recommendations as to the means of financing the improvements proposed for the ensuing fiscal year. The City Council shall have power to accept, with or without amendments, or reject the proposed program and proposed means of financing. The City Council shall not authorize an expenditure for the construction of any building, structure, work or improvement, unless the appropriations for such project are included in the capital improvements budget, except to meet a public emergency. The public hearing shall take place on the proposed budget at the regular City Council meeting in July, and the proposed budget shall be adopted at the regular City Council meeting in August, unless another date is fixed by resolution of the City Council. 
(Code 1979, § 3-1-5; Code 1998, § 38-39; Ord. No. 01-98, § I(3-1-5), 1-5-1998; Ord. No. 02-2014, 5-5-2014) 
Sec. 16-29. - Prior appropriation required; appropriations ordinance and supplemental appropriations. 
(a)  No expenditure in any fund shall be legal or proper unless appropriations adequate to meet that expenditure have been made pursuant to this section. 
(b)  Each city appropriations ordinance, now in force or hereafter adopted with all amendments as are adopted from time to time, shall continue in force and effect for the next fiscal year after adoption; and it shall then expire except for any mandatory appropriations required to meet contractual obligations or the continued appropriation and authorization of state or federal grants. 
(c)  The City Council shall not appropriate funds for any given fiscal year which, in aggregate, exceed a sum equal to the amount of unappropriated surplus expected to have accrued in the city treasury at the beginning of the fiscal year, together with an amount not greater than the total city receipts from existing revenue sources anticipated to be collected in the fiscal year, less refunds as estimated in the budget resolution and amendments thereto. 
(d)  All state or federal funds received by the city are hereby continually appropriated in the exact amounts and for the purposes authorized and directed by the state or federal government in making the grant. 
(e)  In addition to the appropriations made by the city appropriations ordinance and amendments thereto, the City Council may make additional appropriations in the same manner as herein provided, which shall be known as supplementary appropriations ordinances; provided no supplementary appropriation shall be made unless there is an existing unappropriated surplus in the fund to which it applies. 
(f)  In no event shall a supplementary appropriations ordinance continue in force and effect beyond the expiration of the municipal budget in effect when the supplementary appropriations ordinance was adopted and approved. 
(g)  The appropriation for each department, office, bureau, board, commission, function or line item for which appropriation is made shall be for a specific amount of money and no appropriation shall allocate to any object the proceeds of any particular tax or fund or a part or percentage thereof. All appropriations by function or line item shall be lump sum by function or line item. 
(Code 1979, § 3-1-6; Code 1998, § 38-40) 
Sec. 16-30. - Public inspection. 
At the time the proposed budget is transmitted to members of the City Council by the City Manager, a copy of the proposed budget shall be made available for public inspection in the Office of the General Government Administration Department during regular office hours. 
(Code 1979, § 3-1-7; Code 1998, § 38-41; Ord. No. 18-95, § IV, 11-6-1995; Ord. No. 01-98, § I(3-1-7), 1-5-1998) 
Sec. 16-31. - Public hearing. 
At the time of the submission of the budget to the Mayor and Council a public notice advising the citizens of the city of the availability of the budget for review shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the city. The notice shall be published as an advertisement instead of a legal notice and will further contain notice of the time and place of the budget hearing. The budget hearing shall be at least one week prior to the adoption of the budget and shall be open to all persons wishing to be heard on the budget. 
(Code 1979, § 3-1-8; Code 1998, § 38-42) 
Sec. 16-32. - Annual operating budget; amendments. 
(a)  For 2014 and all prior fiscal years and for the eight-month period from January 1, 2015, through August 31, 2015, the annual operating budget and amendments shall be as follows: 
(1)  The City Council shall adopt the final operating budget and appropriation ordinance for the ensuing year not later than December 31 of each year. If the City Council fails to adopt the budget by this date, the amounts appropriated for operation for the current fiscal year shall be deemed adopted for the ensuing fiscal year on a month-to-month basis, with all items prorated accordingly until such time as the City Council adopts a budget for the ensuing fiscal year. Adoption of the budget shall take the form of an appropriations ordinance setting out the estimated revenues in detail by sources and making appropriations according to fund and by organizational unit, purpose or activity as set out in the budget document. 
(2)  The amount set out in the adopted operating budget for each organizational unit shall constitute the annual appropriation for such item, and no expenditure shall be made or encumbrance created in excess of the otherwise encumbered balance of the appropriation, or allotment thereof, to which it is chargeable unless authorized by the City Council. 
(b)  For the fiscal year beginning September 1, 2015, and for all subsequent fiscal years, the annual operating budget and amendments shall be as follows: 
(1)  The City Council shall adopt the final operating budget and appropriation ordinance for the ensuing year not later than August 31 of each year. If the City Council fails to adopt the budget by this date, the amounts appropriated for operation for the current fiscal year shall be deemed adopted for the ensuing fiscal year on a month-to-month basis, with all items prorated accordingly until such time as the City Council adopts a budget for the ensuing fiscal year. Adoption of the budget shall take the form of an appropriations ordinance setting out the estimated revenues in detail by sources and making appropriations according to fund and by organizational unit, purpose or activity as set out in the budget document. 
(2)  The amount set out in the adopted operating budget for each organizational unit shall constitute the annual appropriation for such item, and no expenditure shall be made or encumbrance created in excess of the otherwise encumbered balance of the appropriation, or allotment thereof, to which it is chargeable unless authorized by the City Council. 
(Code 1979, § 3-1-9; Code 1998, § 38-43; Ord. No. 02-2014, 5-5-2014) 
Sec. 16-33. - Capital improvements budget; amendments. 
(a)  For 2014 and all prior fiscal years and for the eight-month period from January 1, 2015, through August 31, 2015, the City Council shall adopt the final capital improvements budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than December 31 of each year. No appropriations provided for in a prior capital improvements budget shall lapse until the purpose for which the appropriation was made shall have been accomplished or abandoned; provided, however, the Mayor or any member of the City Council may submit amendments to the capital improvements budget at any time during the fiscal year, accompanied by recommendations. Any such amendments to the capital improvements budget shall become effective only upon adoption by ordinance. 
(b)  For the fiscal year beginning September 1, 2015, and for all subsequent fiscal years, the City Council shall adopt the final capital improvements budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than August 31 of each year. No appropriations provided for in a prior capital improvements budget shall lapse until the purpose for which the appropriation was made shall have been accomplished or abandoned; provided, however, the Mayor or any member of the City Council may submit amendments to the capital improvements budget at any time during the fiscal year, accompanied by recommendations. Any such amendments to the capital improvements budget shall become effective only upon adoption by ordinance. 
(Code 1979, § 3-1-10; Code 1998, § 38-44; Ord. No. 01-98, § I(3-1-10), 1-5-1998; Ord. No. 02-2014, 5-5-2014) 
Sec. 16-34. - Increases; transfers. 
Any increase in appropriation to a department budget or in a nondepartment expense category, whether accomplished through a change in anticipated revenues or a supplemental appropriations ordinance, shall also require an amendment to the budget resolution. Monies, the expenditure of which is not otherwise specifically provided for in an appropriations ordinance, may be transferred among the various accounts within a department budget or within a nondepartment expense category only after the approval of the department head and the concurrence of the City Manager, except any transfer of monies within a department budget or nondepartment expense account so as to increase or decrease the salary appropriation for the purpose of employing or not employing additional personnel shall require the approval of the City Council by motion. 
(Code 1979, § 3-1-11; Code 1998, § 38-45; Ord. No. 01-98, § I(3-1-11), 1-5-1998) 
Sec. 16-35. - Sinking fund transfer. 
No appropriation transfer shall be made from a sinking fund or debt retirement fund until all the legal obligations and requirements of such fund have been satisfied. 
(Code 1979, § 3-1-12; Code 1998, § 38-46) 
Sec. 16-36. - Anticipated revenues. 
The City Manager shall present the statement of anticipated revenues for the budget on the basis of the ordinary and reasonable revenues which can be expected for the fiscal year. Property tax revenue estimates shall be based on a consideration of the taxes which were delinquent taxes, including penalties and interest, to be collected in the fiscal year based on consideration of the actual experience in the collection of delinquent taxes in the three prior fiscal years. 
(Code 1979, § 3-1-13; Code 1998, § 38-47; Ord. No. 01-98, § I(3-1-13), 1-5-1998) 
Sec. 16-37. - Appropriations to lapse. 
Except as provided for under this article, all appropriations which are not obligated, encumbered or expended at the end of the fiscal year shall lapse and shall become a part of the unencumbered surplus which may be appropriated for the next fiscal year. 
(Code 1979, § 3-1-14; Code 1998, § 38-48) 
Sec. 16-38. - Funds. 
The following funds may be established and may be used as necessary to provide for the proper accounting of financial activities of this city: 
(1)  The general fund to account for the general governmental operations and all financial transactions not properly accounted for in another fund. 
(2)  Special revenue funds to account for the proceeds of special revenue sources other than special assessments, or to finance specified activities as required by law or administrative regulation. 
(3)  Debt service funds to account for the payment of interest and principal on longterm debt other than special assessment and revenue bonds. 
(4)  Capital projects funds to account for the receipt and disbursement of monies including bond funds used for the acquisition of capital facilities other than those financed by special assessment and enterprise funds. 
(5)  Enterprise (utility) funds to account for the financing of services to the general public where all or most of the costs involved are paid in the form of charges by users of such services. 
(6)  Trust and agency funds to account for assets held by a government unit as trustee or agent for individuals, private organizations, and other government units. 
(7)  Intergovernmental service funds to account for the financing of special activities and services performed by a designated organization unit within a governmental jurisdiction for their organization units within the same governmental jurisdiction. 
(8)  Special assessment funds to account for special assessments levied to finance public improvements or services deemed to benefit the properties against which the assessments are levied. 
(Code 1979, § 3-1-15; Code 1998, § 38-49) 
Sec. 16-39. - Accounts. 
(a)  A complete self-balancing group of accounts shall be established and maintained for each fund used. This group of accounts shall include all general ledger accounts and subsidiary records necessary to reflect compliance with legal provisions and to set forth the financial position and the results of financial operations of the fund. 
(b)  Additional accounts, as follows, shall be maintained: 
(1)  A fixed asset account for the purpose of accounting for those assets which are of tangible nature, have a life longer than one fiscal year, and have a significant value or have a value greater than $1,000.00. Fixed assets shall be recorded at original cost, shall not be depreciated and shall be removed from the account when disposed of. 
(2)  A general longterm debt account for the purpose of accounting for longterm debt which is supported by general revenues and for recording and fairly representing the liability for longterm debt at any time from date of issuance until the debt is retired. 
(Code 1979, § 3-1-16; Code 1998, § 38-50) 
Sec. 16-40. - Method of accounting. 
To the extent possible, the modified accrual basis of accounting shall be used so that expenditures, other than accrued interest on longterm debt, are recorded at the time liabilities are incurred and revenues are recorded when cash is received, except for material or available revenues which shall be accrued to reflect properly the taxes levied and the revenues earned. All receipts and disbursements shall be posted promptly and at least on a monthly basis. To the extent possible, all interfund transfers shall be cleared by the end of the fiscal year. 
(Code 1979, § 3-1-17; Code 1998, § 38-51) 
Sec. 16-41. - Financial reports. 
Financial statements and reports showing the current condition of budgetary and proprietary accounts shall be prepared and presented to the City Council each month. No later than 190 days after the close of the fiscal year, a comprehensive annual financial report covering all funds and financial operations shall be prepared. A notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality advising the public that a copy of the comprehensive annual financial report is available for inspection in the Office of the General Government Administration Department during regular office hours. 
(Code 1979, § 3-1-18; Code 1998, § 38-52) 
Sec. 16-42. - Audits. 
All the funds, accounts and financial transactions of the city shall be subject to an annual audit by an independent certified public accountant who is to be selected by the City Council. The audit shall be conducted according to the standards set forth in the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants' Publication, Audits of State and Local Governmental Units. A copy of the audit reports shall be available for public inspection in the Office of the General Government Administration Department during regular office hours. 
(Code 1979, § 3-1-19; Code 1998, § 38-53) 
Secs. 16-43—16-72. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PURCHASING AND CONTRACTS 

Sec. 16-73. - Purchasing agent; purchase orders; duties. 
(a)  Each Department head shall serve as purchasing agent for his department. 
(b)  Purchase orders shall be obtained and processed through the Office of the General Government Administration Department. No purchase order shall be required for expenditures in the amount of $10.00 or less. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided in this article, each Department head, as purchasing agent, shall: 
(1)  According to written procedures established by the city, arrange and negotiate the purchase or contract for all capital expenditures, goods and services for his department. 
(2)  According to written procedures established by the city, sell or otherwise dispose of all surplus equipment and supplies of his department. 
(3)  Maintain a perpetual or periodic inventory record of all materials, supplies or equipment of his department. 
(4)  Control and supervise all storerooms and warehouses of his department. 
(Code 1979, § 3-1-31; Code 1998, § 38-86; Ord. No. 02-2003, 2-3-2003) 
Sec. 16-74. - Unauthorized purchases. 
Except as provided in this article, it shall be unlawful for any city officers to order the purchase of any supplies or make any contract within the purview of this article other than through the City Manager. Any purchase order or contract made contrary to the provisions hereof shall not be approved by city officials, and the city shall not be bound hereby, except by resolution of the City Council. 
(Code 1979, § 3-1-32; Code 1998, § 38-87) 
Sec. 16-75. - Competitive bidding required. 
(a)  All contracts for capital expenditures, goods or services in the amount of $10,000.00 or more shall, except as otherwise provided in this article, be based wherever reasonably possible on three or more competitive sealed bids or competitive sealed proposals and be approved by the City Council. Any contract for capital expenditures, goods or services in the amount of $5,000.00 or more shall, except as otherwise provided in this article, be based wherever reasonably possible on three or more written quotes and be approved by the City Council. These requirements may be waived by the City Council for professional services, sole source providers, state contracts, and capital improvements for the construction of buildings, renovations or other capital improvements to real estate owned by the city to the extent permitted by state law. 
(b)  All sales of personal property of $500.00 or more which have become obsolete and unusable shall, except as otherwise provided herein, be based wherever reasonably possible on three or more sealed competitive bids and be approved by the City Council. If it is not reasonably possible to obtain such bids, then as many competitive bids or quotations as possible shall be obtained. 
(c)  The estimation of the value of any personal property to be sold shall be in the sole and absolute discretion of the City Council or its designated agent. All personal property valued at less than $500.00 may be sold in the manner provided by state law. 
(d)  The lowest responsible bid for capital expenditures and the highest responsible bid for sales shall be accepted, unless the City Council finds that the bid is not in the city's best interest, whereupon the City Council may accept another bid or may call for additional bids. 
(e)  The City Council shall have the right to reject any and all bids or to cancel any proposed sales. 
(Code 1979, § 3-1-33; Code 1998, § 38-88; Ord. No. 04-00, 2-7-2000; Ord. No. 02-2003, 2-3-2003) 
State Law reference— Selling municipal property, O.C.G.A. § 36-37-6. 
Sec. 16-76. - City contracts; procedure. 
(a)  No contract with the city shall be binding on the city unless the following requirements are fulfilled: 
(1)  All contracts shall be in writing. 
(2)  Provided all written purchasing procedures and contracting requirements are fulfilled, the City Manager shall have the authority to bind the city by contract for any purchase or contract for equipment, supplies and contractual services to the extent provided by this article. 
(3)  At the discretion of the Council, contracts for goods or services in excess of $1,500.00 or more may be drawn by or submitted and reviewed by the City Attorney and signed by him to indicate such drafting or review. 
(4)  Upon approval by motion of the City Council all other contracts shall be authorized and signed by the Mayor or a person designated in writing by the Council provided the designation is for a specific contract or subject only and such approval shall be entered in the City Council journal of proceedings pursuant to the Charter. 
(b)  The City Clerk shall authenticate all contracts and shall maintain a permanent indexed file of original copies of all city contracts. 
(c)  No contract for the sale, lease or purchase of real estate shall be valid without the approval of the City Council expressed by a motion to that effect adopted by a majority of the Councilmembers present. 
(Code 1979, § 3-1-35; Code 1998, § 38-90; Ord. No. 04-98, § I(3-1-35(a)), 3-2-1998; Ord. No. 02-2003, 2-3-2003) 
State Law reference— Requirement of performance and payment bonds for all city contractors where the contract is for over $5,000.00 and for any public work, O.C.G.A. §§ 36-82-101—36-82-105; sale of municipal property, O.C.G.A. § 36-37-6. 
Secs. 16-77—16-97. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - AD VALOREM TAXES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Taxation power of municipal and county governments, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV, ¶ I(a) and (b)(2); ad valorem taxation of property, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-1 et seq.; municipal power of ad valorem taxation to provide for financial assistance to its development authority, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-350 et seq. 

Sec. 16-98. - Levy of tax. 
An annual ad valorem tax upon all real and personal property within the city is hereby levied. The millage rate therefor shall be established each year by ordinance of the Council. 
(Code 1979, § 3-2-1; Code 1998, § 38-121) 
Sec. 16-99. - Assessment. 
All property subject to the ad valorem tax shall be assessed at 40 percent of its full fair market value as established by the county for county ad valorem tax purposes. 
(Code 1979, § 3-2-2; Code 1998, § 38-122) 
Sec. 16-100. - Tax due and payable. 
(a)  All ad valorem taxes due the city other than for motor vehicles shall be billed in one payment. 
(b)  Ad valorem tax bills, as adjusted to conform to the tax digest of the county, shall be payable on or before November 15, but upon adjustment by the state revenue commissioner the city shall, within such reasonable time thereafter as may be determined by the resolution of the City Council, after receipt from the county of the adjustment information, refund any over payments or bill for any underpayments resulting. 
(c)  Any taxes not paid by the due date shall bear interest at the maximum rate allowed by state law. 
(Code 1979, § 3-2-3; Code 1998, § 38-123) 
State Law reference— Installments, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-23. 
Secs. 16-101—16-128. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - OCCUPATION TAX[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Business and occupation taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-2 et seq. 

Sec. 16-129. - Definitions. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Dominant line means the type of business, within a multiple-line business, that the greatest amount of income is derived from. 
Person includes sole proprietors, corporations, partnerships, nonprofits, or any other form of business organization; but specifically excludes charitable nonprofit organizations which utilize 50 percent or more of their proceeds for charitable purposes. 
Practitioner of profession and occupation is one who by state law requires state licensure regulating such profession or occupation but shall not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business, if the business pays an occupation tax. 
(b)  The definitions set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5 (Specific, Business, and Occupation Taxes - Definitions), shall be effective as definitions of the words, terms and phrases used in this chapter. All words, terms and phrases used herein, other than those specifically defined elsewhere in this article, shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5, and shall have the same scope and effect that the same words, terms and phrases have where used in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5. 
(Code 1998, § 38-156; Ord. No. 21-95, § 9-1-1, 12-4-1995) 
Sec. 16-130. - Registration required; exceptions. 
(a)  Each person engaged in any business, trade, profession, or occupation in the City, whether with a location in the City or in the case of an out-of-state business with no location in the state, exerting substantial efforts within the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, shall pay an annual occupation tax for such business, trade, profession, or occupation. In the event that an occupation tax certificate is issued for a business which engages in temporary outdoor activities, a separate occupation tax certificate shall be issued which states that temporary outdoor activities at a specific location are limited to two 20-day periods per year in accordance with the terms of section 115-44. Failure to make application for and obtain, where applicable, an appropriate occupation tax certificate, or make estimated or final returns of gross receipts when due, shall incur a penalty of not more than $25.00 for each month or fractional part thereof for which the return or application is overdue. Such penalties shall be in addition to all other penalties herein provided and may be collected by the remedies herein provided for collection of the occupation tax, and shall have the same lien and priority as the occupation tax to which the penalty is applied. 
(b)  Each person operating under various corporate or trade names must obtain a separate occupational registration for each trade or corporate name used. 
(c)  Nothing contained in this section shall be interpreted so as to require any person who may engage in casual or isolated activity and commercial transactions, where they involve personal assets and are not the principal occupation of the individual, to obtain a registration and pay a fee or tax therefor. 
(Code 1998, § 38-157; Ord. No. 21-95, § 9-1-2, 12-4-1995; Ord. No. 08-2012, 2-6-2012) 
Sec. 16-131. - Display of documentation. 
The tax receipt issued under this article and any applicable registration document shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in the place of business, if the taxpayer has a permanent business location in the city. If the taxpayer has no permanent business location in the city, such business tax registration shall be shown to the General Government Administration Department or an appointee of the Department or to any police officer of the city upon request. 
(Code 1998, § 38-158; Ord. No. 21-95, § 9-1-2(a), 12-4-1995) 
Sec. 16-132. - Occupation tax levied; restrictions. 
An occupation tax shall be levied upon those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one or more locations or offices within the corporate limits of the city and upon the applicable out-of-state businesses with no location or office in the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7 based upon the number of employees of the business or practitioner. Nothing contained herein shall prevent the city from requiring verification of any applicant that they are in compliance with all county, state, federal and administrative laws and regulations prior to the issuance of a business license by the city. 
(Code 1998, § 38-159; Ord. No. 21-95, § 9-1-3(a), 12-4-1995) 
Sec. 16-133. - Tax schedule. 
The tax rate shall be determined by the number of employees for each business, trade, profession, or occupation and will be developed and updated from time to time by the General Government Administration Department and approved by City Council. The rates shall be as provided in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the Office of the General Government Administration Department. 
(Code 1998, § 38-160; Ord. No. 21-95, § 9-1-3(b), 12-4-1995) 
Sec. 16-134. - Professionals. 
Practitioners of professions as described in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1) through (18) shall elect as their entire occupation tax one of the following: 
(1)  The occupation tax based on number of employees as set forth in section 16-133. 
(2)  A fee per practitioner who is licensed to provide the service as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges, such tax to be paid at the practitioner's office or location. The per-practitioner fee applies to each person in the business who qualifies as a practitioner under the state's regulatory guidelines and framework. 
This election is to be made on an annual basis and must be done by March 31 of each year. 
(Code 1998, § 38-161; Ord. No. 21-95, § 9-1-3(c), 12-4-1995) 
Sec. 16-135. - Administration of article. 
(a)  The General Government Administration Department shall administer the provisions of this article involving the application for and issuance of occupational taxes, administrative fees, and regulatory fees, unless otherwise provided in this Code. 
(b)  Appeals from any decision of the General Government Administration Department shall be made to the Mayor and Council by any person aggrieved thereby in the manner provided in this Code. 
(Code 1998, § 38-162; Ord. No. 21-95, § 9-1-4, 12-4-1995) 
Sec. 16-136. - Application; fee structure; occupation tax structure. 
(a)  All applications for a business license shall be on forms prepared and approved by the General Government Administration Department Head and shall be entitled "City of Norcross Occupation Tax Application." 
(b)  A nonprorated, nonrefundable administrative fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges shall be required on all business and occupation tax accounts for the initial start-up, renewal, or reopening of those accounts. 
(c)  A regulatory fee will be imposed as provided under O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9 on those applicable businesses. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee. A schedule of regulatory fees adopted by the City Council is on file at the Office of the General Government Administration Department and are available to the public. 
(Code 1998, § 38-163; Ord. No. 21-95, § 9-1-5, 12-4-1995) 
Sec. 16-137. - Paying occupation tax of business with no location in state. 
Registration and assessment of an occupation tax is hereby imposed on those businesses and practitioners of professions with no location or office in the state if the business's largest dollar volume of business in the state is in the city and if the business or practitioner: 
(1)  Has one or more employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within the jurisdiction of the city for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients; or 
(2)  Owns personal or real property which generates income which is located within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Code 1998, § 38-164; Ord. No. 21-95, § 9-1-5, 12-4-1995) 
Sec. 16-138. - Practitioners exclusively practicing for a government. 
Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, instrumentalities of the United States, the state, or a municipality or county of the state shall not be required to obtain a license or pay an occupation tax for that practice. 
(Code 1998, § 38-165; Ord. No. 21-95, § 9-1-7, 12-4-1995) 
Sec. 16-139. - Purpose and scope of tax. 
The occupation tax levied in this article is for revenue purposes only and is not for regulatory purposes, nor is the payment of the tax made a condition precedent to the practice of any such profession, trade, or calling. The occupation tax only applies to those businesses and occupations which are covered by the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-5 through 48-13-26. All other applicable businesses and occupations are taxed by the local government pursuant to the pertinent general and/or local law and ordinances. In the case of those practitioners where the local government cannot suspend the right of the practitioner to conduct business, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1) through (18), the imposition of civil penalties shall be permitted and pursued by the city in the case of delinquent occupation tax and the penalties provided for in section 16-147 shall not apply in the case where the practitioner has a delinquent occupation tax. 
(Code 1998, § 38-166; Ord. No. 21-95, § 9-1-8, 12-4-1995; Ord. No. 06-97, 4-7-1997) 
Sec. 16-140. - When due and payable; effect of transacting business when delinquent; proration. 
(a)  Each such registration and occupation tax shall be due and payable annually. Such registration and occupation tax shall be payable January 1 of each year and shall, if not paid by March 31 of each year, be subject to a ten percent penalty. Delinquent fees shall be collected pursuant to the collection mechanisms provided in section 16-3. 
(b)  On any new profession, trade, or calling in the city, the registration shall be delinquent if not obtained within five days of opening for business and the tax shall be due and payable within 30 days following the commencement of business. If the registration and/or tax are not paid when due, then there shall be assessed a penalty of ten percent of the amount of the tax due. 
(c)  Except to the extent otherwise provided for in this article, any person transacting or offering to transact in the city any business, trade, profession, or occupation without first having obtained registration under this article shall be subject to the penalties provided in this Code. Such penalties shall be in addition to all other penalties, civil and criminal, herein provided; and may be collected by the remedies herein provided for collection of the occupation tax, and shall have the same lien and priority as the occupation tax to which the penalty is applied. 
(d)  In addition to the above remedies, the City Manager may proceed to collect in the same manner as provided by law for tax executions. 
(e)  Any new business, trade, profession or occupation registering for an occupational tax after July 1 of each year shall be charged one-half of the annual occupation tax imposed on such business, trade, profession or occupation. 
(Code 1998, § 38-167; Ord. No. 21-95, § 9-1-9, 12-4-1995; Ord. No. 06-97, 4-7-1997) 
Sec. 16-141. - Display of registrations. 
All persons shall exhibit and display all registrations issued to them under this article in some conspicuous place in their business establishment at which address the registration was issued. Any transient or nonresidential person doing business within the city shall carry the registration either upon his person or in any vehicle or other conveyance which is used in the business and the person shall exhibit the same to any authorized enforcement or police officer. 
(Code 1998, § 38-168; Ord. No. 21-95, § 9-1-10, 12-4-1995) 
Sec. 16-142. - Allocation of tax for businesses with multiple intrastate or interstate locations. 
For those businesses that have multiple locations inside and outside of the city, only the number of employees who work in the city will be counted for taxing purposes. 
(Code 1998, § 38-169; Ord. No. 21-95, § 9-1-11, 12-4-1995) 
Sec. 16-143. - Exemption on grounds that business is operated for charitable purpose. 
No business on which a business registration or occupation tax is levied by this article shall be exempt from the registration or tax on the grounds that such business is operated for a charitable purpose, unless 50 percent or more of the entire proceeds from such business are devoted to such purpose. 
(Code 1998, § 38-170; Ord. No. 21-95, § 9-1-12, 12-4-1995) 
Sec. 16-144. - Evidence of state registration required if applicable; state registration to be displayed. 
(a)  Each person who is licensed by the secretary of state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 43-1-1 et seq. shall provide evidence of proper and current state license before the city registration may be issued. 
(b)  Each person who is licensed by the state shall post the state license in a conspicuous place in the licensee's place of business and shall keep the license there at all times while the license remains valid. 
(Code 1998, § 38-171; Ord. No. 21-95, § 9-1-13, 12-4-1995) 
Sec. 16-145. - Evidence of qualification required if applicable. 
Any business required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency, or any other regulatory matter shall first, before the issuance of a business registration, show evidence that such requirements have been met. 
(Code 1998, § 38-172; Ord. No. 21-95, § 9-1-14, 12-4-1995) 
Sec. 16-146. - Liability of officers and agents; registration required; failure to obtain. 
All persons subject to the occupation tax levy pursuant to this article shall be required to obtain the necessary registration for such business as described in this article, and in default thereof. Except as specifically otherwise provided for the professions listed under section 16-139, the officer or agent soliciting for or representing such persons shall be subject to the same penalty as other persons who fail to obtain a registration. Except to the extent otherwise provided for in this article, every person commencing business after January 1 of each year shall likewise obtain the registration provided for in this section before commencing such business. Any person transacting, or offering to transact, any of the kinds of business, trade, profession or occupation without first having so obtained such registration shall be subject to penalties provided in this article for such business, trade, profession or occupation. 
(Code 1998, § 38-173; Ord. No. 21-95, § 9-1-15, 12-4-1995; Ord. No. 06-97, 4-7-1997) 
Sec. 16-147. - Penalty for violation. 
Except to the extent otherwise provided for in this article, any person violating any provisions of this article shall, upon conviction before the municipal judge, be fined in an amount not exceeding $1,000.00 or imprisoned not exceeding 30 days, either or both, in the discretion of the municipal judge. 
(Code 1998, § 38-174; Ord. No. 21-95, § 9-1-16, 12-4-1995; Ord. No. 06-97, 4-7-1997) 
Sec. 16-148. - Businesses not covered by this article. 
The following businesses are not covered by the provisions of this article but may be assessed an occupation tax or other type of tax pursuant to the provisions of other general laws of the state or by local law: 
(1)  Those businesses regulated by the state public service commission. 
(2)  Those electrical service businesses organized under O.C.G.A. § 46-3-1 et seq. 
(3)  Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including agribusiness. 
(4)  Cooperative marketing associations governed by O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105. 
(5)  Insurance companies governed by O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8 et seq. See article VI of this chapter. 
(6)  Motor common carriers governed by O.C.G.A. § 46-7-15. 
(7)  Those businesses governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355. (Businesses that purchase carload lots of guano, meats, meal, flour, bran, cottonseed, or cottonseed meal and hulls.) 
(8)  Agricultural products and livestock raised in the state governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356. 
(9)  Depository financial institutions governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 
(10)  Facilities operated by a charitable trust governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-55. 
(Code 1998, § 38-175; Ord. No. 21-95, § 9-1-17, 12-4-1995) 
Sec. 16-149. - More than one place or line of business. 
Where a business is operated at more than one place or where the business includes more than one line, such business will pay an occupation tax in accordance with the prevailing taxing method and tax rate for the dominant line at each location. 
(Code 1998, § 38-176; Ord. No. 21-95, § 9-1-18, 12-4-1995) 
Sec. 16-150. - Returns confidential. 
Except in the case of judicial proceedings or other proceedings necessary to collect the occupation tax levied by this article, it shall be unlawful for any officer, employee, agent, or clerk of the city, or any other person to divulge or make known in any manner any particulars set forth or disclosed in any occupation tax return required under this article. All contents of such return shall be confidential and open only to the officials, employees, agents, or clerks of the city using such returns for the purpose of this occupation tax levy and the collection of the tax. Independent auditors or bookkeepers employed by the city shall be classed as employees. Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the publication by city officials of statistics, so classified as to prevent the identification of particular reports or returns and items thereof; or the inspection of the records by duly qualified employees of the tax departments of the state, the United States, and other local governments. 
(Code 1998, § 38-177; Ord. No. 21-95, § 9-1-19, 12-4-1995) 
Sec. 16-151. - Inspection of books and records. 
In any case the General Government Administration Department of the city, through its officers, agents, employees, or representative, may inspect the books of the business or person for which the returns are made. The General Government Administration Department shall have the right to inspect the books or records for the business or person of which the return was made in the city, and upon demand such books or records shall be submitted for inspection by a representative of the city within 30 days. Except to the extent otherwise provided for in this article, failure of submission of such books or records within 30 days shall be grounds for revocation of the tax registration currently existing to do business in the city. Adequate records shall be kept in the city, for examination by the General Government Administration Department Head or his designee for examination at that officer's discretion. If, after examination of the books or records, it is determined that a deficiency occurs as a result of underreporting, a penalty of 125 percent of the prime interest rate times the amount deficient will be assessed for the period delinquent. For purposes of this section, the prime interest rate shall be that which is published by The Wall Street Journal on the first business day of the year in which the underreporting is identified. 
(Code 1998, § 38-178; Ord. No. 21-95, § 9-1-20, 12-4-1995; Ord. No. 06-97, 4-7-1997) 
Sec. 16-152. - Tax registration to be revoked for failure to pay tax, file returns, permit inspection of books. 
Except to the extent otherwise provided for in this article, upon the failure of any business to pay the occupation tax or any part thereof before it becomes delinquent, or upon failure to make any of such returns within the time required herein, or upon failure to make a true return, or upon failure to amend a return to set forth the truth, or upon failure to permit inspection of its books as provided in section 16-151, any business tax registration granted by the city under this article permitting the owner of such business to do business for the current year shall be, ipso facto, revoked. No new business tax registration shall be granted by the city for the operation of a business for which any part of the occupation tax herein provided for is at that time unpaid, or to a person who has failed to submit adequate records as requested by the General Government Administration Department in accordance with the provisions of section 16-151. In the case of those practitioners where the local government cannot suspend the right of the practitioner to conduct business, the imposition of civil penalties shall be permitted and pursued by the local government in the case of delinquent occupation tax. 
(Code 1998, § 38-179; Ord. No. 21-95, § 9-1-21, 12-4-1995; Ord. No. 06-97, 4-7-1997) 
Sec. 16-153. - Effect of failure to comply with article; continuing in business after tax registration revocation. 
Any persons, their managers, agents, or employees, who do business in the city after the registration for such business has been revoked, hereby required to make occupation tax returns, and who fail to make such returns within the time and in the manner herein provided, who refuse to amend such returns so as to set forth the truth, or who shall make false returns shall be subject to the penalties herein. Any person who refuses to permit an inspection of books in their charge when the officers, agents, employees, or representatives of the city request such inspection, during business hours, for the purpose of determining the accuracy of the returns herein provided for, shall be subject to penalties provided herein. In the case of those practitioners where the local government cannot suspend the right of the practitioner to conduct business, the imposition of civil penalties shall be permitted and pursued by the local government in the case of delinquent occupation tax. These penalties may consist of either a percentage of the amount due or a flat fee fine. 
(Code 1998, § 38-180; Ord. No. 21-95, § 9-1-22, 12-4-1995) 
Sec. 16-154. - Requirement of public hearing before tax increase. 
In any year when revenue from occupation taxes is greater than revenue from occupation taxes for the preceding year, the city shall conduct a public hearing as part of the process of determining how to use the additional revenue. 
(Code 1998, § 38-181; Ord. No. 21-95, § 9-1-23, 12-4-1995) 
Sec. 16-155. - Revocation of registration. 
Except to the extent otherwise provided for in this article, if any holder of an occupation tax registration is engaged in unlawful activities including the operation of the business, including violations of laws of the state, appropriate county or municipal ordinances, applicable zoning regulations, or applicable heating, electrical, health or building codes, the registration may be revoked. Where it is reported to the General Government Administration Department that a holder of a city registration is engaged in unlawful activities, a preliminary investigation shall be conducted by the General Government Administration Department in order to attempt to determine whether there is a basis for the reports. If the preliminary investigation reveals that there may be a basis for revocation or suspension of the registration, the registrant will be notified to appear before the Mayor and Council and show cause why his registration should not be revoked or suspended. The registrant may appear in person at the hearing or be represented by counsel. At the conclusion of the hearing, the Mayor and Council, based upon evidence submitted at the hearing, shall enter an order making a finding of fact and then: 
(1)  Find that the evidence does not authorize revocation or suspension; 
(2)  Issue a warning to registrant; 
(3)  Suspend registration and probate suspension; 
(4)  Revoke registration and probate revocation; 
(5)  Suspend registration; 
(6)  Revoke registration; or 
(7)  Take any other appropriate action regarding licensee. 
(Code 1998, § 38-182; Ord. No. 21-95, § 9-1-24, 12-4-1995; Ord. No. 06-97, 4-7-1997) 
Sec. 16-156. - Enforcement. 
The General Government Administration Department shall issue executions for the collection of all outstanding and unpaid taxes imposed and assessed by this article. The unpaid taxes and executions shall be collected in the manner provided by law for the collection of other taxes due to the city. 
(Code 1979, § 3-2-20; Code 1998, § 38-183) 
Secs. 16-157—16-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - INSURERS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— General assembly authorized to provide for taxation of insurance companies based on gross direct premiums received from insurance policies within the unincorporated areas of counties, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV, ¶ I(c); powers of municipal corporations to impose license fees on life insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8; local tax on life insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1; local tax on other than life insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. 

Sec. 16-181. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Gross direct premiums means gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. 
Insurer means a company which is authorized to transact business in any of the classes of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5. 
(Code 1979, § 3-2-18(a); Code 1998, § 38-216) 
Sec. 16-182. - License fees—Levied upon each insurer; each separate business location. 
There is hereby levied for each year an annual license fee upon each insurer doing business within the city pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8(b)(1) in the amount provided in the schedule of fees and charges. For each separate business location in excess of one not covered by section 16-183, which is operating on behalf of such insurers within the city, there is hereby levied a license fee as provided in the schedule of fees and charges. 
(Code 1979, § 3-2-18(a); Code 1998, § 38-217) 
Sec. 16-183. - Same—Insurers insuring certain risks at additional business locations. 
For each separate business location, not otherwise subject to a license fee under this article, operated and maintained by a business organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing and in connection with such loans or sales offers, solicits or takes application for insurance through a licensed agent of an insurer for insurance, such insurer shall pay an additional fee pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8(b)(2) as provided in the schedule of fees and charges, per location for each year. 
(Code 1979, § 3-2-18(b); Code 1998, § 38-218) 
Sec. 16-184. - Same—Agencies; brokers. 
There is hereby levied for each year an annual license fee upon independent agencies and brokers for each separate business location from which an insurance business is conducted and which is not subject to the company license fee imposed by section 16-182 a license fee pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8(b)(1) as provided in the schedule of fees and charges, per location for each year. 
(Code 1979, § 3-2-18(c); Code 1998, § 38-219) 
Sec. 16-185. - Same—Due date. 
License fees imposed under the provisions of this article shall be due and payable on January 1 of each year. 
(Code 1979, § 3-2-18(f); Code 1998, § 38-220) 
Sec. 16-186. - Gross premiums tax—Imposed on life, accident and sickness insurers. 
There is hereby levied for each year an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer writing life, accident and sickness insurance within the state in an amount equal to one percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 16-182. 
(Code 1979, § 3-2-18(d); Code 1998, § 38-221) 
Sec. 16-187. - Same—All other insurers. 
There is hereby levied for each year an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer, other than an insurer transacting business in the class of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5(1), doing business within the city in an amount equal to 2.5 percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 16-182. 
(Code 1979, § 3-2-18(e); Code 1998, § 38-222) 
Secs. 16-188—16-212. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Local depository financial institutions business license tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 

Sec. 16-213. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Gross receipts has the same meaning as is ascribed to the term "gross receipts" for each such depository financial institution in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 
(Code 1979, § 3-2-19(b); Code 1998, § 38-261) 
Sec. 16-214. - Tax levied. 
(a)  Pursuant to the authority contained in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93 there is levied for each year, upon each state and national bank, each federal savings and loan association, and each state building and loan association located in the city, not exempted by state law, an annual business license tax at the rate of 0.25 percent of the gross receipts of each such institution, or $1,000.00, per annum, whichever amount is greater. 
(b)  The taxes levied by subsection (a) of this section for each year shall be levied on the amount of gross receipts received by each such depository financial institution during the immediately preceding calendar year. 
(Code 1979, § 3-2-19(a); Code 1998, § 38-262) 
Sec. 16-215. - Calculation of gross receipts. 
(a)  Banks. Items to be included in the calculation of gross receipts with respect to banks are as follows: 
(1)  Interest and fees on loans, less any interest collected on those portions of loans sold and serviced for others; 
(2)  Interest on balances with other depository financial institutions; 
(3)  Interest on federal or correspondent funds sold and securities purchased under agreements of resale; 
(4)  Interest on other bonds, notes and debentures, excluding interest on obligations in the state or its political subdivisions and obligations on the United States; 
(5)  Dividends on stocks; 
(6)  Income from direct lease financing; 
(7)  Income from fiduciary activities; 
(8)  Service charges on deposit accounts; 
(9)  Other service charges, commissions, and fees; and 
(10)  Other income. 
(b)  Savings and loans. Items to be included in the calculation of gross receipts with respect to savings and loan associations are as follows: 
(1)  Interest on mortgage loans less any interest collected on those portions of loans sold in service for others; 
(2)  Interest on mortgages, participations, or mortgage-backed securities; 
(3)  Interest on real estate sold on contract; 
(4)  Discounts on mortgage loans purchased; 
(5)  Interest on other loans, excluding interest on obligations of the state or its political subdivisions and obligations of the United States; 
(6)  Interest and dividends on investments and deposits; 
(7)  Loan fees; 
(8)  Other fees and charges; 
(9)  Gross income from real estate owned operations; 
(10)  Net income from office building operation; 
(11)  Gross income from real estate held for investment; 
(12)  Net income from service corporations and subsidiaries; 
(13)  Miscellaneous operating income; 
(14)  Profit on sale of real estate owned, investment securities, loans and other assets; and 
(15)  Miscellaneous nonoperating income. 
(c)  Deductions. The following items shall be deducted from gross receipts calculated pursuant to subsections (a) and (b) of this section: 
(1)  An amount equal to the amount of interest paid on all liabilities for the period; 
(2)  An amount equal to income derived from the authorized activities of any domestic international banking facility operating pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 7-1-730 et seq.; 
(3)  An amount equal to any income arising from the conduct of a banking business with persons or entities located outside of the United States, its territories or possessions; 
(4)  An amount equal to a depository financial institution's gross income which is taxed under the tax laws of a state other than Georgia; and 
(5)  To the extent that any deductions are made pursuant to subsections (c)(2), (3) and (4) of this section, any deductions taken under subsection (c)(1) of this section shall be reduced by the same proportion that the deductions in subsections (c)(2) through (4) of this section bear to the gross receipts of the depository financial institution as calculated before making any deductions pursuant to subsections (c)(1) through (4) of this section. 
(Code 1979, § 3-2-19(b); Code 1998, § 38-263) 
Sec. 16-216. - Returns. 
Each depository financial institution subject to the tax levied by this article shall file with the city not later than March 1 of each year a return of its gross receipts received by it during the immediately preceding calendar year. The returns shall be made in the manner and in the form prescribed by the commissioner of the department of banking and shall be based on the allocation method set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(d). The tax levied pursuant to this article shall be assessed and collected based upon the information provided in the return. 
(Code 1979, § 3-2-19(c); Code 1998, § 38-264) 
Sec. 16-217. - When taxes due and payable. 
The taxes levied by this article shall be due and payable on April 1 of each year. 
(Code 1979, § 3-2-19(c)(2); Code 1998, § 38-265) 
Secs. 16-218—16-242. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - TELEPHONE COMPANIES 

Sec. 16-243. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Recurring local service revenues means: 
(1)  Monthly charges for local exchange service, including: 
a.  Charges for additional listings and joint users; 
b.  The guarantee portion of the charge for semipublic pay station services; 
c.  Charges for local message rate service, including mobile service messages; and 
d.  Subscriber station revenues from teletypewriter exchange service. 
(2)  Charges for Morse transmission, signaling, data transmission, metering and supervisory control, where both terminal points are within the city limits. 
(3)  All charges for local private line services (except audio and video program transmission service) where both terminals of the private line are within the city limits. 
Nothing in this definition shall preclude the charging of a separate franchise fee or tax for the transmission of audio or video programs to customers. 
(Code 1979, § 3-2-17; Code 1998, § 38-296; Ord. No. 2-95, 4-3-1995) 
Sec. 16-244. - Franchise fee imposed. 
Notwithstanding the provisions in this article to the contrary, each telephone company operating in the city shall pay a franchise fee in the amount of three percent of the recurring local service revenues received by the company from subscribers located within the city. 
(Code 1979, § 3-2-17(a); Code 1998, § 38-297; Ord. No. 2-95, 4-3-1995) 
Sec. 16-245. - Payment. 
The franchise fee shall be paid in quarterly installments, each of which shall be due on or before the last day the second month following the end of each calendar quarter and shall be based on recurring local service revenues billed during such calendar quarter. 
(Code 1979, § 3-2-17(a); Code 1998, § 38-298; Ord. No. 2-95, 4-3-1995) 
Secs. 16-246—16-268. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - MALT BEVERAGE, WINE, AND DISTILLED SPIRITS EXCISE TAXES[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference— Excise tax on distilled spirits per package, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-80; excise tax on distilled spirits per drink, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-130; excise tax on malt beverages required, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-80; excise tax on wine, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-60. 

Sec. 16-269. - Malt beverage excise taxes. 
The local excise tax on malt beverages provided by O.C.G.A. § 3-5-80 is hereby imposed in the city. The payment, collection and procedures related to such excise tax on malt beverages shall be the same as those provided by state law for malt beverages. 
(Code 1979, § 3-2-31; Code 1998, § 38-331) 
Sec. 16-270. - Wine excise taxes. 
The local excise tax on wine provided by O.C.G.A. § 3-6-60 is hereby imposed in the city. The payment, collection and procedures related to such excise tax on wine shall be the same as those provided by state law for wine. 
(Code 1998, § 38-332; Mo. of 4-12-1982) 
Sec. 16-271. - Distilled spirits per package excise taxes. 
There is hereby levied an excise tax computed at the rate of $0.22 per liter or $0.65 per ounce which shall be paid to the governing authority on all distilled spirits sold by the package by wholesalers to retailers in the city. Such tax shall be paid to the Tax and Licensing Manager by the wholesale distributor on all distilled spirits sold to the licensees for the sale of distilled spirits in the city as follows: each wholesaler selling, shipping, or in any way delivering distilled spirits to any licensee hereunder, shall collect the excise tax at the time of delivery and shall remit the same together with a summary of all deliveries to each licensee on or before the tenth day of the month following. Excise taxes received in the General Government Administration Department after the 20th day of the month shall be charged a ten percent penalty. The $0.22 per liter or $0.65 per ounce shall be prorated so that all containers of distilled spirits shall be taxed on the basis of $0.22 per liter or $0.65 per ounce. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this section for any wholesaler to sell, ship or deliver in any manner any distilled spirits to a retail dealer without collecting said tax. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this section for any retail dealer to possess, own, hold, store, display or sell any distilled spirits on which such tax has not been paid. Each wholesaler shall be paid three percent of the amount of taxes collected as reimbursement for collection of the said tax. 
(Ord. No. 07-2003, 7-7-2003; Ord. No. 10-2003, § 38-333, 8-4-2003) 
Sec. 16-272. - Distilled spirits per drink excise tax. 
(a)  Every purchaser of distilled spirits by the drink shall be liable for a tax thereon at the rate of three percent of the retail price or charge for such drink. Such taxes shall be collected by the licensee hereunder and such licensee shall remit the same to the city on or before the tenth day of the succeeding month along with a summary of the licensee's gross sales derived from the sale of distilled spirits by the drink. Gross sales shall include all credit card sales and shall be reported and taxes collected thereon shall be submitted to the Tax And Licensing Manager to the same extent as required of cash sales. Each licensee shall be allowed a deduction equal to that rate authorized for deductions from state tax under part V of the Georgia Retailer's and Consumer's Sale and Use Tax Act, O.C.G.A. § 48-8-50, as now written or hereafter amended; provided that said tax is not delinquent at the time of payment. It shall be the duty of every such licensee required to make a report and pay any tax levied hereunder, to keep and preserve suitable records of the sales taxable hereunder, and such other books or accounts as may be necessary to determine the amount of tax due; and it shall be the duty of every licensee to keep and preserve such records for a period of three years. 
(b)  Excise taxes received in the General Government Administration Department after the 20th day of the month shall be charged a ten percent penalty. 
(c)  In the event the Tax and Licensing Manager deems it necessary to conduct an audit of the records and books of the licensee, such Manager will notify the licensee of the date, time and place of the audit. 
(Ord. No. 10-2003, § 38-334, 8-4-2003) 
Sec. 16-273. - Brewpub excise tax. 
There is hereby levied an excise tax on all beer and malt beverage produced by a brewpub at the rate of $6.00 per one-half barrel (15½ gallons) and $12.00 per barrel (31 gallons). Such tax shall be paid to the General Government Administration Department no later than the 20th day of each month for the preceding month's production. A late payment penalty not to exceed ten percent of the tax otherwise due shall be added to the amount due for any payment not received by the due date. 
(Ord. No. 10-2003, § 38-335, 8-4-2003) 
Secs. 16-274—16-294. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - HOTEL AND MOTEL OCCUPANCY TAXES[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference— Municipalities authorized to impose, levy, and collect excise tax on hotels, motels, lodgings and accommodations, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50 et seq. 

Sec. 16-295. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases are for the purpose of this article and except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, defined as follows: 
General Government Administration Department Head means the General Government Administration Department Head of the city. 
Guestroom means a room occupied, or intended, arranged or designed for occupancy by one or more occupants. 
Hotel means any structure or any portion of a structure, including any lodginghouse, roominghouse, dormitory, Turkish bath, bachelor hotel, studio hotel, hotel, motel, auto court, inn, public club or private club, containing guestrooms and which is occupied, or is intended or designed for occupancy, by guests, whether rent is paid in money, goods, labor or otherwise. It does not include any jail, hospital, asylum, sanitarium, orphanage, prison, detention or other buildings in which human beings are housed or detained under legal restraint. 
Occupancy means the use or possession, or the right to use or possession, of any room or apartment in a hotel or the right to use or possession of the furnishings or to the services and accommodations accompanying the use and possession of the room. 
Occupant means any person who, for a consideration, uses, possesses or has the right to use or possess any room in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license to use or other agreement, or otherwise. However, the term occupant shall not include state or local government officials or employees when traveling on official business, and who occupy rooms in any hotel as defined in this chapter for a period of one or more days. 
Operator means any person operating a hotel in the city, including, but not limited to, the owner or proprietor of these premises, lessee, sublessees, mortgagee in possession, licensee or any other person otherwise operating that hotel. 
Permanent resident means any occupant as of a given date who has or shall have occupied, or has or shall have the right of occupancy, of any guestroom in a hotel for at least ten consecutive days next preceding that date. 
Person means an individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate or other group or combination acting as a unit excepting the United States of America, the state, and any political subdivision of either thereof upon which the city is without power to impose the tax herein provided. 
Quarterly period means the quarter of any year as follows: The first quarter being composed of the months of January, February and March; the second quarter being the months of April, May and June; the third quarter being the months of July, August and September, and the fourth quarter being the months of October, November and December. 
Rent means the consideration received for occupancy valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property or services of any kind or nature, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the operator to the occupant, without any deduction therefrom. 
Return means any return filed or required to be filed as herein provided. 
Tax means the tax imposed by this article. 
(Code 1998, § 38-351; Ord. No. 04-99, 3-1-1999) 
Sec. 16-296. - Imposition and rate of tax. 
(a)  [Tax rate.] There is hereby levied and assessed, and there shall be paid a tax of seven percent of the rent for every occupancy of a guestroom in a hotel in the city. Excluded are rooms furnished for more than 30 consecutive days and meeting rooms. The tax shall be paid upon any occupancy, whether this occupancy is had pursuant to a contract, lease or other arrangement. Where rent is paid, or charged or billed, or falls due on either a weekly, monthly or other term basis, the rent so paid, charged, billed or falling due shall be subject to the tax, and this payment, bill, charge, or rent due shall be apportioned on the basis of the ratio of the number of days covered thereby. Where any tax has been paid therefor, the General Government Administration Department head may, by regulation, provide for credit or refund of the amount of that tax upon application therefor as provided in section 16-301. 
(b)  Effective date. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(g)(1), the increase in the tax rate shall become effective on the first day of September, 2009, the first day of the second month following the passage of Ordinance No. 15-2009. 
(c)  Allocation of tax. 
(1)  Three-sevenths of the total taxes collected from the new seven percent hotel/motel tax rate shall be allocated to the City General Fund to be used for marketing purposes to benefit the City and its citizens. 
(2)  Four-sevenths of the total taxes collected from the new seven percent hotel/motel tax rate shall fund "tourism product development" of which not less than two-sevenths of the total taxes collected from the new seven percent hotel/motel tax rate shall be expended for the promotion of tourism, conventions, and trade shows through funding a contract to be subsequently negotiated between the City and the Gwinnett Convention and Visitor's Bureau as the City's "designated marketing organization" as that term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50.2(1). 
(d)  Contract with the Gwinnett Convention and Visitors Bureau. The Mayor and Council of the City hereby direct the City Manager to negotiate and prepare a contract between the City and the Gwinnett Convention and Visitor's Bureau as the City's "designated marketing organization" as that term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50.2(1). Staff shall present such negotiated contract to the mayor and council may vote on whether to enter into such contract prior to September 1, 2009. 
(Code 1998, § 38-352; Ord. No. 04-99, 3-1-1999; Ord. No. 15-2009, pts. II—V, 9-14-2009; Ord. No. 15-2012, 6-4-2012) 
Sec. 16-297. - Persons liable for tax; extinguishment of liability. 
Every person occupying a guestroom in a hotel in this city is liable for the tax. His liability is not extinguished until the tax has been paid to the city except that a receipt from an operator maintaining a place of business in this city or from an operator who is authorized by the General Government Administration Department Head, under such rules and regulations as she may prescribe, to collect the tax and who is, for the purposes of this article, regarded as an operator maintaining a place of business in this city, which receipt is given to the occupant pursuant to section 16-298 hereof, is sufficient to relieve the occupant from further liability for the tax to which the receipt refers. 
(Code 1998, § 38-353; Ord. No. 04-99, 3-1-1999) 
Sec. 16-298. - Collection of tax by operator; receipt of occupant; rules for collections schedules. 
Every operator maintaining a place of business in the city as provided in section 16-297, and renting guestrooms in the city, not exempted under section 16-300 shall, at the time of collecting the rent from the occupant, and on demand shall give the occupant a receipt therefor. In all cases of transactions upon credit or deferred payment, the payment of tax to the operator shall be liable therefor at the time and to the extent that these credits are incurred in accordance with the rate of tax owing on the amount thereof. The General Government Administration Department Head shall have the power to adopt rules and regulations prescribing methods and schedules for the collection and payment of tax. 
(Code 1998, § 38-354; Ord. No. 04-99, 3-1-1999) 
Sec. 16-299. - Unlawful advertising regarding tax. 
It is unlawful for any operator to advertise or hold out or state to the public or to any guest, directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator or that it will not be added to the rental of the guestroom, or that, if added, it or any part thereof will be refunded. 
(Code 1998, § 38-355; Ord. No. 04-99, 3-1-1999) 
Sec. 16-300. - Exemptions. 
No tax shall be imposed hereunder: 
(1)  Upon a permanent resident; or 
(2)  Upon a corporation or association organized and operated exclusively for religious, charitable or educational purposes, or for one or more such purposes, no part of the net earnings of which inures to the benefit of any private shareholder or individual. 
(Code 1998, § 38-356; Ord. No. 04-99, 3-1-1999) 
Sec. 16-301. - Registration of operator; form and contents; execution; certificate of authority. 
(a)  Every person engaging or about to engage in business as an operator of a hotel in the city shall immediately register with the General Government Administration Department Head on a form provided by the Department head. Persons engaged in this business must so register no later than 15 days after the date the tax becomes effective and is imposed as set forth in section 16-296, but the privilege of registration imposed after the imposition of the tax shall not relieve any person from the obligation of payment or collection of tax on and after the date of imposition thereof, regardless of registration. This registration shall set forth the name under which the person transacts business or intends to transact business, the location of his places of business and such other information to facilitate the collection of the tax as the General Government Administration Department Head may require. The registration shall be signed by the owner if a natural person; in the case of an association or partnership, by a member or partner; in the case of a corporation, by an executive officer or some person specifically authorized by the corporation to sign the registration. The Department head shall, after this registration, issue without charge a certificate of authority to each registrant to collect the tax from the occupant. A separate registration shall be required for each place of business of an operator. Each certificate shall state the name and location of the business to which it is applicable and shall be prominently displayed therein so as to be seen and come readily to the notice of all occupants and persons seeking occupancy. This certificate shall be nonassignable and nontransferable and shall be returned immediately to the Department head upon the cessation of business at that location named or upon the sale or transfer of the business at that location. 
(b)  If the General Government Administration Department Head deems it necessary in order to facilitate initial registration hereunder of persons engaged in business or prior to the date of imposition of tax as set forth in this article, she may prescribe provisions therefor other than those provided in this section. Those provisions shall be made to effect the purposes of this article. For those purposes, those provisions shall be in lieu of those provided herein. The registration and the certificate thereof shall have the same effect as that provided herein. 
(Code 1998, § 38-357; Ord. No. 04-99, 3-1-1999) 
Sec. 16-302. - Determinations, returns and payments. 
(a)  Due date of taxes. The tax shall become due and payable from the occupant at the time of occupancy of any hotel in this city. All amounts of these taxes collected by any operator are due and payable to the Department head quarterly on or before April 30, July 31, October 31 and January next succeeding each respective quarterly period as set forth in section 16-295. 
(b)  Return; time of filing persons required to file; execution. On or before the last day of the month following each quarterly period of three months, a return for the preceding quarterly period shall be filed with the General Government Administration Department Head in such form as he may prescribe, by every operator and by every person liable to payment of tax hereunder during that quarterly period who has not paid the tax, and made return in regard to the related occupation which is the subject of the tax. 
(c)  Contents of return. All returns shall show the gross rent, rent from permanent residents, taxable rent, amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the related period and such other information as required by the General Government Administration Department Head. 
(d)  Delivery of return and remittance. The person required to file the return shall deliver the return, together with the remittance of the net amount of tax due, to the General Government Administration Department Head. 
(e)  Collection fee allowed operators. Operators collecting the tax shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and paying the amount due, if the amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be the same rate authorized for deductions from state tax under the Georgia Retailers' and Consumers' Sales and Use Tax Act, approved February 20, 1951, (Ga. Laws 1951, page 360), as now or hereafter amended. 
(f)  Extension of time for filing a return and paying tax. For a good cause the General Government Administration Department Head may extend for a period not to exceed one month, the time for making any return or payment of tax. No further extension of time may be granted. Any person to whom an extension, of time has been granted, who makes a return and pays the tax within the period of extension shall pay in addition to the tax, interest on the amount thereof at the rate of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, for a period of this extension to the time of return and payment. 
(Code 1998, § 38-358; Ord. No. 04-99, 3-1-1999) 
Sec. 16-303. - Deficiency determinations. 
(a)  Recomputation of tax; authority to make; basis of recomputation. If the General Government Administration Department Head is not satisfied with the returns of the tax or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the city by any person, he may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information within his possession or that may come into his possession. One or more than one deficiency determination may be made of the amount due for one or more than one period. 
(b)  Interest on deficiency. The amount of the determination, exclusive of penalties, shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, from the 15th day after the close of the quarterly period for which the amount or any portion thereof should have been returned until the date of payment. 
(c)  Offsetting of overpayments. In making a determination, the General Government Administration Department Head may offset overpayments for periods against underpayments for another period, against penalties and against the interest on underpayments. The interest on underpayments shall be computed in the manner set forth in section 16-304(c). 
(d)  Penalty; negligence or disregard of rules and regulations. If any part of the deficiency for which a deficiency determination has been made is due to fraud or an intent to evade this article or other authorized rules and regulations, a penalty of 15 percent of the amount of this deficiency shall be added thereto. 
(e)  Penalty for fraud or intent to evade. If any part of the deficiency for which a deficiency determination is made is due to fraud or an intent to evade any provisions of this article or other authorized rules and regulations, a penalty of 25 percent of the deficiency shall be added thereto. 
(f)  Notice of General Government Administration Department Head's determination; service. The General Government Administration Department Head, or his designated representative, shall give the operator written notice of his determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail. If by mail, the notice shall be addressed to the operator at his address as it appears in the records of the General Government Administration Department Head. In case of service by mail of any notice required by this article, the service is complete at the time of deposit in the United States post office. 
(g)  Time within which notice of deficiency determination to be mailed. Except in the case of fraud, intent to evade this article or authorized rules or regulations, or failure to make a return, every notice of deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the 15th day of the calendar month following the quarterly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period should last expire. 
(Code 1998, § 38-359; Ord. No. 04-99, 3-1-1999) 
Sec. 16-304. - Determination if no return made. 
(a)  Estimate of gross receipts. If any persons fails to make a return, the General Government Administration Department Head shall make an estimate of the amount of gross receipts of the person, or as the case may be, of the amount of the total rentals in this city which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period in respect to which the person failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information which is in the General Government Administration Department Head's possession or may come into his possession. Upon the basis of this estimate, the General Government Administration Department Head shall compute and determine the amount required to be paid the city adding to the sum thus arrived at a penalty equal to 15 percent thereof. One or more determinations may be made for one or more than one period. 
(b)  Manner of computation; offsets; interest. In making a determination, the General Government Administration Department Head may offset overpayments for periods, against unpaid tax found to be due for another period, against penalties, and against the interest on underpayments. The interest on underpayments shall be computed in the manner set forth in subsection (c) of this section. 
(c)  Interest on amount found due. The amount of the determination, exclusive of penalties, shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, from the last day of the month following the close of the quarterly period for which the amount or any portion thereof should have been returned until the date of payment. 
(d)  Penalty for fraud or intent to evade. If the failure of any person to file a return is due to fraud or an intent to evade this article or rules and regulations, a penalty of 25 percent of the amount required to be paid by the person, exclusive of penalties, shall be added thereto in addition to the 15 percent penalty provided in section 16-305. 
(e)  Giving of notice; manner of service. Promptly after making this determination, the General Government Administration Department Head shall give to the person written notice to be served personally or by mail in the manner prescribed for service of notice of a deficiency determination. 
(Code 1998, § 38-360; Ord. No. 04-99, 3-1-1999) 
Sec. 16-305. - Penalties and interest for failure to pay tax. 
Any person who fails to pay any tax to the city or any amount of tax required to be collected and paid to the city within the time required shall pay a penalty of 15 percent of the tax or amount of the tax, in addition to the tax or amount of tax, plus interest on the unpaid tax or any portion thereof as set forth in section 16-304(c). 
(Code 1998, § 38-361; Ord. No. 04-99, 3-1-1999) 
Sec. 16-306. - Collection of tax. 
(a)  Action for tax; time. At any time within three years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and payable and at any time within three years after the delinquency of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected, the City Council may bring an action in the courts of this state, or any other state or of the United States in the name of the city to collect the amount delinquent together with penalties and interest, court fees, filing fees, attorney's fees and other legal fees incident thereto. The bringing of such an action shall not be a prerequisite for the issuance of a fi. fa. under the provisions of subsection (d) of this section. 
(b)  Duty of successors or assignees of operator to withhold tax from purchase money. If any operator liable for any amount under this article sells out his business or quits the business, his successors or assigns shall withhold sufficient of the purchase price to cover this amount until the former owner produces a receipt from the General Government Administration Department Head showing that he has been paid for a certificate stating that no amount is due. 
(c)  Liability for failure to withhold; certificate of notice of amount due; time to enforce successor's liability. If the purchaser of a business fails to withhold purchase price as required, he becomes personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld by him to the extent of the purchase price, valued in money. Within 30 days after receiving a written request from the purchaser for a certificate, the General Government Administration Department Head shall either issue the certificate or mail notice to the purchaser at his address as it appears on the records of the General Government Administration Department Head of the amount that must be paid as a condition of issuing the certificate. Failure of the General Government Administration Department Head to mail the notice will release the purchaser from any further obligation to withhold purchase price as above provided. The time within which the obligation of a successor may be enforced shall start to run at the time the operator sells out his business or at the time that the determination against the operator becomes final, whichever event occurs later. 
(d)  Issuance of a fi. fa. The General Government Administration Department Head is hereby authorized to issue a fi. fa. for execution and levy to satisfy the amount of the tax, penalty and interest due but not paid under the provisions of this article. 
(e)  Refund of tax; penalty of interest paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected. Whenever the amount of any tax, penalty or interest has been paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received under this article, it may be refunded provided a verified claim in writing therefor, stating the specific grounds upon which the claim is founded, is filed with the General Government Administration Department Head within three years from the date of payment. The claim shall be audited and shall be made on forms provided by the Department head. If the claim is approved by the General Government Administration Department Head and the City Council, the excess amount collected or paid may be refunded or may be credited on any amounts then due and payable from the person from whom it was collected or by whom paid and the balance may be refunded to this person, his administrators or executors. 
(Code 1998, § 38-362; Ord. No. 04-99, 3-1-1999) 
Sec. 16-307. - Administration of article. 
(a)  Authority of General Government Administration Department Head. The General Government Administration Department Head shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article for the levy and the collection of the tax imposed by this article. 
(b)  Rules and regulations. The General Government Administration Department Head shall have the power and authority to make and publish reasonable rules and regulations not inconsistent with this article or other ordinances of the city, or the laws of the state, or the Constitution of this state or the United States, for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article and the collection of the taxes hereunder. 
(c)  Records required from operators; form. Every operator renting guestrooms in the city shall keep such records, receipts, invoices and other pertinent papers in such form as the General Government Administration Department Head may require. 
(d)  Examination of records; audits. The General Government Administration Department Head or any person authorized in writing by him may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any person renting guestrooms and any person liable for the tax and may investigate the character of the business of the person in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the person, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. 
(e)  Authority to require reports; contents. In administration of the tax, the General Government Administration Department Head may require the filing of reports by any person or class of persons having in his or their possession or custody information relating to rentals of guestrooms which are subject to the tax. The reports shall be filed with the Department head when he requires and shall set forth the rental charged for each occupancy, the date of occupancy and such other information as the General Government Administration Department Head may require. 
(f)  Disclosure of business operators; limitation on rule. The General Government Administration Department Head or any person having an administrative duty under this article shall not make known in any manner the business affairs, operations or information obtained by an audit of books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any operator or any other person visited or examined in the discharge of official duty, or the amount or source of income, profits, losses or expenditures, or any particular thereof, set forth or disclosed in any return, or permit any return or copy thereof or any book containing any abstract or particulars thereof to be seen or examined by any person not having that administrative duty under this article. Successors, receivers, trustees, executors, administrators, assignees and guarantors, if directly interested, may be given information as to the items included in the measure and amount of unpaid tax or amounts of tax, interest and penalties required to be collected. 
(Code 1998, § 38-363; Ord. No. 04-99, 3-1-1999) 
Sec. 16-308. - Applicability. 
This article shall not apply to any person as to whom, or to any occupancy as to which, it is beyond the power of the City Council to impose the tax. 
(Code 1998, § 38-364; Ord. No. 04-99, 3-1-1999) 
Sec. 16-309. - Purposes for which proceeds of hotel/motel tax may be used. 
All proceeds of the hotel/motel occupancy tax assessed pursuant to this article shall be used in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(b). The General Government Administration Department Head shall maintain a separate accounting of the proceeds generated under this article. 
(Code 1998, § 38-365; Ord. No. 04-99, 3-1-1999; Ord. No. 09-2007, 4-9-2007; Ord. No. 15-2012, 6-4-2012) 
Secs. 16-310—16-400. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - RENTAL MOTOR VEHICLE EXCISE TAX 

Sec. 16-401. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the following meanings respectively ascribed to them. 
Month or monthly period shall mean the calendar months of any year. 
Rental charge means the total value received by a rental motor vehicle concern for the rental or lease for 31 or fewer consecutive days of a rental motor vehicle, including the total cash and nonmonetary consideration for the rental or lease including, but not limited to, charges based on time or mileage and charges for insurance coverage or collision damage waiver, but excluding all charges for motor fuel taxes or sales taxes. 
Rental motor vehicle means a motor vehicle designed to carry ten or fewer passengers and used primarily for the transportation of persons that is rented or leased without a driver regardless of whether such vehicle is licensed in the State of Georgia. 
Rental motor vehicle concern means a person or legal entity which owns or leases five or more rental motor vehicles and which regularly rents or leases such vehicles to the public for value. 
Tax, excise tax or taxes shall mean the tax imposed by this article. 
( Ord. No. 03-2015 , § I, 2-2-2015) 
Sec. 16-402. - Authority; rules and regulations; records. 
(a)  Authority. The City Clerk shall administer and enforce this article for the levy and collection of the tax. 
(b)  Rules and regulations. The City Clerk shall have the power and authority to make and publish reasonable rules and regulations not inconsistent with this article or other laws of the city and the state or the Constitution of this state or the United States for the administration and enforcement of this article and the collection of the tax under this article. 
(c)  Records required. Every rental motor vehicle concern subject to this article shall keep such records, receipts, invoices and other pertinent papers in such form as the City Clerk may require. 
( Ord. No. 03-2015 , § I, 2-2-2015) 
Sec. 16-403. - Excise tax levied; collection. 
(a)  There is hereby assessed and levied an excise tax upon each rental charge collected by any rental motor vehicle concern when such charge constitutes a taxable event for the purposes of the sales and use tax as provided for under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-1, as amended. The tax levied pursuant to this article shall be in the amount of three percent of the rental charge as defined herein. The tax levied pursuant to this article shall be imposed only at the time when and the place where a customer pays sales tax with respect to the rental charge. The customer who pays a rental charge that is subject to the tax levy as provided in this article shall be liable for the tax. The tax shall be paid by the customer to the rental motor vehicle concern. The tax shall be a debt of the customer to the rental motor vehicle concern until it is paid and shall be recoverable at law in the same manner as authorized for the recovery for other debts. 
(b)  The rental motor vehicle concern collecting the tax shall remit the tax to the City Clerk of the City of Norcross, Georgia and the tax thus remitted shall be a credit against the tax imposed by this article on the rental motor vehicle concern. Every rental motor vehicle concern subject to the tax levied by this article shall be liable for the tax at the rate of three percent upon the rental charges actually collected or the amount of taxes collected from the customers, whichever is greater. 
( Ord. No. 03-2015 , § I, 2-2-2015) 
Sec. 16-404. - Purposes for proceeds from tax. 
The following projects and purposes for which the proceeds of the tax levied by this article are to be expended are specified as follows: 
(1)  Promoting industry trade, commerce and tourism; 
(2)  Capital outlay projects consisting of the construction of convention, trade, sports, and recreational facilities, or public safety facilities, including the acquiring, constructing, renovating, improving, and equipping of parking facilities, pedestrian walkways, plazas, connections, and other public improvements associated with such convention, trade, sports, and recreational facilities or public safety facilities or the retirement of debt issued with respect to such capital outlay projects; and 
(3)  Maintenance and operation expenses or security and public safety expenses associated with subsection (2) of this section. 
( Ord. No. 03-2015 , § I, 2-2-2015) 
Sec. 16-405. - Exceptions. 
No tax shall be imposed pursuant to this article on the rental charge associated with the rental or lease of a rental motor vehicle if either: 
(1)  The customer picks up the rental motor vehicle outside the State of Georgia and returns it within the State of Georgia; 
(2)  The customer picks up the rental motor vehicle in the State of Georgia and returns it outside the State of Georgia. 
( Ord. No. 03-2015 , § I, 2-2-2015) 
Sec. 16-406. - Amount of tax allowed to be retained for expenses. 
Each rental motor vehicle concern collecting the tax imposed by this article shall be allowed to retain three percent of the tax due and collected and may retain that amount in the form of a deduction for expenses incurred in submitting, reporting and paying the amount of taxes due, if the amounts due are not delinquent at the time of payment. 
( Ord. No. 03-2015 , § I, 2-2-2015) 
Sec. 16-407. - Statement required showing gross rental charges and taxes. 
(a)  On or before the last day of each month following the month of February 2015, the rental motor vehicle concern liable for the tax provided for herein shall transmit to the City Clerk for the city, a statement showing the gross rental charges and gross taxes collected by authority of this article for each preceding calendar month. Along with said statement, the rental motor vehicle concern shall submit to the City Clerk the net taxes due for that particular month. 
(b)  Failure to remit taxes by the due date shall subject the rental motor vehicle concern to a penalty of five percent of the tax then due, and in addition to such penalty, interest thereon on the unpaid principal amount due, computed at the rate of one percent per month. 
( Ord. No. 03-2015 , § I, 2-2-2015) 
Sec. 16-408. - Records. 
In order to aid in the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article and to collect all the tax imposed, all rental motor vehicle concerns are hereby required to keep a record of all rental charges for rental motor vehicles and taxes collected which are related thereto. Said records shall be open for inspection and copying by any duly authorized agent of the city during regular business hours. 
( Ord. No. 03-2015 , § I, 2-2-2015) 
Sec. 16-409. - Deficiency determinations. 
(a)  If the City Clerk is not satisfied with the return or returns of the excise tax provided for herein, or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the city by any rental motor vehicle concern, the City Clerk may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information within his or her possession or that may come into his or her possession. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for the one or more monthly periods. 
(b)  The amount of the determination made by the City Clerk shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month or fraction thereof from the due date of the taxes found to be due by him. 
(c)  The City Clerk or his designated representative shall give to the rental motor vehicle concern a written notice of any such determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail and if by mail the service shall be addressed to the operator or the owner of the rental motor vehicle concern at the address as the same appears in the records of the City Clerk as provided to him or her by each rental motor vehicle concern. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by an addressee or agent of the addressee. 
(d)  Except in cases of failure to make a return, every notice of deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the last day of the calendar month following the monthly period in which the amount proposed to be determined or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period shall expire last. 
( Ord. No. 03-2015 , § I, 2-2-2015) 
Sec. 16-410. - Failure to make a return. 
(a)  If any rental motor vehicle concern fails to make a return, the City Clerk shall make an estimate of the excise tax due. The estimate shall be made for the period or periods in respect to which the rental motor vehicle concern has failed to make the return and shall be based upon such information which is or may come into the possession of the City Clerk. Written notice shall be given in the manner as prescribed above in section 16-409. 
(b)  The amount of the determination shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month or fraction thereof from the last day of the month following the monthly period for which the amount of any portion thereof should have been returned until the date of payment. 
( Ord. No. 03-2015 , § I, 2-2-2015) 
Sec. 16-411. - Audit authority. 
Duly authorized employees of the city upon exhibition of identification and during regular business hours may examine and copy the books, papers, records, financial reports equipment and other facilities if necessary of any rental motor vehicle concern in order to verify the accuracy of any return made pursuant to this article, or if no return is made by the rental motor vehicle concern, to ascertain or determine the amount of tax required to be paid. 
( Ord. No. 03-2015 , § I, 2-2-2015) 
Sec. 16-412. - Withholding tax on sale of business. 
(a)  If any rental motor vehicle concern liable for any amount under this article transfers or sells its business or quits the business, its successors or assigns shall withhold sufficient amounts from the purchase price to cover the amount required to be paid pursuant to this article until the former owner or operator of the rental motor vehicle concern produces a receipt from the City Clerk or his or her designee showing that the indebtedness has been paid or a certificate stating that no amount is due. 
(b)  If the purchaser of a business or rental motor vehicle concern fails to withhold from the purchase price as required herein such purchaser shall be personally liable for the payment of the amount of the outstanding tax required to be withheld by him to the extent of such purchase price. 
( Ord. No. 03-2015 , § I, 2-2-2015) 
Sec. 16-413. - Penalty for violation. 
(a)  In addition to the interest charges and delinquent penalties specified in this article any person violating any provision of this article shall be deemed guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by the municipal court for the City of Norcross in accordance with the limits established by the City of Norcross. Such persons shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during which any violation of any provision of this article is committed, continued, or permitted by that person and shall be punished accordingly. 
(b)  The tax levied by this article shall be effective on the first day of February 2015, and shall continue until its permissible existence shall expire as provided by law, or until otherwise terminated by the Georgia General Assembly or the Norcross City Council. 
( Ord. No. 03-2015 , § I, 2-2-2015) 
Chapter 18 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to provide police and fire protection, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(1); regulation of fire and other hazards to persons and property generally, O.C.G.A. § 25-2-1 et seq.; statewide application of Standard Fire Prevention Code, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25(a). 

Sec. 18-1. - Minimum fire safety standards. 
The city adopts by reference, incorporates herein as if fully set out, and will enforce the state minimum fire safety standards set forth in O.C.G.A. § 25-2-12. The city authorizes the county fire prevention bureau to enforce all codes pursuant to this chapter for the city; provided, however, pursuant to county code section 46-28, all authorized officers of the Police Department may enforce the provisions within the city. 
(Code 1979, § 4-2-1; Code 1998, § 42-1; Ord. No. 24-96, 12-2-1996) 
Chapter 20 - FRANCHISES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Power to grant franchises or make contract with public utilities, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2(7). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 20-1. - Due compensation for telephone companies that maintain and operate lines and facilities occupying municipal streets and rights-of-way and serve end user retail customers within the city. 
(a)  The city hereby requires due compensation of three percent of actual recurring local service revenues, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 46-5-1(b)(8) and (9); provided, however, that any company which pays in excess of three percent of actual recurring local service revenues pursuant to an existing franchise agreement shall continue to pay in accordance with the agreement until the expiration of the franchise agreement or December 31, 2012, whichever occurs first, and any company which pays in excess of three percent of actual recurring local service revenues in accordance with an occupational license tax arrangement shall continue to pay in accordance with such payment schedule until December 31, 2012. 
(b)  Regarding any telephone company that maintains and operates lines and facilities occupying municipal streets and rights-of-way and does not have retail, end-user customers located within the city's municipal boundaries, the payment by such company to a municipal authority in accordance with the rates set by regulations promulgated by the Department of Transportation for the use of its rights-of-way shall be considered the payment of due compensation. 
(Ord. No. 03-2010, § 1, 1-4-2010) 
Sec. 20-2. - Authorized designee. 
The City Manager, shall, on behalf of the city, exercise day-to-day administrative duties necessary to fulfill the regulatory authority of the city under O.C.G.A. § 46-5-1 et seq. and shall perform the following duties: 
(a)  Review application information submitted by a telephone company to the city and, if an application is incomplete, notify the telegraph or telephone company within 15 business days of the receipt of such application, identifying in such notice all application deficiencies. 
(b)  Report the receipt of a completed application to the Council within 60 calendar days of the receipt of such completed application. 
(c)  Review payments of due compensation submitted by the company to ensure compliance with the provisions of the amended law and this section. 
(d)  Provide a coordination function between a telephone company and all city departments on any matter relating to the amended law and this section. 
(e)  Arrange and evaluate, no more than once a year, a comprehensive review of the records of a company which is reasonably related to the calculation and payment of due compensation. 
(f)  Provide to all telegraph and telephone companies located in its rights-of-way written notice of annexations and changes in municipal corporate boundaries. 
(Ord. No. 03-2010, § 2, 1-4-2010) 
Secs. 20-3—20-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CABLE AND OTHER TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES 

Sec. 20-19. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Cable services means the term "cable services" as defined in the Communications Act of 1934, as amended by the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984 and the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, and as may be further amended from time to time (the Cable Act). In the event that cable services is no longer defined in the Cable Act or the definition in the Cable Act otherwise becomes inapplicable, the term "cable services" means cable services as defined in the Cable Act immediately prior to such term no longer being defined in the Cable Act or such definition otherwise becoming inapplicable. 
Cable system means any cable system as defined in the Cable Act. 
Franchise means an initial authorization, or renewal thereof, issued by the city, whether such authorization is designated as a franchise, permit, license, resolution, contract, certificate, agreement or otherwise, which authorizes the occupation and use of the streets to provide telecommunications services. 
Grantee means the legal entity to which is granted the right, authority and responsibility to construct, install, operate and maintain a system of equipment as necessary to furnish, supply and distribute cable or telecommunications services or both, to inhabitants within the franchise area. 
Person means any individual or any association, firm, partnership, joint venture, corporation or other legally recognized entity, whether for profit or not for profit, but shall not mean the city. 
Street means the surface of, as well as the spaces above and below, any and all streets, alleyways, avenues, highways, boulevards, driveways, bridges, tunnels, parks, parkways, public grounds or waters, and other public rights-of-way within or belonging to the city. 
Telecommunications services means the receipt and/or distribution, through any means, including, without limitation, coaxial cable, optical fiber or satellite or microwave transmission, of one or more audio, voice or data signals. Telecommunications services includes both cable services and noncable telecommunications services. 
(Code 1998, § 46-101; Ord. No. 20-97, § I(9-3-31), 10-6-1997) 
Sec. 20-20. - Granting authority and franchising procedures. 
(a)  No person shall provide cable services or operate a cable system without a franchise granted in accordance with the provisions of this article and no person shall use or occupy the streets to provide any telecommunications service other than cable services without a franchise granted in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  The City Council may grant one or more franchises in accordance with this article, provided that the City Council reserves the right to modify any provision of this article by amendment hereof. 
(c)  The grant of any franchise shall be made by adoption of a separate ordinance by the City Council and shall be on such terms and conditions as may be specified in such separate ordinance and/or a franchise agreement between the city and the franchisee. 
(d)  Any franchise granted shall be nonexclusive. The city specifically reserves the right to grant, at any time, such additional franchises as it deems appropriate and or itself engage in the provision of telecommunications services. 
(e)  A franchise may be granted for all or any defined portion of the city and for all or less than all telecommunications services, and for telecommunications services for all or less than all purposes. 
(f)  The grant of franchises by the city shall be subject to the provisions of applicable law, such as the provisions in the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, governing cable television franchises and renewals thereof. 
(Code 1998, § 46-102; Ord. No. 20-97, § I(9-3-32), 10-6-1997) 
Sec. 20-21. - Franchise applications. 
(a)  Applications for franchises shall be submitted in such form and be issued on such terms and conditions as the City Council may determine, subject to applicable law. 
(b)  Any application for a franchise shall contain and/or require the following information with respect to the proposed franchise and such other information as the City Council shall deem necessary or appropriate: 
(1)  The applicant's name, address, telephone number and federal employer identification number or social security number; copy of the applicant's corporate charter or partnership agreement as applicable; and any trade names (and registrations) used by the applicant. 
(2)  A detailed statement of the corporation or business entity organization of the applicant including, but not limited to, the following, and to whatever extent required by the city: 
a.  The names and the residence and business addresses of all officers and Directors of the applicant; 
b.  The names, residence and business addresses of all persons and entities having any share of the ownership of the applicant and the respective ownership share of each person or entity; 
c.  The names and address of any parent or subsidiary of the applicant, namely, any other business entity owning or controlling applicant in whole or in part or owned or controlled in whole or in part by the applicant, and a statement describing the nature of any such parent or subsidiary business entity including, but not limited to, telecommunications or cable systems owned or controlled by the applicant, its parent and subsidiary, and the areas served thereby; 
d.  A detailed and complete financial statement of the applicant, certified by an independent certified public accountant, for the fiscal year immediately preceding the date of the application pursuant to this article, or a letter or other acceptable evidence in writing from a recognized lending institution or funding source, addressed to both the applicant and the Council, setting forth the basis for a study performed by such lending institution or funding source, and a clear statement of its intent as a lending institution or funding source to provide whatever capital shall be required by the applicant to construct and operate the proposed telecommunications or cable system in the city, or a statement from an independent certified public accountant certifying that the applicant has available sufficient free, net and uncommitted cash resources to construct and operate the proposed cable or telecommunications system in the city; 
e.  A detailed financial plan (pro forma) describing for each year of the franchise, projected number of subscribers, rates, all revenues, operating expenses, capital expenditures, depreciation schedules, income statements and a sources and uses of funds statement; and 
f.  A statement identifying, by place and date, any other cable system or telecommunication franchise awarded to the applicant, its parent or subsidiary; the status of such franchise with respect to completion thereof; the total cost of completion of such franchised cable or telecommunication system; and the amount of the applicant's and its parent's or subsidiary's resources committed to the completion thereof. 
(3)  A detailed description of the proposed plan of operation of the applicant which shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
a.  A description of the cable services and any other telecommunications services proposed to be provided; 
b.  A detailed map indicating all areas proposed to be served, and a proposed time schedule for the installation of all equipment necessary to become operational throughout the entire area to be serviced; 
c.  A statement or schedule setting forth all proposed classifications or rates and charges to be made against subscribers and all rates and charges as to each of such classifications, including installation charges, cable service charges and any other telecommunications service charges; 
d.  A detailed, informative and referenced statement describing the actual equipment and operational standards proposed by the applicant; 
e.  A copy of the form of any agreement, undertaking or other instrument proposed to be entered into between the applicant and any subscriber to cable or telecommunications services; and 
f.  A detailed statement setting forth in its entirety any and all agreements and undertakings, whether formal or informal, written, oral or implied, existing or proposed to exist between the applicant and any person which materially relate or pertain to or depend upon the application and the granting of the franchise. 
(4)  A copy of any agreement covering the franchise area, if existing between the applicant and any utility providing for the use of any facilities of the utility including, but not limited to, poles, lines or conduits. 
(5)  Any other details, statements, supplementary information or references pertinent to the subject matter of such application which shall be required or requested by the Council, or by any other provision of law. 
(Code 1998, § 46-103; Ord. No. 20-97, § I(9-3-33), 10-6-1997) 
Sec. 20-22. - Nonrefundable application fees for new franchises. 
(a)  Generally. No application for a new franchise shall be considered without payment by the applicant of application fees as provided in this section. If a franchise is granted, application fees will not be deemed a credit towards any other fees or sums due by the grantee. If an application is denied, the application fee will not be refunded. 
(b)  Purpose of application fees. The application fees provided by this section will serve to cover the direct and indirect costs incurred by the city in processing the application, evaluating the applicant and granting a franchise, and shall include, but not be limited to, administrative, engineering, publication, legal and consultant's expenses. 
(c)  Application fee. The applicant will be expected to pay the reasonable costs of the city in evaluating the application. Notwithstanding any other requirement of this article, each applicant must furnish with its proposal a nonrefundable application fee in the form of a certified check or cashier's check made payable to the city in the amount set forth in the schedule of fees on file with the City Clerk. 
(Code 1998, § 46-104; Ord. No. 20-97, § I(9-3-34), 10-6-1997) 
Sec. 20-23. - Responsibilities of applicants. 
It shall be the responsibility of each applicant for a franchise to comply with all applicable laws, ordinances, resolutions, rules, regulations and other directives of the city and any federal, state or local governmental authority having jurisdiction. 
(Code 1998, § 46-105; Ord. No. 20-97, § I(9-3-35), 10-6-1997) 
Sec. 20-24. - Public availability of applications. 
To the extent determined by the City Council, applications for franchises, including any additions, modifications or amendments thereto, shall be available for public inspection at a designated city office during normal business hours. 
(Code 1998, § 46-106; Ord. No. 20-97, § I(9-3-36), 10-6-1997) 
Sec. 20-25. - Evaluation criteria. 
In making any determination hereunder as to any application for a franchise, the City Council may consider such factors as it deems appropriate and in the public interest, including, without limitation: 
(1)  The adequacy of the proposed compensation to be paid to the city, including the value of any facilities and telecommunications services offered by the applicant to the city; 
(2)  The legal, financial, technical and other appropriate qualifications of the applicant; 
(3)  The ability of the applicant to maintain the property of the city in good condition throughout the term of the franchise; 
(4)  The value and efficiency to the city and its residents of the cable services and other telecommunications services to be provided, including the type of telecommunications services to be provided, as well as alternatives to those services and services that may be precluded by the grant of the franchise; 
(5)  The willingness and ability of the applicant to meet construction and physical requirements and to abide by all purpose and policy conditions, limitations and requirements with respect to the franchise; and 
(6)  Any other public interest factors or considerations deemed pertinent by the city for safeguarding the interests of the city and the public. 
(Code 1998, § 46-107; Ord. No. 20-97, § I(9-3-37), 10-6-1997) 
Sec. 20-26. - Procedure for consideration of and action on applications. 
(a)  The city may make such investigations and take or authorize the taking of such other steps as the City Council deems necessary or appropriate to consider and act on applications for franchises and determine whether a franchise should be granted to an applicant, and may require the applicant to furnish additional information and data for this purpose. In considering applications, the City Council may seek advice from other city officials or bodies, from such other advisory bodies as it may establish or determine appropriate, or from the public, and may request the preparation of one or more reports to be submitted to the City Council, which may include recommendations with respect to such applications. 
(b)  If the City Council, after considering such information as it determines to be appropriate, elects to further consider one or more applications, the City Council shall set one or more public hearings for consideration of the applications, fixing and setting forth a day, hour and place certain when and where any persons having any interest therein or objections thereto may file written comments and appear before the City Council and be heard, and providing notice of such public hearing in accordance with applicable law. 
(c)  The City Council may authorize negotiations between city officials and applicants to determine whether the city and such applicants are able to reach agreement on the terms of the proposed franchise. 
(d)  Upon completion of the steps deemed appropriate by the City Council, the City Council may grant the franchise, and may specify the conditions under which the franchise is granted. Alternatively, the city may reject any and all applications from whatever source and whenever received except that a franchising authority may not grant an exclusive franchise and may not unreasonably refuse to award an additional competitive franchise. The city also reserves the right to waive any or all requirements when it determines that the best interests of the city may be served thereby and may, if it so desires, request new or additional proposals. 
(Code 1998, § 46-108; Ord. No. 20-97, § I(9-3-38), 10-6-1997) 
Sec. 20-27. - Terms and conditions of franchise. 
(a)  The terms and conditions applicable to any franchise granted pursuant to this article shall be set forth in the separate ordinance granting the franchise or in a separate written agreement. Such separate ordinance or written agreement, among other things, shall address the following subjects: 
(1)  The term of the franchise; 
(2)  The franchise area and the cable services and other telecommunications services and purposes of such other telecommunications services, if any, which are the subject of the franchise; 
(3)  The compensation to be paid to the city, which may include the payment of fees or the provision of facilities or services, or both; 
(4)  The circumstances upon which the franchise may be terminated or cancelled; 
(5)  The mechanisms, such as performance bonds, security funds or letters of credit, to be put in place to ensure the performance of the franchisee's obligations under the franchise; 
(6)  The city's right to inspect the facilities and records of the franchisee; 
(7)  Insurance and indemnification requirements applicable to the franchisee; 
(8)  The obligation of the franchisee to maintain complete and accurate books of account and records, and the city's inspection rights with respect thereto; 
(9)  Provisions to ensure quality workmanship and construction methods; 
(10)  Provisions to ensure that the franchisee will comply with all applicable city, state and federal laws, regulations, rules and policies, including, without limitation, those related to employment, purchasing and investigations; 
(11)  Provisions to ensure adequate oversight and regulation of the franchisee by the city; 
(12)  Provisions to restrict the assignment or other transfer of the franchise without the prior written consent of the city; 
(13)  Remedies available to the city to protect the city's interest in the event of the franchisee's failure to comply with terms and conditions of the franchise; 
(14)  Provisions to ensure that the franchisee will obtain all necessary licenses and permits from, and comply with, all laws, regulations, rules and policies of any governmental body having jurisdiction over the franchisee, including the Federal Communications Commission; 
(15)  Provisions to ensure that the franchisee will protect the property of the city and the delivery of public services from damage or interruption of operations resulting from the construction, operation, maintenance, repair or removal of improvements related to the franchise; 
(16)  Provisions designed to minimize the extent to which the public use of the streets of the city are disrupted in connection with the construction of improvements relating to the franchise; and 
(17)  Such other provisions as the city determines are necessary or appropriate in furtherance of the public interest. 
(b)  This article shall not be retroactively applied to franchises for cable services and other telecommunications services existing on October 6, 1997. 
(Code 1998, § 46-109; Ord. No. 20-97, § I(9-3-39), 10-6-1997) 
Chapter 22 - HEALTH CODES 

Sec. 22-1. - County vector ordinance adopted. 
(a)  The Gwinnett County Vector Control Ordinance, as adopted by resolution of the Gwinnett County Board of Commissioners on July 7, 1998, is hereby adopted by reference and incorporated herein as if fully set out as a general ordinance of the city to the extent that it is not inconsistent with the city's local amendments under this article. A copy of the current vector control ordinance and any additions, deletions, or local amendments thereto, shall be maintained in the Office of the Community Development Department and be available for inspection by the public. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, the following sections of the vector control ordinance are amended as follows: 
Section 290-5-58.04 Enforcement. The County Vector Control Ordinance, upon adoption by the City Council of the city shall be enforced in the city by the Gwinnett County Board of Health, Environmental Health Section. 
(Code 1998, § 34-112; Ord. No. 15-99, 10-4-1999) 
Sec. 22-2. - Tourist accommodations ordinance adopted. 
(a)  The Gwinnett County Tourist Accommodations Ordinance, as adopted by resolution of the Gwinnett County Board of Commissioners on July 7, 1998, is hereby adopted by reference and incorporated herein as if fully set out as a general ordinance of the city to the extent that the tourist accommodations ordinance is not inconsistent with the city's local amendments under this article. A copy of the current Tourist Accommodations Ordinance and any additions, deletions, or local amendments thereto shall be maintained in the Office of the Community Development Department and be available for inspection by the public. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, the following sections of the tourist accommodations ordinance are amended as follows: 
Section 290-5-18.19 Enforcement. The Gwinnett County Tourist Accommodations Ordinance, upon adoption by the City Council of the city shall be enforced in the city by the Gwinnett County Board of Health, Environmental Health Section. 
(Code 1998, § 34-113; Ord. No. 15-99, 10-4-1999) 
Sec. 22-3. - County food service ordinance adopted. 
(a)  The Gwinnett County Food Service Ordinance, as adopted by resolution of the Gwinnett County Board of Commissioners on November 13, 2007, is hereby adopted by reference and incorporated herein as if fully set out as a general ordinance of the city to the extent that the food service ordinance is not inconsistent with the city's local amendments under this article. A copy of the current food service ordinance and any additions, deletions, or local amendments thereto shall be maintained in the Office of the Community Development Department and be available for inspection by the public. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, the following sections of the food service ordinance are amended as follows: 
The section referenced as Enforcement. The Gwinnett County Food Service Ordinance, upon adoption by the City Council of the city shall be enforced in the city by the Gwinnett County Board of Health, Environmental Health Section. 
(Code 1998, § 34-114; Ord. No. 15-99, 10-4-1999) 
Sec. 22-4. - County on-site sewage management systems ordinance adopted. 
(a)  The Gwinnett County On-Site Sewage Management Systems Ordinance, as adopted by resolution on June 18, 1996, and amended by resolution on July 7, 1998, of the Gwinnett County Board of Commissioners, is hereby adopted by reference and incorporated herein as if fully set out as a general ordinance of the city to the extent that the on-site sewage management systems ordinance is not inconsistent with the city's local amendments under this article. A copy of the current on-site sewage management systems ordinance and any additions, deletions, or local amendments thereto shall be maintained in the Office of the Community Development Department and be available for inspection by the public. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, the following sections of the on-site management systems ordinance are amended as follows: 
Section 290-5-18.18 Enforcement. The Gwinnett County On-Site Sewage Management Systems Ordinance, upon adoption by the City Council of the city shall be enforced in the city by the Gwinnett County Board of Health, Environmental Health Section. 
(Code 1998, § 34-115; Ord. No. 15-99, 10-4-1999) 
Sec. 22-5. - County swimming pools, public spa pools, and bath house ordinance adopted. 
(a)  The Gwinnett County Swimming Pools, Public Spa Pools, and Bath House Ordinance, as adopted by ordinance of the Gwinnett County Board of Commissioners on April 3, 1990, is hereby adopted by reference and incorporated herein as if fully set out as a general ordinance of the city to the extent that the Swimming Pools, Public Spa Pools, and Bath House Ordinance is not inconsistent with the city's local amendments under this article. A copy of the current Swimming Pools, Public Spa Pools, and Bath House Ordinance and any additions, deletions, or local amendments thereto shall be maintained in the Office of the Community Development Department and be available for inspection by the public. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, the following sections of the swimming pools, public spa pools, and bath house ordinance are amended as follows: 
Section 9-7072 Enforcement. The Gwinnett County Swimming Pools, Public Spa Pools, and Bath House Ordinance, upon adoption by the City Council of the city shall be enforced in the city by the Gwinnett County Board of Health, Environmental Health Section. 
(Code 1998, § 34-116; Ord. No. 15-99, 10-4-1999) 
Chapter 24 - LAW ENFORCEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to provide for police protection, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(1); Georgia Peace Officer Standards and Training Act, O.C.G.A. § 35-8-1 et seq.; municipality's liability for torts of police or other officers, O.C.G.A. § 36-33-3. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 24-1. - Chief of Police; powers and duties. 
The Chief of Police, or police officers under his direction, shall: 
(1)  Attend all meetings and municipal court sessions or as directed by the City Manager. 
(2)  Execute all orders and directions of the City Manager. 
(3)  Abate and remove any nuisance upon direction by the judge of the municipal court. 
(4)  Maintain the peace, good order and tranquility of the city by the enforcement of all municipal ordinances and state or federal laws. 
(5)  Place upon the municipal court docket the names of all persons violating any of the municipal ordinances and arrest and take into custody all persons who violate any city ordinances, state, or federal laws. 
(6)  Under the general direction of the City Manager, be in charge of the Police Department and have supervision over the members thereof in the exercise of their powers, duties and authority and in hiring, discharging or suspending any members. 
(7)  Should any arrested person be jailed at the order of a police officer, enter or cause to be entered the name of the person arrested; the date of arrest; and the name of the arresting officer or other person, on the station docket. 
(8)  Post with the city a performance bond for the faithful performance of duties in an amount set by resolution of the City Council payable to the city. 
(9)  Serve all subpoenas and warrants of the municipal court. 
(10)  Approve appearance bonds. 
(11)  Issue and serve summons for any violation of any law or ordinance and serve all processes, executions, attachments and the like of the Chief, City Clerk, Municipal Court, General Government Administration Department, City Manager, or the Mayor and City Council. 
(12)  Deliver all monies received by any member of the Police Department while acting in the capacity of a law enforcement officer for the city or while executing administrative duties to the General Government Administration Department. 
(13)  Maintain a docket with entries therein on all executions issued by authority of the city showing any payments thereon. 
(Code 1979, § 4-1-1; Code 1998, § 50-1; Ord. No. 18-95, § V, 11-6-1995) 
Sec. 24-2. - Patrol powers. 
(a)  The police officers of the city shall have the authority to patrol over any street, alley, path, sidewalk, or park, in and around any stores, cafes, taverns, restaurants, dancehalls, service stations or any other establishment in the city. 
(b)  An officer while on duty for the city shall have authority to enter any type of business while open to the public and check to see if it is being carried on in a lawful manner. After business hours, and while closed to the public, an officer for the city has the authority to check places of business, to see if the doors and windows are safely locked. 
(c)  An officer for the city shall have the authority to check and investigate, enter and patrol any park, business, residence or public place within the city limits if the officer has probable cause or sufficient reason to believe some act is being committed which would involve the violation of a provision of this Code, state law or city ordinance, a personal injury or damage to property, or if any of the above appear to be imminent. 
(d)  No police officer shall enter a private dwelling without a search or arrest warrant unless he has the voluntary consent of the owner or occupant or he is in pursuit of a fugitive whom the officer has personal knowledge or probable cause to believe has committed or attempted to commit a felony. 
(Code 1979, § 4-1-2; Code 1998, § 50-2) 
Sec. 24-3. - Abuse of position. 
(a)  No police officer shall use official position or official identification cards or badges for: 
(1)  Personal or financial gain; 
(2)  Obtaining privileges not otherwise available to the officer except in the performance of duty; or 
(3)  Avoiding consequences of illegal acts. 
(b)  Police officers may not lend their identification cards or badges to another person, or permit them to be photographed or reproduced without the approval of the Chief. 
(Code 1979, § 4-1-3; Code 1998, § 50-3) 
Sec. 24-4. - Abuse of process; withholding evidence. 
Police officers shall not convert to their own use, manufacture, conceal, falsify, destroy, remove, tamper with, or withhold evidence or information, or make false accusations of a criminal or traffic charge. 
(Code 1979, § 4-1-4; Code 1998, § 50-4) 
Sec. 24-5. - Departmental reports; truthfulness. 
Police officers shall submit all necessary reports on time and in accordance with established departmental procedures. Reports submitted by officers shall be truthful and complete and no officer shall knowingly enter or cause to be entered any inaccurate, false, misleading or improper information. 
(Code 1979, § 4-1-5; Code 1998, § 50-5) 
Sec. 24-6. - Endorsements and referrals. 
Police officers shall not recommend or suggest in any manner, except in the transaction of personal business, the employment or procurement of a particular product, professional service or commercial service such as an attorney, ambulance, towing service, bondsman, mortician or the like. In the case of ambulance or towing service, when such service is necessary and the person needing the service is unable or unwilling to procure it or requests assistance, officers shall proceed in accordance with established departmental procedures. 
(Code 1979, § 4-1-6; Code 1998, § 50-6) 
Sec. 24-7. - police cars; riders. 
No person, other than a city employee, or person duly deputized, or city officials, shall at any time be permitted to be a passenger in a police car, unless such person is involved in an accident and needing medical attention or is participating in an official departmental activity. 
(Code 1979, § 4-1-7; Code 1998, § 50-7; Ord. No. 18-95, § V, 11-6-1995) 
Secs. 24-8—24-32. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RESERVE POLICE FORCE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Special policemen, O.C.G.A. § 35-9-1 et seq. 

Sec. 24-33. - Supplemental nature of article. 
Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to abrogate or impair the powers of the courts or any department of the city to enforce any provisions of its Charter or its ordinances or regulations, nor to prevent or punish violations thereof, and the powers conferred by this chapter shall be in addition to and supplemental to the powers conferred by any other law, the Charter, or this Code. 
(Code 1979, § 4-8-3(d); Code 1998, § 50-41) 
Sec. 24-34. - Creation, supervision. 
There is established in the city a reserve police force which shall be operated under the supervision and direction of the Chief of Police. 
(Code 1979, § 4-8-1; Code 1998, § 50-42) 
Sec. 24-35. - Approval, certificate of members. 
No person shall be permitted to serve in the reserve police force until such time as that person is certified by all applicable state agencies and that person's service on the reserve police force has been approved by the Chief of Police. 
(Code 1979, § 4-8-2; Code 1998, § 50-43) 
Sec. 24-36. - Oath. 
The members of the reserve police force shall take and subscribe the oath of office as regular police officers of the city. 
(Code 1979, § 4-8-1; Code 1998, § 50-44) 
Sec. 24-37. - Training. 
The Chief of Police shall establish such training programs as deemed necessary in order to properly train the members of the reserve police force. 
(Code 1979, § 4-8-3(a); Code 1998, § 50-45) 
Sec. 24-38. - Compensation. 
Members of the reserve police force shall receive no compensation. 
(Code 1979, § 4-8-3(b); Code 1998, § 50-46) 
Sec. 24-39. - Powers, regulations. 
The members of the reserve police force shall have only the powers specifically delegated to them by the Chief of Police and shall at all times be bound by the specific regulations enacted by the city that pertain to the reserve police force together with all applicable regulations contained in the Police Department's standard operating procedures manual. 
(Code 1979, § 4-8-1; Code 1998, § 50-47) 
Sec. 24-40. - Status of membership. 
No member of the reserve police force shall have any constitutionally protected right to a position with the city, may be disciplined or dismissed by the Chief of Police with or without notice and without the right to hearing, including any name-clearing hearing, and shall at all times be treated by the city as a volunteer at will whose service may be terminated with or without cause. 
(Code 1979, § 4-8-3(c); Code 1998, § 50-48) 
Sec. 24-41. - Employee benefits denied. 
Members of the reserve police force shall not be eligible for any employee benefits provided by the city to its work force, including, but not limited to, hospitalization and disability insurance, hourly pay, overtime pay, sick leave, vacation, personal time, comp time, pension benefits and/or supplemental pay. 
(Code 1979, § 4-8-3(d); Code 1998, § 50-49) 
Sec. 24-42. - Call to service. 
The members of the reserve police force shall be subject to call to service by the Chief of Police at such times as their assistance shall be required by the Chief of Police. 
(Code 1979, § 4-8-1; Code 1998, § 50-50) 
Chapter 26 - NUISANCES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 26-1—26-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NOISE CONTROL[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 01-2013, adopted March 4, 2013, amended art. II in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. II, §§ 26-19—26-21, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from the 1979 Code, §§ 11-1-10(a)—(c); the Code of 1998, §§ 34-31—34-33; Ord. No. 14-2004, adopted Oct. 4, 2004; Ord. No. 04-2005, adopted Aug. 1, 2005; Ord. No. 07-2005, adopted Oct. 3, 2005; Ord. No. 13-2008, adopted May 5, 2008; and Ord. No. 06-2009, pt. I, adopted May 4, 2009. 

Sec. 26-19. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
A-weighted sound pressure level means the sound pressure level as measured with a sound level meter using the A-weighted network. The standard notation is DB(A) or dBA. 
Alarm means any fire, burglary, motor vehicle or civil defense alarm, whistle or similar stationary emergency signaling device. 
Commercial area means an area as defined by the official city zoning map. 
Construction means any site preparation, assembly, erection, substantial repair, alteration, demolition or similar action, for or of public or private rights-of-way, structures, utilities or similar property. 
Emergency means any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual or imminent physical trauma or property damage demanding immediate attention. 
Emergency vehicle means a motor vehicle belonging to a fire department or an ambulance, or a motor vehicle belonging to a federal, state, county or municipal law enforcement agency, provided such vehicles are in use as an emergency vehicle by one authorized to use such vehicle for that purpose. 
Emergency work means any work for the purpose of preventing of alleviating the physical trauma or property damage threatened or caused by an emergency. 
Industrial area means an area as defined by the city zoning ordinance. 
Land use category means the classification of an area, such as residential, multifamily dwelling, commercial, industrial, noise-sensitive area or public space, according to its use. Any area not otherwise classified shall be considered a commercial area. In case of multiple use, the more restrictive use category shall apply. 
Motor vehicle means a vehicle with two or more wheels, or a machine, propelled or drawn by mechanical power and used on the public roads and highways in the transportation of passengers or property, or any combination thereof, which is required to be licensed, but shall not include any vehicle, locomotive, or car operated exclusively on rail or rails. 
Multifamily dwelling means a building or other shelter that has been divided into separate units to house more than one family. 
Noise-sensitive area means an area where a school, hospital, nursing home, church, court or public library is located. 
Person means any individual, association, partnership or corporation and includes any officer, employee, department, agency or instrumentality of the State of Georgia or of the United States. 
Powered model vehicle means any self-propelled airborne, waterborne or landborne plane, vessel or vehicle which is not designed to carry persons, including but not limited to any model airplane, boat, car or rocket. 
Public right-of-way means any street, avenue, boulevard highway, sidewalk, alley or similar place normally accessible to the public which is owned or controlled by a governmental entity. 
Public space means any real property or structures thereon owned by a governmental entity and normally accessible to the public, including but not limited to parks and other public recreational areas. 
Real property line means a line along the surface, and its vertical plane extension, which separates the real property owned, rented or leased by one person from that owned, rented or leased by another person, excluding intrabuilding real property division. 
Residential area means an area as defined in the city zoning ordinance. 
Sound level means the A-weighted sound pressure level obtained by use of a sound level meter as specified in American National Standards Institute specifications for sound level meters (ANSI SI.4-1971, as amended). 
All terminology used herein and not defined shall be in conformance with applicable publications of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI). 
(Ord. No. 01-2013, 3-4-2013) 
Sec. 26-20. - Excessive noise prohibited. 
No person shall make, continue or cause to be made or continued any loud unnecessary or excessive noise which unreasonably interferes with the comfort and repose of others within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Ord. No. 01-2013, 3-4-2013) 
Sec. 26-21. - Maximum permissible sound levels. 
It shall be unlawful, except as expressly permitted herein, to make, cause or allow the making of any noise or sound which violates the provisions of this article. 
(1)  No person shall operate or cause to be operated any source of sound from any location in such a manner as to create a sound level which exceeds the limits set forth in section 26-25 for the receiving land use category, when measured at or beyond the property boundary of the land use category from which the sound emanates; however, in the case of a multifamily dwelling land use category, the sound level shall be measured within an adjacent intrabuilding dwelling. 
(2)  For any source of sound, the sound level shall not exceed the maximum permissible sound level limit set forth in section 26-25 by 15 dB(A) for all land use categories. 
(3)  Sound level measurement shall be made with a sound level meter using the A-weighting scale in accordance with the standards promulgated by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI). 
(Ord. No. 01-2013, 3-4-2013) 
Sec. 26-22. - Exemptions. 
The following are exempt from the sound level limits of section 26-25: 
(1)  Domestic power tools, lawn mowers and agricultural equipment, when operated with a muffler, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. 
(2)  Noises resulting from any authorized emergency vehicles when responding to an emergency. 
(3)  Any noise resulting from activities of a temporary duration, for which a special permit has been granted pursuant to this article, and which conforms to the conditions and limits stated thereon. 
(4)  Noises from exterior site and building construction activity are exempt from section 26-25 between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on weekdays and 10:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. on Saturdays and holidays. Exterior site and building construction activity may occur on Sundays when the contractor applies for, and is granted, a permit by the Director of Community Development and Planning. 
Interior construction activity may take place between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. weekdays and Saturdays. Interior construction may take place between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on Sunday and Holidays when the Contractor applies for, and is granted, a permit by the Director of Community Development and Planning. 
The industrial sound level limit (85 dBA) shall apply in all land use categories. 
(Ord. No. 01-2013, 3-4-2013; Ord. No. 06-2014, § I, 10-6-2014) 
Sec. 26-23. - Specific prohibitions. 
In addition to the general prohibitions set out above, the following specific acts are declared to be in violation of this article. 
(1)  Horns, signaling devices. The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any motor vehicle or any street or public place in the city continuously and/or incessantly for a period in excess of sixty (60) seconds, except as a danger warning. 
(2)  Radios, televisions, musical instrument, digital sound equipment and similar devices. 
a.  The operating or playing of any radio, musical instrument or similar device which produces or reproduces sound on the public rights-of-way in such a manner as to be plainly audible to any person other than the operator of the device. 
b.  The operating or playing of any radio, television, phonograph, musical instrument, digital sound equipment or similar device which produces or reproduces sound in a motor vehicle or public park in a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet from the device. 
c.  The operating or playing of any radio, television, phonograph, musical instrument, digital sound equipment or similar device which produces or reproduces sound in such a manner as to exceed the levels set forth in section 26-25 for the land use category. 
(3)  Loudspeakers and sound amplifiers. The using or operating of any loudspeaker, loudspeaker system, sound amplifier, digital sound equipment or other similar device between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays and 10:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. on weekends and holidays is prohibited. 
The provisions of this subparagraph shall not apply to any public performance, gathering or parade for which a permit has been obtained from the city. 
The provisions of this subparagraph shall not apply to any event, public performance, or gathering held in the Norcross Historic Business District, Thrasher Park, or Lillian Webb Park if the event has been approved and authorized by the city provided such event is not occurring between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays and 11:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. on weekends and holidays. For purposes of this provision, Friday night and Saturday morning and Saturday night and Sunday morning shall be considered weekends. 
(4)  Street sales. The offering for sale by shouting or outcry within any residential, commercial or noise-sensitive area except by permit issued by the city. 
(5)  Animals. Domesticated animals may not make any vocalizations (including barking, baying, howling, crying, or making any other noise) for more than ten minutes without interruption or more than 30 minutes if intermittent. 
(6)  Site construction and demolition. The operating of any equipment used in site construction work within 500 feet of any residential or noise-sensitive area between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. on weekdays and 8:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. on Saturdays and holidays, except for emergency work is prohibited. Site construction may take place on Sunday in accordance with the issuance of a permit by the Director of Community Development and Planning (subsection 26-22(4)) above. 
(7)  Powered model vehicles. The operating of, or permitting the operation of, powered model vehicles between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays, and 10:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. on weekends or holidays. 
(8)  Emergency signaling devices. 
a.  Except in case of an emergency, the intentional sounding of any alarm between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
b.  The testing of any alarm for a period in excess of 60 seconds at any time. 
(9)  Motor vehicles. The operating of any motor vehicle or motorcycle not equipped with a muffler in good working order and in constant operation. 
(Ord. No. 01-2013, 3-4-2013; Ord. No. 06-2014, § I, 10-6-2014) 
Sec. 26-24. - Noise control special use permit. 
The use of any loudspeaker, loudspeaker system, sound amplifier, digital equipment or other similar device at any location which is within 1,000 feet of the property boundary of a residential area or noise sensitive area as defined in this article is prohibited unless a special use permit has been obtained from the Mayor and Council of the City of Norcross for the operation of such loudspeaker, loudspeaker system, sound amplifier or other similar device. Such special use permits shall be granted on a case by case basis. Those desiring to obtain such a special use permit shall make application to the Community Development Department. The Community Development Department shall review the application and shall transmit it to the Mayor and Council with a recommendation. In reviewing the application, the Community Development Department and the Mayor and Council shall consider the following: 
(1)  The volume of noise to be generated by the operation of the device; 
(2)  Whether the nature of the noise is usual or unusual; 
(3)  The volume and intensity of background noise in the area; 
(4)  The ability of noise from the device to be heard in the residential or noise sensitive areas; 
(5)  The nature and zoning of the applicant's property; 
(6)  The density of inhabitants in any residential area within 1,000 feet; 
(7)  The time of day or night proposed for use of the device; 
(8)  Whether the noise to be produced by the device is recurrent, intermittent, or constant; and 
(9)  The proposed placement of speakers to be operated in connection with the device. 
Should the Mayor and Council determine that the applicant is entitled to a special use permit, said permit may be conditioned upon limitations of the time of day or night that the device may be used, the position of the placement of speakers to be used in connection with the device, and such other limitations or restrictions as the Mayor and Council may deem necessary and appropriate to enforce the spirit and purpose of this section. 
(Ord. No. 01-2013, 3-4-2013) 
Sec. 26-25. - Maximum permissible sound levels by receiving land use category. 
The maximum permissible sound levels by receiving land use categories are as follows: 

 
(Ord. No. 01-2013, 3-4-2013) 
Sec. 26-26. - Penalty for violations. 
Any person who violates any provision of this article may, upon conviction, be punished in accordance with section 10-17. 
(Ord. No. 01-2013, 3-4-2013) 
Sec. 26-27. - Responsibility for enforcement. 
The City Police Department shall have the responsibility for the enforcement of this article. 
(Ord. No. 01-2013, 3-4-2013) 
Secs. 26-28—26-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ABATEMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Nuisances, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-1 et seq.; jurisdiction of municipal court or magistrate court to abate nuisance, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5. 

Sec. 26-46. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Closing means securing and causing a dwelling, building, or structure to be vacated. 
Dwelling, building or structure means any building or structure or part thereof used and occupied for human habitation, commercial, industrial or business uses, or intended to be so used, and includes any outhouses and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith and also includes any building or structure of any design. 
Owner means the holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee of record. 
Parties in interest means persons in possession of such property, dwelling, building or structure, and all individuals, associations, and corporations who have interest of record in the county where the property, dwelling, building or structure is located in the property, dwelling, building, or structure, including executors, administrators, guardians, and trustees. 
Public authority means any housing authority or any officer who is in charge of any department or branch of the government of the city, county, or state relating to health, fire, or building regulations or to other activities concerning dwellings, buildings, or structures in the municipality. 
Public officer means the officers who are authorized by the ordinances adopted in this chapter to exercise the powers prescribed by such ordinances or any agent of such officers. 
Repair means altering or improving a dwelling, building, or structure or the cleaning or removal of debris, trash, and other materials present and accumulated which create a health or safety hazard in or about any dwelling, building, structure or property. 
(Code 1979, § 11-2-4; Code 1998, § 34-66) 
Sec. 26-47. - Findings. 
(a)  It is found by the City Council that there exists within the city, dwellings, buildings or structures which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial or business uses, due to dilapidation and defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents or other calamities or due to the lack of adequate ventilation, light or sanitary facilities; or due to other conditions rendering such dwellings, buildings or structures unsafe or unsanitary or dangerous or detrimental to the health, safety or welfare or otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents of the city. It is further found that there is private property within the corporate boundaries of the city where an accumulation of weeds, trash, junk, filth and other unsanitary or unsafe conditions has created a public health hazard or a general nuisance to those persons residing in the vicinity and the city. 
(b)  Accordingly, the city hereby adopts and ordains the ordinances in this article so that said unsafe, unsanitary, dangerous and detrimental conditions may be abated. The ordinances which follow herein in this chapter are adopted pursuant to and under the authority of O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7 through 41-2-17. 
(Code 1979, § 11-2-2; Code 1998, § 34-67) 
Sec. 26-48. - Construction of article. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed to abrogate or impair the powers of the courts or of any department of the city to enforce any provisions of its charter or its ordinances or regulations nor to prevent or punish violations thereof. The powers conferred by this article shall be in addition to and supplemental to the powers conferred by any other law or by the Charter. 
(Code 1979, § 11-2-12; Code 1998, § 34-68) 
Sec. 26-49. - Determination of nuisances. 
Pursuant to the power vested in the Council by the city Charter, the following conditions are specifically declared to be nuisances: 
(1)  Stagnant water on premises which endangers the health, welfare or good order of the city; conditions conducive to the breeding or attraction of rodents, flies, ticks, mosquitoes or any other disease-carrying insects; 
(2)  Any dead or decaying matter, weeds, vegetation, or any fruit, vegetable, animal or rodent, upon premises which is odorous or capable of causing disease or annoyance to the inhabitants of the city; 
(3)  Manmade or mechanically induced, noxious, air contaminants, the generation of smoke or fumes in sufficient amounts to cause odor or annoyance to the inhabitants of the city; 
(4)  The pollution of public water or the injection of matter into the sewerage system which would be damaging thereto, toilets, plumbing, sewer, septic tank systems, garbage containers or any other sanitary facilities in bad repair; 
(5)  The keeping of animals or fowl, except under the following conditions: all housing, enclosures or any other areas used by animals shall be clean, well-drained and free from the accumulation of excrement, maintaining a dangerous or diseased animal or fowl, and shall be maintained in accordance with subsection 115-78(b)(8) of the city zoning ordinances. 
(6)  Obstruction of a public street, highway or sidewalk without a permit; 
(7)  Loud or unusual noises which are detrimental or annoying to the public; unusual, loud disturbances in or around churches and schools or around multifamily complexes, such as loud music and other activities in swimming pool and clubhouse areas; 
(8)  All walls, trailers and buildings that may endanger persons or property; 
(9)  Any business or building where illegal activities are habitually and commonly conducted in such a manner as to reasonably suggest the owner or operator of the business or building was aware of the illegal activities and failed to reasonably attempt to prevent such activities; 
(10)  Abandoned, deteriorating, decayed, dilapidated or defaced buildings, fences, walls, building materials, automobiles, trucks, house trailers, stoves, iceboxes, refrigerators, washing machines, clothes dryers or similar appliances; 
(11)  Trash, garbage, refuse or any foul, decaying or putrescent material kept, used, placed or disposed of in such a manner or place as to be or become detrimental to human health or well-being; 
(12)  Sewage, kitchen wastes, laundry wastes or any other wastes deposited upon or allowed to remain upon the ground surface or any other place so as to be or to become detrimental to human health or well-being; 
(13)  Any trees, shrubbery or other plants or parts thereof which obstruct clear, safe vision on roadways and intersections of the city; 
(14)  Any other condition constituting a nuisance under state law; and 
(15)  Any condition found by the judge of the municipal court, after an evidentiary hearing, to be detrimental to or endanger the health, welfare or good order of the city and declared by him therefore to be a nuisance. 
(Code 1979, § 11-2-1; Code 1998, § 34-69; Ord. No. 06-2009, pt. I, 5-4-2009) 
Sec. 26-50. - Complaint. 
Any city official or at least five inhabitants of the city may file a verified complaint of nuisance with the municipal court. The Judge of the Municipal Court or the Chief of Police or designee shall thereupon issue a citation to the offender to appear in municipal court. The Judge of the Municipal Court shall have jurisdiction to hear and determine the existence of such nuisance, and if found to exist to order its abatement. A finding by any governmental health department, health officer or a building inspector that any property, dwelling, building or structure is a health or safety hazard shall constitute prima facie evidence that such property is in violation of this article. 
(Code 1979, § 11-2-3; Code 1998, § 34-70) 
Sec. 26-51. - Unfit building, dwelling, structure, or property. 
(a)  The Judge of the Municipal Court is hereby designated and appointed to exercise the powers prescribed by this chapter. 
(b)  Whenever a verified complaint of nuisance is filed with the Police Department by a city official or at least five inhabitants of the city charging that any dwelling, building, structure or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial or business use, is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, or when it appears to the judge (on his own motion) that any dwelling, building, structure or property is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial or business use, is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, or that there is an accumulation of weeds, trash, junk, or filth on property, then the public officer shall make an investigation or inspection of the specific dwelling, building, structure, or property. If the officer's investigation or inspection identifies that any dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, then the public officer may issue a complaint in rem against the lot, tract, or parcel of real property on which such dwelling, building, or structure is situated or where such public health hazard or general nuisance exists and the public officer shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner of and any parties in interest in such dwelling, building, structure or property a summons and a copy of said verified complaint stating the charges in that respect and containing a notice that a hearing will be held before the judge of the municipal court (or his designated agent) at a place within the city in which the property is located, fixed not less than 15 days nor more than 45 days after the serving of such complaint; that the owner and any parties in interest shall be given a right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person, or otherwise, and give testimony at the place and time fixed in the complaint; and that the rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not be controlling in hearings before the public officer. 
(c)  If, after such notice and hearing, the judge determines that the dwelling, building, structure or property under consideration is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use, and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, he shall state in writing his findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner thereof an order: 
(1)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the dwelling, building, structure or property can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the value of the dwelling, building, structure, or property requiring the owner or parties in interest, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter, or improve such dwelling, building, structure or property so as to render it fit for human habitation or for current commercial, industrial, or business use so as to bring it into full compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violation and, if applicable, to secure the structure so that it cannot be used in connection with the commission of drug crimes, or to vacate and close the dwelling, building, structure or property as a human habitation; or 
(2)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the dwelling, building, structure or cleanup of property cannot be made so as to bring it into full compliance with applicable codes relevant to the cited violations at a reasonable cost in relation to the value of the dwelling, building, structure, or property, thus requiring the owner or parties in interest, within the time specified in the order, to remove or demolish such dwelling, building or structure, or clean up such property. 
(d)  In no event shall the judge require removal or demolition of any dwelling, building, or structure except upon a finding that the cost of repair, alteration, or improvement thereof exceeds one-half the value of such dwelling, building, or structure will have when repaired to satisfy the minimum requirements of this article. 
(e)  If the owner or parties in interest fail to comply with an order to vacate and close or demolish the dwelling, building, fence, wall or structure, or clean up the property the judge may cause such dwelling, building, fence, wall or structure to be repaired, altered, or improved or to be vacated, closed or demolished or said property to be cleaned up; and the judge may cause to be posted on the main entrance of any building, dwelling, or structure so closed or property to be cleaned up, a placard with the following words: 
"This building (property) is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use and does not comply with the applicable codes or has been ordered secured to prevent its use in connection with drug crimes or constitutes an endangerment to public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The use or occupation of this building (property) for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use is prohibited and unlawful." 
(f)  If the owner fails to comply with any order to remove or demolish the dwelling, building, fence, wall or structure, or to clean up the property, the judge may cause such dwelling, building, fence, wall or structure to be removed or demolished; or the property to be cleaned provided, however, that the duties of the judge set forth in subsection (e) of this section and this subsection, shall not be exercised until the City Council shall have by ordinance ordered the judge to proceed to effectuate the purpose of this article with respect to the particular property which the judge shall have found to be unfit for human habitation or unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use, which property shall be described in this article. 
(g)  The cost of such vacating and closing or removal or demolition or cleanup by the judge shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. Such lien shall attach to the real property upon the payment of all costs of demolition by the city and the filing of an itemized statement of the total sum of said costs by the judge in the Office of the City Clerk on a lien docket maintained by the Clerk for such purposes. If a dwelling, building, fence, wall or structure is removed or demolished by the judge, he shall sell the materials of such dwellings, buildings, fences, walls or structures and shall credit the proceeds of such sale against the cost of the removal or demolition and any balance remaining shall be deposited in the superior court by the judge, shall be secured in such manner as may be directed by the judge, and shall be disbursed by such superior court to the persons found to be entitled thereto by final order or decree of such superior court. 
(h)  The city may enforce the collection of any amount due on such lien for removal or demolition of dwellings, buildings, fences, walls or structures or cleanup of property only in the following manner: 
(1)  The owner or parties in interest shall be allowed to satisfy the amount due on such lien by paying to the city within 30 days after the perfection of such lien, a sum of money equal to 25 percent of the total amount due and by further paying to the city the remaining balance due on such lien, together with interest at the rate of seven percent per annum, in three equal annual payments, each of which shall become due and payable on the anniversary date of the initial payment made as hereinabove prescribed. 
(2)  Should the property upon which such lien is perfected be sold, transferred, or conveyed by the owner or parties in interest at any time prior to the termination of the said three-year period, then the entire balance due on such lien shall be due and payable to the city. 
(3)  Should the amount due on such lien, or any portion thereof, be unpaid after the passage of such three-year period, or upon the occurrence of the contingency provided for in subsection (h)(2) of this section, the city may enforce the collection of any amount due on such lien for alteration, repair, removal, or demolition of dwellings, buildings, or structure or cleanup of property as provided by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-358 and other applicable state statutes. This procedure shall be subject to the right of redemption by any person having any right, title, or interest in or lien upon said property, all as provided by O.C.G.A. § 48-4-40 et seq. 
(Code 1979, § 11-2-5; Code 1998, § 34-71) 
Sec. 26-52. - Offense and penalty. 
(a)  It is hereby declared to be an offense for any owner, agent or tenant to maintain or allow a nuisance to exist. Each day a nuisance is continued after order of the judge to abate shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  Whenever a nuisance is declared to exist, the offender shall be punished for contempt of court for not abating said nuisance as provided by the order of the court at the discretion of the municipal judge as provided in section 1-11. 
(Code 1979, § 11-2-6; Code 1998, § 34-72) 
Sec. 26-53. - Determination by judge that dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit. 
In addition to the nuisances declared in section 26-49, the judge may determine that a dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use if he finds that conditions exist in such building, dwelling, or structure or on such property which are dangerous or injurious to the health, safety, or morals of the occupants of such dwelling, building, structure or property; or the occupants of neighborhood dwellings, buildings, structures or property; or of other residents of the city; such conditions include the following (without limiting the generality of the foregoing): 
(1)  Defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; 
(2)  Lack of adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; 
(3)  Dilapidation; 
(4)  Disrepair; 
(5)  Structural defects; and 
(6)  Uncleanliness. 
(Code 1979, § 11-2-7; Code 1998, § 34-73) 
Sec. 26-54. - Powers of public officers in regard to unfit buildings or structures or property. 
The judge may exercise such powers as may be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purpose and provisions of this article, including the following powers, in addition to others herein granted to: 
(1)  Investigate property conditions in the city in order to determine which dwellings, buildings, structures or property are unfit for human habitation or are unfit for current commercial, industrial, or business use; 
(2)  Administer oaths and affirmations, to examine witnesses, and to receive evidence; 
(3)  Enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations; provided, however, that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession; 
(4)  Appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents, and employees as he deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this article; and 
(5)  Delegate any of his functions and powers under this article to such officers and agents as he may designate. 
(Code 1979, § 11-2-8; Code 1998, § 34-74) 
Sec. 26-55. - Service of complaints or orders upon parties in interest and owners of unfit buildings or structures or property. 
(a)  Verified complaints or orders issued by a public officer pursuant to this article shall, in all cases, be served upon each person in possession of such property, each owner, and each party in interest; and the return of service signed by the public officer or his agent or an affidavit of service executed by any citizen of this state, reciting that a copy of such complaint or order was served upon each person in possession of such property, each owner, and each party in interest personally or by leaving such copy at the place of his residence, shall be sufficient evidence as to the service of such person in possession, owner, and party in interest. 
(b)  In addition, at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing the public officer shall mail copies of the complaint by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, to all interested parties whose identities and addresses are reasonably ascertainable. Copies of the complaint shall also be mailed by first-class mail to the property address to the attention of the occupants of the property, if any, and shall be posted on the property within three business days of filing the complaint and at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(c)  If any of the owners and parties in interest shall reside outside of the city, service shall be perfected by causing a copy of such complaint or orders to be served upon such parties by the sheriff or any lawful deputy of the county of the residence of such parties or such service may be made by any citizen. The return of such sheriff or lawful deputy or the affidavit of such citizen, that such parties were served either personally or by leaving a copy of the complaint or orders at the residence, shall be conclusive as to such service. 
(d)  Nonresidents of this state shall be served by publishing the same once a week for two successive weeks in a newspaper printed and published in the city or, in the absence of such newspaper, in one printed and published in the county and circulated in the city in which the dwellings, buildings, structures or property are located. A copy of such complaint or orders shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises affected by the complaint or orders. Where the address of such nonresidents is known, a copy of such complaint or orders shall be mailed to them by registered or certified mail. 
(e)  If either the owner or any party in interest is a minor or an insane person or person laboring under disabilities, the guardian or other personal representative of such person shall be served and if such guardian or personal representative resides outside of the city or is a nonresident, he shall be served as provided for in subsection (c) or (d) of this section in such cases. If such minor or insane person or person laboring under disabilities has no guardian or personal representative or in the event such minor or insane person lives outside the city or is a nonresident, service shall be perfected by serving such minor or insane person personally or by leaving a copy at the place of his residence which shall be sufficient evidence as to the service of such person. In the case of other persons who live outside of the city or are nonresidents, service shall be perfected by serving the judge of the probate court of the county wherein such property is located who shall stand in the place of and protect the rights of such minor or insane person or appoint a guardian ad litem for such person. 
(f)  If the whereabouts of any owner or party in interest is unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by the public officer in the exercise of reasonable diligence and the public officer shall make an affidavit to that effect, then the service of such complaint or order upon such persons shall be made in the same manner as provided in subsection (d) of this section or service may be perfected upon any person holding himself out as an agent for the property involved. 
(g)  A copy of such complaint or order shall also be filed in the proper offices for the filing of a lis pendens notice in the county in which the dwelling, building, structure or property is located and such filing of the complaint or orders shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices provided by law. Any such complaint or order or an appropriate lis pendens notice may contain a statement to the effect that a lien may arise against the described property and that an itemized statement of such lien is maintained on a lien docket maintained by the City Clerk. 
(Code 1979, § 11-2-9; Code 1998, § 34-75) 
Sec. 26-56. - Taking of unfit buildings or structures by eminent domain; police power. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed as preventing the owner of any property from receiving just compensation for the taking of such property by the power of eminent domain under the laws of this state nor as permitting any property to be condemned or destroyed except in accordance with the police power of this state. 
(Code 1979, § 11-2-10; Code 1998, § 34-76) 
Sec. 26-57. - Appropriations to repair, close or demolish unfit buildings or structures or clean up property. 
The City Council is authorized to make such appropriations from its revenues as it may deem necessary and may accept and apply grants or donations to assist it in carrying out the provisions of ordinances adopted in this article. 
(Code 1979, § 11-2-11; Code 1998, § 34-77) 
Sec. 26-58. - Duty of owner to clean property. 
(a)  The term "owner," as used in this section, means any person, agent, operator, firm, partnership, corporation, limited liability company, or trust that has a legal or equitable interest in a parcel of real property, and/or the improvements thereon. Street address means the street or route address. Such term shall not mean or include a post office box. 
(b)  Whenever trash and/or rubbish shall accumulate on any tract of land within the city, or such lot or tract of land shall be covered with an excessive growth of noxious weeds, grass and/or vegetation in excess of eight inches in height a warning notice will be issued. 
(c)  The unpaved areas of front yards shall be maintained with grass, ground cover or other type of landscaping to such an extent that the soil is not subject to erosion. 
(d)  (1)  No clotheslines, drying racks, poles, or other similar devices for hanging clothes, towels, rugs, other fabrics or similar items shall be erected or maintained outdoors in a front or side yard in any residential area of the city. This is to include the hanging of said items on any natural objects such as shrubs, trees and similar objects. 
(2)  All clotheslines, drying racks, poles and similar devices for hanging clothes, towels, rugs, other fabrics or similar items shall be erected in the rear yard only and shall be no closer than five feet from any abutting property line. 
(3)  If any resident claims they will suffer unnecessary hardship or is otherwise unable to hang or dry clothes, towels, rugs, other fabrics or similar items elsewhere on the premises they occupy, then said resident may apply for a waiver to do so in the front or side yard of premises. Waivers will be reviewed and approved or denied by the Community Development Director. 
(e)  If the owner of such premises shall fail to clean the premises within the time frame given with the warning notice, such owner shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-11. 
(Code 1979, § 11-1-8; Code 1998, § 34-78; Ord. No. 04-2008, § 34-78, 2-4-2008; Ord. No. 16-2011, 10-3-2011; Ord. No. 07-2013, 11-4-2013) 
Sec. 26-59. - Inoperable vehicles—Accumulation of junk prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful in any residential or business area for the owner or resident of any property in the city to permit to accumulate on the property any junk, but is not limited to, any inoperable, discarded, dismantled, wrecked, scrapped, ruined or abandoned junk motor vehicles or heavy equipment or parts thereof or any vehicles or heavy equipment or parts thereof or any vehicle without a valid license plate attached thereto. 
Exemption: 
(1)  Property where authorized by zoning ordinance. 
(b)  Enforcement of this section shall be by the City Manager or his designee. 
(Code 1979, § 11-1-4; Code 1998, § 34-79; Ord. No. 08-2004, § 34-79, 7-6-2004; Ord. No. 12-2012, 6-4-2012) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12-2012, adopted June 4, 2012, changed the title of § 26-59 from "Accumulation of junk prohibited" to "Inoperable vehicles—Accumulation of junk prohibited." 
Sec. 26-60. - Holiday decorations; exceptions. 
It shall be unlawful to display holiday decorations over 30 days from the date of the holiday. The exception to this rule would apply to the lighting in the downtown area. Enforcement of this section shall be by the City Manager or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 08-2004, 7-6-2004) 
Sec. 26-61. - Open and outdoor storage. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit the accumulation of open or outdoor storage of any lumber, building materials, junk, trash, garbage, debris, scrap metal, concrete, asphalt, cans, bottles, glass, tires, salvage materials, boxes, containers, bins, and abandoned, discarded, inoperative, or unusable and/or indoor furniture, stove, refrigerator, freezer, sink, toilet, cabinet or other household appliances or fixtures, yard waste or equipment (excluding residential lawn maintenance equipment), personal items or similar items shall not be permitted for more than 24 hours. 
Exceptions: 
(1)  Property where outdoor storage is authorized by the zoning ordinance; 
(2)  Cut wood which is neatly stacked in lengths not to exceed three feet and is for the personal use of the owner or occupant 
(Ord. No. 08-2008, 3-3-2008) 
Sec. 26-62. - Abatement by the city. 
If the owner of any property shall refuse or fail to comply with sections 26-58, 26-59, 26-60, or 26-61 after ten days' written notice addressed to the owner of the property, the city may remove the offensive matter or personal property in a reasonable manner, and may cut such weeds, underbrush, or high grass on the property. Such work shall be done at the expense of the owner of the property. Upon completion of such work, the city finance director shall cause said expense to become a special assessment upon said property, which special assessment may be enforced and collected in accordance with section 16-3. The person returning such property for taxation in the city, or the person against whom all taxes upon the property may be assessed if there has been no return of such property by the owner of the property, shall be deemed to be the true owner of such property. 
(Ord. No. 07-2013, 11-4-2013) 
Sec. 26-63. - Punishment for violations. 
If the owner of any property shall fail or refuse to remove the offensive matter or personal property or to cut and remove all weeds, underbrush, or high grass, or shall fail or refuse to clean up all waste and refuse, as specified more completely in sections 26-58, 26-59, 26-60, and 26-61 from such person's property within ten days after written notice addressed to the owner of the property by the Code Enforcement Division or other department of the city, such person or entity shall be issued a citation for such refusal or failure, and shall be prosecuted and shall upon conviction be appropriately punished as provided in section 1-11. Each day of violation of this section of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 07-2013, 11-4-2013) 
Secs. 26-64—26-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - LITTER CONTROL[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Litter Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-40 et seq. 

Sec. 26-81. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety, environment, and general welfare through the regulation and prevention of litter. The objectives of this article are to: 
(1)  Provide for uniform prohibition throughout the incorporated city and of any and all littering on public or private property; 
(2)  Prevent the desecration of the beauty and quality of life of the city; and 
(3)  Prevent harm to the public health, safety, environment, and general welfare, including prevention of communicable disease and degradation of water and aquatic resources caused by litter. 
(Ord. No. 12-2006, § 62.49, 11-6-2006) 
Sec. 26-82. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Handbill means any printed or written matter, any sample or device, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet, flyer or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of literature which: 
(1)  Advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity, service, business, opportunity or thing; 
(2)  Directs attention to any business or mercantile or commercial establishment or other activity, for the purpose of either directly or indirectly promoting the interest thereof by sales; 
(3)  Directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind, for which an admission fee is charged; or 
(4)  While containing reading matter other than advertising matter, is predominately and essentially an advertisement, and is distributed or circulated for advertising purposes or for the private benefit and economic gain of any person so engaged as advertiser or distributor; and 
(5)  Handbills for political, charitable and other nonprofit purposes are exempt from this article. 
Litter means any organic or inorganic waste material, rubbish, refuse, garbage, trash, hulls, peelings, debris, grass, weeds, ashes, sand, gravel, slag, brickbats, metal, plastic, and glass containers, broken glass, dead animals or intentionally or unintentionally discarded materials of every kind and description which are not egregious litter as such term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-7-51(4). 
Private property means any dwelling house, building or other structure, designed or used either wholly or in part for private residential purposes, whether inhabited or vacant, and shall include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling house, building or other structure. 
Property open to the public means the right-of-way of any road or highway; any body of water or watercourse or the shores or beaches thereof; any public park, playground, building, refuge, or conservation or recreation area; lumber lands or forests; and residential, institutional, commercial or industrial properties. 
Vehicle means every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway. 
(Code 1998, § 62-46; Ord. No. 18-95, § VII(5-3-1), 11-6-1995; Ord. No. 12-2006, § 62.50, 11-6-2006) 
Sec. 26-83. - Applicability. 
This article shall apply to all property open to the public and to all private property within the incorporated city. 
(Ord. No. 12-2006, § 62.51, 11-6-2006) 
Sec. 26-84. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This article is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law. The requirements of this article should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence. 
(Ord. No. 12-2006, § 62.52, 11-6-2006) 
Sec. 26-85. - Prohibition against littering on public or private property or waters. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to dump, deposit, throw or leave or to cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing or leaving of litter on any property open to the public or private property in the city or any waters in the city unless: 
(1)  The area is designated by the state or by any of its agencies or political subdivisions for the disposal of such litter; 
(2)  Such person is authorized by the proper public authority to use such area for such purposes; and 
(3)  The litter is placed into a nondisposable receptacle or container installed on such property designed for the temporary storage of litter and located in an area designated by the owner or tenant in lawful possession of the property; or 
(4)  The person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, or has first obtained consent of the owner or tenant in lawful possession, or unless the act is done under the personal direction of the owner or tenant, all in a manner consistent with the public welfare. 
(Code 1998, § 62-47; Ord. No. 18-95, § VII(5-3-2), 11-6-1995; Ord. No. 12-2006, § 62.53, 11-6-2006) 
Sec. 26-86. - Provision of litter receptacles. 
All commercial businesses and institutions patronized by the public shall place and maintain on the exterior of their premises in places easily accessible by the public receptacles for the deposit of litter at appropriate locations where the property is frequented by the public and to post signs directing people to the receptacles. 
(Ord. No. 12-2006, § 62.54, 11-6-2006) 
Sec. 26-87. - Distribution of handbills. 
(a)  Private property. It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, deposit, leave, place or cause or permit the throwing, depositing, leaving or placing of any handbill, unless exempted by this article, upon any private property if the mailbox is specifically marked with the identifying insignia which signifies that the occupant does not wish to receive handbills. The identifying insignia is to be posted on the bottom right corner of the mailbox door, the insignia will be green, state "Handbills" with the universal insignia for "no" superimposed over "Handbills," and identify the enforcing ordinance. This insignia must be provided by the city. 
(b)  Prohibition on vacant property. No person shall throw, deposit, leave, place or cause or permit the throwing, depositing, leaving or placing of any handbill, upon any private property which is vacant and which could be reasonably ascertained to be vacant. 
(c)  Manner of placing on property. Unless private property is posted as provided in subsection (a) of this section, or vacant as provided in subsection (b) of this section, or unless requested by anyone upon such premises not to do so whether such private property is posted as provided in subsection (a) of this section or not, the person distributing the handbills may place or deposit any such handbill in or upon such inhabited private property as provided in subsection (a) of this section. 
(1)  Such handbill may be placed on doorknob hangers provided by the person distributing the handbill; or 
(2)  Such handbill may be placed or deposited on inhabited private property if such handbill is placed or deposited in a manner that is reasonably designed to secure or prevent such handbill from being blown or drifted about such private property or property open to the public, including streets, stormwater catchment and conveyance systems and other public places. 
(d)  Mailboxes. Nothing in this article authorizes placing handbills in mailboxes when such use is prohibited by federal law or by postal regulations. 
(e)  Property open to the public. No person shall throw, deposit, leave, place or cause or permit the throwing, depositing, leaving or placing of any handbill, unless exempted by this article, upon any property open to the public; provided, however, it shall not be a violation of this article for any person to hand out or to distribute without charge to the receiver thereof any handbill to any person willing to receive it. 
(f)  Vehicles. No person shall throw, deposit, leave, place or cause or permit the throwing, depositing, leaving or placing of any handbill, unless exempted by this article, upon any vehicle, provided, however, it shall not be a violation of this article for any person to hand out or to distribute without charge to the receiver thereof any handbill to any occupant of a vehicle who is willing to receive it. 
(g)  Public utility poles, trees and other structures. No person shall throw, post or affix any handbill upon any public utility pole, tree, lamppost or upon any other public structure except as may be authorized or required by law. 
(Ord. No. 12-2006, § 62.55, 11-6-2006) 
Sec. 26-88. - Vehicle loads causing litter. 
No person shall operate any motor vehicle with a load on or in such vehicle unless the load on or in such vehicle is adequately secured to prevent the dropping or shifting of materials from such load onto the roadway. 
(Ord. No. 12-2006, § 62.56, 11-6-2006) 
Sec. 26-89. - Violations enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Violations. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this article. Any person who has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this article, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section or may be restrained by injunction or otherwise sentenced in a manner provided by law. 
(b)  Evidence. 
(1)  Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped or dumped from any motor vehicle, boat, airplane, or other conveyance in violation of this article, the trier of fact may in its discretion and in consideration of the totality of the circumstances infer that the operator of the conveyance has violated this article. 
(2)  Except as provided in subsection (b)(1) of this section, whenever any litter is dumped, deposited, thrown or left on public or private property in violation of this article and is discovered to contain any articles, including, but not limited to, letters, bills, publications or other writing which display the name of the person thereon in such a manner as to indicate that the article belongs or belonged to such person, the trier of fact may in its discretion and in consideration of the totality of the circumstances infer that such person has violated this article. 
(c)  Penalties. Any person who violates this article shall be punished as follows: 
(1)  By a fine of not less than $200.00 and not more than $200.00; 
(2)  In addition to the fine set out in subsection (c)(1) of this section, the violator shall reimburse the city for the reasonable cost of removing the litter when the litter is or is ordered removed by the city; and 
(3)  In the sound discretion of the court, the person may be directed to pick up and remove any and all litter from any public street or highway or public right-of-way, for a distance not to exceed one mile, any litter he has deposited and any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone else prior to the date of execution of sentence; or 
(4)  In the sound discretion of the court, the person may be directed to pick up and remove any and all litter from any property open to the public, any right-of-way, or with prior permission of the legal owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, any private property upon which it can be established by competent evidence that he has deposited litter. Pickup and removal shall include any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone prior to the date of execution of sentence; and 
(5)  The court may publish the names of persons convicted of violating this article. 
(d)  Enforcement. Any law enforcement officer authorized to enforce county ordinances within the city is hereby authorized, empowered and directed to enforce compliance with this article. 
(Code 1998, § 62-48; Ord. No. 18-95, § VII(5-3-3), 11-6-1995; Ord. No. 12-2006, § 62.57, 11-6-2006) 
Secs. 26-90—26-106. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - YARD TRIMMINGS DISPOSAL 

Sec. 26-107. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commercial solid waste means all types of solid waste generated by stores, offices, restaurants, warehouses and other nonmanufacturing activities, excluding residential and industrial wastes. 
Composting means the controlled biological decomposition of organic matter into a stable, odor-free humus. 
Leachate collection system means a system at a landfill for collection of the leachate which may percolate through the waste and into the soils surrounding the landfill. 
Municipal solid waste means any solid waste derived from households, including garbage, trash and sanitary waste in septic tanks and solid waste from single-family and multifamily residences, hotels and motels, bunkhouses, campgrounds, picnic grounds and day use recreation areas. The term "municipal solid waste" includes yard trimmings and commercial solid waste but does not include solid waste from mining, agricultural or silvicultural operations or industrial processes or operations. 
Municipal solid waste disposal facility means any facility or location where the final deposition of any amount of municipal solid waste occurs, whether or not mixed with or including commercial or industrial solid waste including, but not limited to, municipal solid waste landfills. 
Municipal solid waste landfill means a disposal facility where any amount of municipal solid waste, whether or not mixed with or including commercial waste, industrial waste, nonhazardous sludges or small quantity generator hazardous waste, is disposed of by means of placing an approved cover thereon. 
Yard trimmings means leaves, brush, grass clippings, shrub and tree prunings, discarded Christmas trees, nursery and greenhouse vegetative residuals, and vegetative matter resulting from landscaping development and maintenance, other than mining, agricultural and silvicultural operations. 
(Code 1998, § 62-81; Ord. No. 23-96, § I(5-3-1), 12-2-1996) 
Sec. 26-108. - Prohibitions on placement and disposal. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to place or mix yard trimmings with municipal solid waste within the city. 
(b)  Yard trimmings shall not be disposed at any municipal solid waste disposal facility having a litter and leachate collection system or requiring vertical expansion located within the city. 
(Code 1998, § 62-82; Ord. No. 23-96, § I(5-3-2), 12-2-1996) 
Sec. 26-109. - Sorting, storing, collecting and composting. 
Yard trimmings shall be sorted and stored in the following manner: 
(1)  Yard trimmings shall be sorted and stored for collection in a manner that facilitates collection, composting or other lawful handling. Yard trimmings cannot be placed in plastic bags if placed at the curb for pickup. 
(2)  Upon collection by the city, yard trimmings shall be sorted and stockpiled until their ultimate disposal by chipping, mulching, other beneficial use or recycling. 
(Code 1998, § 62-83; Ord. No. 23-96, § I(5-3-3), 12-2-1996; Ord. No. 15-97, 9-8-1997) 
Chapter 28 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Criminal Code of Georgia, O.C.G.A. § 16-1-1 et seq.; limitation on home rule powers of municipal corporations with respect to duplication of state criminal offenses, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 28-1. - Damage to property; graffiti, exception; vandalism; penalty. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to cut down, remove, injure or attach any sign or advertising to any tree or shrub planted or growing in any public place in the city without the express permission of the City Council. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully damage, destroy, mar or deface any property of the city. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to tamper with, to open or to paint any equipment of the departments of the city, including fire hydrants, street information signs, electrical enclosures and water mains. 
(d)  For purposes of this section, the term "graffiti" shall have the same meaning as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 17-15A-2. The term "graffiti" means any inscriptions, words, figures, paintings, or other defacements that are written, marked, etched, scratched, sprayed, drawn, painted, or engraved on or otherwise affixed to any surface of real property or improvements thereon without prior authorization of the owner or occupant of the property by means of any aerosol paint container, broad-tipped marker, gum label, paint stick, graffiti stick, etching equipment, brush, or other device capable of scarring or leaving a visible mark on any surface. It is unlawful for any person or group of persons to commit any act resulting in or attempting to result in the application of graffiti or the engaging in or attempting to engage in an act of related vandalism including, but not limited to, any of the following: 
(1)  Any act such as drawing, scribing, etching, marking, painting, staining, sticking on or adhering to any surface, public or private, including, but not limited to, trees, signs, poles, fixtures, utility boxes, walls, windows, roofs, paths, walks, streets, buildings and/or any other structures or surfaces. 
(2)  Any act of participation in applying graffiti such as, but not limited to, conspiring to commit or assist in the applying of graffiti or engaging in or assisting in an act of related vandalism including, but not limited to, acting as a lookout, regardless of the fact the act was not actually witnessed. 
(3)  Any person who knowingly allows any acts of graffiti or related vandalism to occur on or to any property over which he has control as owner, tenant or possessor and who thereafter fails to promptly report such acts to the proper authorities is guilty of being a principal to the offense. 
(4)  It is unlawful for any person, business, company, or other entity which owns or otherwise controls any building, sign, pole, vehicle, trailer, trash receptacle, wall, parking lot, walkway or any other structure or real property to knowingly allow or permit any graffiti or related vandalism to be placed on, or to take place on, any such structure or property where the graffiti and/or results of the vandalism are visible from any public right-of-way. 
(5)  Graffiti and/or graffiti-related vandalism which appears on property and/or structures where such graffiti or related vandalism is visible from a public right-of-way shall be deemed to be a public nuisance and the property owner shall be issued a warning notice to remove the graffiti or the same will be subject to abatement by the city. The removal of graffiti shall leave the area that resulted in the application of graffiti as close as possible to its original color/texture prior to the graffiti application, as determined by the Community Development Director. 
Exceptions: Any mural or work of art approved by the city or other governmental agency through a design review or planning process and requiring proper permits prior to commencement of any work shall not constitute graffiti. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful to plant or place any type of shrubbery around any electrical enclosure, fire hydrant, water main or other property belonging to the city. 
(f)  Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section shall be subject to a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 or by imprisonment not exceeding 180 days, or both. Any such violation shall constitute a separate offense on each successive day continued. 
(Code 1979, § 11-1-3; Code 1998, § 54-2; Ord. No. 05-97, 4-7-1997; Ord. No. 07-2008, 3-3-2008; Ord. No. 13-2009, 7-6-2009) 
Sec. 28-2. - Loitering and prowling. 
(a)  Commission of offense. A person commits the offense of loitering or prowling when he is in a place at a time or in a manner not usual for law-abiding individuals under circumstances that warrant a justifiable and reasonable alarm or immediate concern for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity. Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether alarm is warranted is the fact that the person takes flight upon the appearance of a law enforcement officer, refuses to identify himself, or manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or any object. Unless flight by the person or other circumstances make it impracticable, a law enforcement officer shall, prior to any arrest for an offense under this Code section, afford the person an opportunity to dispel any alarm or immediate concern which would otherwise be warranted by requesting the person to identify himself and explain his presence and conduct. No person shall be convicted of an offense under this section if the law enforcement officer failed to comply with the foregoing procedure or if it appears at trial that the explanation given by the person was true and would have dispelled the alarm or immediate concern. 
(b)  Halting or impeding flow of traffic. No person shall congregate with another or others in or on any public way or place so as to halt or impede the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic after having been directed to clear such public way or place when ordered by the police or any other law enforcement official. 
(c)  Loitering for the purpose of engaging in solicitation of sex acts. It shall be unlawful for any person to remain or loiter in any public place for the following purposes: 
(1)  The solicitation of another to perform or offer or consent to perform an act of prostitution; 
(2)  The solicitation of another to perform or submit to an act of sodomy; 
(3)  The solicitation of another to erotically stimulate the genital organs of another, whether resulting in orgasm or not, by manual or other bodily contact exclusive of sexual intercourse or by instrumental manipulation. 
(d)  Any person found guilty of violating any of these sections shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 or by imprisonment not to exceed 180 days, or both. 
(Code 1979, § 11-1-9; Code 1998, § 54-3; Ord. No. 08-98, 4-6-1998; Ord. No. 11-2001, 8-6-2001; Ord. No. 12-2009, 7-6-2009) 
Sec. 28-3. - Urban camping and improper use of public places. 
(a)  Public property—City parks. It shall be unlawful to sleep, lie down, to reside or to store personal property in any park owned by the city. 
(b)  Same—Sidewalks. It shall be unlawful to sleep, lie down, to reside or to store personal property on any sidewalk in the city. 
(c)  Same—Blocking ingress and egress. It shall be unlawful to use any public place to sleep, lie down, to reside or to store personal property or to sit or lie down on any public property so as to interfere with the ingress or egress from the building. 
(d)  Same—Urban camping. It shall be unlawful to use any public place, including city parks and sidewalks, for living accommodations or camping, except in areas specifically designated for such use or specifically authorized by permit. 
(e)  Private property: urban camping without the owner's permission. It shall be unlawful for anyone other than the owner, a leaseholder, an employee, or other rightful occupant to camp, sleep, reside, store personal property, or lie down, outside on any private property without the owner's or leaseholder's permission. 
(f)  Exceptions. Notwithstanding anything in this section to the contrary, this section shall not apply to nor be construed to prohibit the following behavior: 
(1)  Persons sitting or lying down as a result of a medical emergency; 
(2)  Persons sitting in wheelchairs while using parks, sidewalks, or other public places; 
(3)  Persons sitting down while attending parades for which valid permits have been issued; 
(4)  Persons sitting down while patronizing outdoor cafes; 
(5)  Persons sitting on chairs or benches supplied by a public agency or abutting private property owner; 
(6)  Persons sitting down, lying down or napping while attending performances, festivals and concerts taking place in any park, street or sidewalk closed by permit for such purpose; 
(7)  Persons sitting on seats in bus zones occupied by people waiting for the bus; 
(8)  Persons sitting or lying down while waiting in an orderly line outside a box office to purchase tickets to any sporting event, concert, performance, or other special event; or 
(9)  Children under the age of 13 years sleeping in parks, or sleeping anywhere else while being carried by an accompanying person or while sitting or lying in a stroller or baby carriage. 
(Ord. No. 16-2003, 11-3-2003) 
Sec. 28-4. - Juvenile curfew. 
(a)  Title of section. This section shall be known as the City of Norcross Juvenile Curfew Ordinance. 
(b)  Findings and purpose. It is the responsibility of the City Council to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens. The City Council is concerned about the increase in criminal activity engaged in by minors especially those crimes that occur after hours and/or at times in which juveniles should be at home. A child curfew ordinance is one initiative in protecting our children from being the victims and perpetrators of crime. In an effort to keep our communities drug free and our streets safe by reducing the number of crimes that are committed by and against minors after hours, the City Council believes that a child curfew ordinance is in the best interest of the citizens of the city. Accordingly, the city finds and declares that the purpose of this section is to reduce the number of crimes committed by and against juveniles after hours, and to safeguard the welfare of our citizens. 
(c)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adult means a person who is at least 18 years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian to have the care and custody of a minor, or is an emancipated minor. 
Curfew hours means 11:00 p.m. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, or Thursday until 6:00 a.m. on the following day, and 11:59 p.m. on any Friday or Saturday until 6:00 a.m. on the following day. 
Emancipated minor means: 
(1)  Any person under the age of 18 years who is or has been married or who is not under the care, custody, and control of a parent, parents, guardian, person standing in locus parentis, or the juvenile court of competent jurisdiction; or 
(2)  Any person under the age of 18 years who has had the disabilities of minority removed by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
Emergency means an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term "emergency" includes, but is not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, or automobile accident, or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life. 
Establishment means any privately owned place of business operated for a profit to which the public is invited including, but not limited to, any place of amusement or entertainment. 
Guardian means a person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor, or a public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by the court. 
Minor means any person 17 years of age or under. 
Operator means any individual, firm, association, partnership, or corporation operating, managing, or conducting any establishment. The term "operator" includes the members or partners of an association or partnership and officers of a corporation. 
Parent means a person who is a natural parent, an adopted parent, or stepparent of another person. 
Public place means any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access that includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities, and shops. 
Remain means linger or stay, or fail to leave premises when requested to do so by an officer or the owner, operator, or the person in control of the premises. 
Serious bodily injury means bodily injury that causes death or creates a substantial risk of serious permanent disfigurement, or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ. 
(d)  Persons 17 years of age or younger. Curfew for persons 17 years of age or younger is as follows: 
(1)  It is unlawful for any minor, to loiter, wander, stroll, or play in or upon the public places, streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds or other public grounds, establishments, public buildings, places of amusement, eating places, vacant lots, or any place in the city unsupervised by an adult, parent, or guardian having the lawful authority to be in such places, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. on any day and 6:00 a.m. on the following day; provided, however, that on Fridays and Saturdays the effective hours are between 11:59 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the following day. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian, or other person having custody or control of any minor 17 years of age or younger to knowingly or, by insufficient control, to allow such minor to be in or upon the public place, streets or any other places listed in subsection (d)(1) of this section in the city between the hours of 11:00 p.m. on any day and 6:00 a.m. the following day, or on Fridays and Saturdays between the hours of 11:59 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. the following day, except as provided by subsection (f) of this section. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for any owner, operator, or employee of an establishment to knowingly allow a minor to be in or upon the premises of an establishment in the city between the hours of 11:00 p.m. on any day and 6:00 a.m. the following day, or on Fridays and Saturdays between the hours of 11:59 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. the following day, except as provided by subsection (f) of this section. 
(e)  Offenses. 
(1)  Minor. A minor commits an offense if he remains in any public place or on the premises of any establishment in the city during curfew hours. 
(2)  Parent or guardian. A parent or a guardian of a minor commits an offense if he knowingly permits, or by insufficient control allows, the minor to remain in any public place or on the premises of any establishment in the city during curfew hours. 
(3)  Owner, operator or employee. An owner, operator, or employee of an establishment commits an offense if he knowingly allows a minor to remain in or upon the premises of any establishment in the city during curfew hours. It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the owner, operator, or employee of an establishment promptly notified the Police Department that a minor was present on the premises of the establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave. 
(f)  Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply in the following instances: 
(1)  When a minor is accompanied by his parent, guardian, or other adult having the lawful care and custody of the minor; 
(2)  When the minor is upon an emergency errand directed by his parent or guardian or other adult person having the lawful care and custody of such minor, or if such minor is seeking medical treatment; 
(3)  When the minor is returning directly home from a school activity, entertainment, recreational activity, or dance; 
(4)  When the minor is returning directly home from lawful employment that makes it necessary to be in the above-referenced places during the prescribed period of time; 
(5)  When the minor is attending or traveling directly to or from an activity involving the exercise of First Amendment rights of free speech, freedom of assembly, or free exercise of religion; 
(6)  When the minor is in a motor vehicle of parental consent for normal travel. All cases of interstate travel through the city are excepted from the curfew; 
(7)  When the minor is an emancipated minor as defined in O.C.G.A. § 20-2-16.03(3). 
(g)  Violations and penalties. Penalties for violation of this section are as follows: 
(1)  Adult, parent, guardian or owner, operator or employee. Upon conviction of violations of this section for the first time, an adult, parent, guardian or owner, operator of employee of an establishment shall be given a warning citation. Upon further convictions, an adult, parent, guardian or owner, operator or employee of an establishment shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or imprisonment for not more than 180 days, or by both. 
(2)  Minor. Adjudication of violations of this section by minors shall be made in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 15-1-1 et seq. 
(h)  Enforcement. Before taking any enforcement action under this section, the police officer shall ask the apparent offender's age and the reason for being in the public place. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this section unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that, based on any response and other circumstances that no exception listed in subsection (f) of this section is present. 
(Ord. No. 03-2004, 3-1-2004; Ord. No. 16-2009, 7-6-2009) 
Sec. 28-5. - Discharge of firearms. 
(a)  No person shall discharge any firearm within the city limits, except as authorized by permit secured from the City Manager or his designee. The term "firearm" as used in this section shall have the same meaning as in O.C.G.A. § 16-11-171(3). 
(b)  In order to obtain a permit to discharge a firearm within the city limits, such activity shall be conducted within an approved and permitted indoor firing range which provides a sufficient backstop or bullet trap to prevent the projectile from leaving the range or causing injury. The City Manager or his designee shall establish criteria for periodic inspection and permitting of indoor firing ranges. Outdoor firing ranges are prohibited within the city limits. 
(c)  This section shall not be construed to prohibit any officer of the law from discharging a firearm in the performance of his duty, nor any citizen from discharging a firearm when lawfully defending his person or property. 
(d)  This section shall not be construed to prohibit the discharge of firearms loaded with blank cartridges during a funeral ceremony conducted by the police, the United States military, or by United States Military Veterans' organizations; 
(e)  Citizens desiring to conduct hunting, turkey shoots or other events on property owned by them or with permission from the owner shall obtain a letter of authorization from the chief of police whose duty it will be to inspect the area for safety and to approve or disapprove the request. Approval shall be given upon a showing that public safety will not be endangered by the proposed activity and a further showing that the proposed activity will not violate any law or ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 10-2014, § I, 12-1-2014) 
Secs. 28-6—28-26. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STREET GANG TERRORISM AND PREVENTION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Street Gang Terrorism and Prevention Act, O.C.G.A. § 16-15-1 et seq. 

Sec. 28-27. - Short title. 
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Norcross Street Gang Terrorism and Prevention Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 14-2007, § 54-4, 6-4-2007) 
Sec. 28-28. - Legislative intent. 
(a)  The Mayor and City Council finds and declares that it is the right of every person to be secure and protected from fear, intimidation, and physical harm caused by the activities of violent groups and individuals. It is not the intent of this chapter to interfere with the exercise of the constitutionally protected rights of freedom of expression and association. The Mayor and City Council recognize the constitutional right of every citizen to harbor and express beliefs on any lawful subject whatsoever, to associate lawfully with others who share similar beliefs, to petition lawfully constituted authority for a redress of perceived grievances, and to participate in the electoral process. 
(b)  The Mayor and City Council, however, further finds that the city is in a state of crisis, which has been caused by violent street gangs whose members threaten, terrorize, and commit a multitude of crimes against the peaceful citizens of their neighborhoods. These activities, both individually and collectively, present a clear and present danger to public order and safety and are not constitutionally protected. 
(c)  The Mayor and City Council finds that there are criminal street gangs operating in the city and that the number of gang related crimes is increasing. It is the intent of the Mayor and City Council in enacting this article to seek the eradication of criminal activity by street gangs by focusing upon patterns of criminal gang activity and upon the organized nature of street gangs which together are the chief source of terror created by street gangs. 
(d)  The Mayor and City Council further finds that an effective means of punishing and deterring the criminal activities of street gangs is through forfeiture of the profits, proceeds, and instrumentalities acquired, accumulated, or used by street gangs. 
(Ord. No. 14-2007, § 54-5, 6-4-2007) 
Sec. 28-29. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Criminal gang activity means the commission, attempted commission, conspiracy to commit, or solicitation, coercion, or intimidation of another person to commit any of the following offenses on or after May 1, 2007: 
(1)  Any offense defined as racketeering activity by O.C.G.A. § 16-14-3; 
(2)  Any offense defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-5-90 et seq., relating to stalking; 
(3)  Any offense defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-6-1 (as rape), O.C.G.A. § 16-6-2 (as aggravated sodomy), O.C.G.A. § 16-6-3 (as statutory rape), or O.C.G.A. § 16-6-22.2 as aggravated sexual battery; 
(4)  Any offense defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-10-50 et seq., relating to escape and other offenses related to confinement; 
(5)  Any offense defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-11-100 et seq., relating to dangerous instrumentalities and practices; 
(6)  Any offense defined in O.C.G.A. §§ 42-5-15, 42-5-16, 42-5-17, 42-5-18, or 42-5-19, relating to the security of state or county correctional facilities; 
(7)  Any offense defined in O.C.G.A. § 49-4A-11, relating to aiding or encouraging a child to escape from custody; 
(8)  Any offense of criminal trespass or criminal damage to property resulting from any act of gang related painting on, tagging, marking on, writing on, or creating any form of graffiti on the property of another; 
(9)  Any criminal offense committed in violation of the laws of the United States or its territories, dominions, or possessions, any of the several states, or any foreign nation which, if committed in this state, would be considered criminal gang activity under this section; and 
(10)  Any criminal offense in the state, any other state, or the United States that involves violence, possession of a weapon, or use of a weapon, whether designated as a felony or not, and regardless of the maximum sentence that could be imposed or actually was imposed. 
Criminal street gang means any organization, association, or group of three or more persons associated in fact, whether formal or informal, which engages in criminal gang activity as defined in this section. The existence of such organization, association, or group of individuals associated in fact may be established by evidence of a common name or common identifying signs, symbols, tattoos, graffiti, or attire or other distinguishing characteristics. Such term shall not include three or more persons, associated in fact, whether formal or informal, who are not engaged in criminal gang activity. 
(Ord. No. 14-2007, § 54-6, 6-4-2007) 
Sec. 28-30. - Unlawful acts; penalties. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person employed by or associated with a criminal street gang to conduct or participate in criminal street gang activity through the commission of any offense enumerated in the definition of "criminal gang activity" in section 28-29. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person employed by or associated with a criminal street gang to commit any offense enumerated in section 28-29 with knowledge that members of such criminal street gang have committed one or more of such offenses. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to commit any offense enumerated in section 28-29 with the intent to maintain or increase his status or position in a criminal street gang. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to acquire or maintain, directly or indirectly, through criminal gang activity or proceeds derived therefrom any interest in or control of any real or personal property of any nature, including money. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person who occupies a position of organizer, supervisory position, or any other position of management with regard to a criminal street gang to engage in, directly or indirectly, or conspire to engage in criminal gang activity. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, encourage, solicit, or coerce another to participate in a criminal street gang. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful for any person to communicate, directly or indirectly, with another any threat of injury or damage to the person or property of the other person or to any associate or relative of the other person with the intent to deter such person from assisting a member or associate of a criminal street gang to withdraw from such criminal street gang. 
(h)  It shall be unlawful for any person to communicate, directly or indirectly, with another any threat of injury or damage to the person or property of the other person or to any associate or relative of the other person with the intent to punish or retaliate against such person for having withdrawn from a criminal street gang. 
(i)  Any person who violates subsection (a), (b), (c), or (d) of this section shall, in addition to any other penalty imposed by law, be punished as provided for in section 1-11. 
(j)  Any crime committed in violation of this section shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 14-2007, § 54-7, 6-4-2007) 
Sec. 28-31. - Forfeiture of contraband property. 
(a)  The following are declared to be contraband and no person shall have a property interest in them: 
(1)  All property which is directly or indirectly used or intended for use in any manner to facilitate a violation of this article; and 
(2)  Any property constituting or derived from gross profits or other proceeds obtained from a violation of this article. 
(b)  The Chief of Police or other appropriate city official may take the necessary steps to initiate forfeiture proceedings as allowed by law. 
(Ord. No. 14-2007, § 54-8, 6-4-2007) 
Sec. 28-32. - Criminal gang activity; nuisance, abatement, cause of action. 
(a)  Nuisance. Any real property which is erected, established, maintained, owned, leased, or used by any criminal street gang for the purpose of conducting criminal gang activity shall constitute a public nuisance and may be abated as provided by O.C.G.A. § 41-1-1 et seq., relating to nuisances. 
(b)  Action to abate. An action to abate a nuisance pursuant to this section may be brought by the district attorney, solicitor-general, prosecuting attorney of a municipal court or city or county attorney in any superior, state, or municipal court. 
(c)  Cause of action for injured persons. Any person who is injured by reason of criminal gang activity shall have a cause of action for three times the actual damages sustained and, where appropriate, punitive damages; provided, however, that no cause of action shall arise under this subsection as a result of an otherwise legitimate commercial transaction between parties to a contract or agreement for the sale of lawful goods or property or the sale of securities regulated by O.C.G.A. § 10-5-1 et seq. or by the Federal Securities and Exchange Commission. Such person shall also recover attorney's fees in the trial and appellate court and costs of investigation and litigation reasonably incurred. All averments of a cause of action under this subsection shall be stated with particularity. No judgment shall be awarded unless the finder of fact determines that the action is consistent with the intent of the General Assembly as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 16-15-2. 
(d)  Action to enjoin. The state, any political subdivision thereof, or any person aggrieved by a pattern of gang activity may bring an action to enjoin violations of this article in the same manner as provided in O.C.G.A. § 16-14-6. 
(Ord. No. 14-2007, § 54-10, 6-4-2007) 
Sec. 28-33. - Effect of conviction of criminal gang activity on subsequent civil action. 
A conviction of an offense defined as criminal gang activity shall estop the defendant in any subsequent civil action or proceeding as to matters proved in the criminal proceeding. 
(Ord. No. 14-2007, § 54-11, 6-4-2007) 
Sec. 28-34. - Certain offenses admissible as evidence. 
The commission of any offense enumerated in section 28-29 by any member of a criminal street gang shall be admissible in any trial or proceeding for the purpose of proving the existence of the criminal street gang activity. 
(Ord. No. 14-2007, § 54-12, 6-4-2007) 
Secs. 28-35—28-56. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DISORDERLY CONDUCT 

Sec. 28-57. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Incite a riot means, but is not limited to, urging or instigating other persons to riot, but shall not be deemed to mean the mere oral or written: 
(1)  Advocacy of ideas; or 
(2)  Expression of belief, not involving advocacy of any act of violence or assertion of the rightness of, or the right to commit, any such act. 
Public place means any place to which the general public has access and a right to resort for business, entertainment, or other lawful purpose, but does not necessarily mean a place devoted solely to the uses of the public. The term "public place" includes the front or immediate area of any store, shop, restaurant, tavern, or other place of business and also public grounds, areas, or parks. 
Riot means a public disturbance involving: 
(1)  An act of violence by one or more persons part of an assemblage of three or more persons, which act or acts shall constitute a clear and present danger of or shall result in, damage or injury to the property of any other person or to the person of any other individual; or 
(2)  A threat of the commission of an act of violence by one or more persons part of an assemblage of three or more persons having, individually or collectively, the ability of immediate execution of such threat or threats, where the performance of the threatened act of violence would constitute a clear and present danger of, or would result in damage or injury to, the property of any other person or to the person of any other individual. 
(Code 1979, § 11-1-1(a); Code 1998, § 54-36) 
Sec. 28-58. - Prohibited acts. 
A person shall be guilty of disorderly conduct if, with the purpose of causing public danger, alarm, disorder, nuisance, or if his conduct is likely to cause public danger, alarm, disorder or nuisance, he willfully does any of the following acts in a public place. 
(1)  Commits an act in a violent and tumultuous manner toward another whereby that other is placed in danger of his life, limb or health. 
(2)  Commits an act in a violent and tumultuous manner toward another whereby the property of any person is placed in danger of being destroyed or damaged. 
(3)  Causes, provokes or engages in any fight, brawl or riotous conduct so as to endanger the life, limb, health, or property of another. 
(4)  Interferes with another's pursuit of a lawful occupation by acts of violence. 
(5)  Obstructs, either singly or together with other persons, the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic and refuses to clear such public way when ordered to do so by the police or other lawful authority known to be such. 
(6)  Is in a public place under the influence of an intoxicating liquor or drug in such condition as to be unable to exercise care for his own safety or the safety of others. 
(7)  Resists or obstructs the performance of duties by police or any other authorized official of the city, when known to be such an official. 
(8)  Incites, attempts to incite, or is involved in attempting to incite a riot. 
(9)  Addresses abusive language or threats to any member of the Police Department, any other authorized official of the city who is engaged in the lawful performance of his duties, or any other person when such words have a direct tendency to cause acts of violence. Words merely causing displeasure, annoyance or resentment are not prohibited. 
(10)  Damages, befouls, or disturbs public property or the property of another so as to create a hazardous, unhealthy, or physically offensive condition. 
(11)  Makes or causes to be made any loud, boisterous and unreasonable noise or disturbance to the annoyance of any other persons nearby, or near to any public highway, road, street, lane, alley, park, square, or common, whereby the public peace is broken or disturbed, or the travelling public annoyed. 
(12)  Fails to obey a lawful order to disperse by a police officer, when known to be such an official, where one or more persons are committing acts of disorderly conduct in the immediate vicinity, and the public health and safety is imminently threatened. 
(13)  Uses abusive or obscene language or makes an obscene gesture. 
(14)  A person enters upon the land or premises of another person after receiving prior notice from the owner, rightful occupant, or upon proper identification, an authorized representative of the owner or rightful occupant, that such entry is forbidden. 
(Code 1979, § 11-1-1(b); Code 1998, § 54-37; Ord. No. 17-2004, 12-6-2004) 
Sec. 28-59. - Exemptions. 
This article shall not be construed to suppress the right to lawful assembly, picketing, public speaking, or other lawful means of expressing public opinion not in contravention of other laws. 
(Code 1979, § 11-1-1(c); Code 1998, § 54-38) 
Chapter 30 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 05-2011, adopted July 12, 2011, amended ch. 30 in its entirety and enacted similar provisions as set out herein. The former ch. 30 derived from Code 1979, § 7-1-2; Code 1998, §§ 58-1, 58-2; Ord. No. 18-95, § IX, adopted Nov. 6, 1995; Ord. No. 14-99, adopted Sept. 13, 1999; Ord. No. 03-2005, adopted Feb. 7, 2005; and Ord. No. 01-2010, adopted Jan. 4, 2010. 

Sec. 30-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alcoholic beverage(s) means any intoxicating beverage, malt beverage, wine or any other beverage containing any alcohol whatsoever. 
Building means any structure attached to the ground which has a roof and which is designed for the shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, animals or property of any kind. 
Litter means garbage, refuse, paper, rubbish, debris, trash and all other waste material whether natural or artificial. 
Park(s) means all parks owned or managed by the City, including, but not limited to, Rossie Brundage Park, Thrasher Park, South Point Park, Johnson-Dean Park, Betty Mauldin Park, Fickling Property Greenspace, and Lillian Webb Park. 
Recreation facility(ies) means all recreation areas in parks, including land, buildings, natural bodies of water, swimming pools, sports fields, cemeteries, and all other property and buildings owned, leased, or managed by the City. 
Vehicle means any motor-driven equipment, such as an automobile, truck, motorcycle, bicycle, sled, go-cart, scooter, skateboard, ATV, child's toy vehicle, or Segway. 
Weapon means firearm, rifle, pistol, revolver, paintball gun, or any weapon designed or intended to propel a shot, bullet, or other missile of any kind, or any device capable of discharging a projectile by air, spirit, gas or explosive, or any explosive substance or harmful solid, liquid and gaseous substance, or any spear, arrow, bow and arrow, slingshot, crossbow, spear or spear gun, or any dirk, Bowie knife, switchblade knife, ballistic knife, or any other knife, straight-edged razor, spring stick, metal knuckles, blackjack, any bat, club or other bludgeon-type weapon, or any flailing instrument or any disk which is designed to be thrown or propelled and which may be known as a throwing star or oriental dart, or any weapon of like kind, and any stun gun, taser or similar device. 
(Ord. No. 05-2011, 7-12-2011) 
Sec. 30-2. - Enforcement. 
This chapter shall be enforced by an authorized law enforcement officer of the City. Where there has been a violation of any of the following provisions of this chapter, the law enforcement officer in his discretion may issue a citation, warning and/or order the person to leave the park or recreation facility. 
(Ord. No. 05-2011, 7-12-2011) 
Sec. 30-3. - Public use of park property. 
Any group or organization wishing to use any park, playground or recreational facility of the city for activities such as barbecues, fish fries, birthday parties, weddings, receptions, reunions, or other such gatherings shall first secure a reservation and pay any applicable fees for priority use through the Parks, Recreation and Cultural Arts (PRCA) Division office at 10 College Street, also available through the City's on-line reservation system on the City's website. 
(Ord. No. 05-2011, 7-12-2011) 
Sec. 30-4. - Operating hours. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or vehicle to enter or be within any park, playground or other recreational facility of the City except in conformance with the regular 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. hours posted by the City Council at the park, playground or other recreational facility unless a special exception is granted by the City Council or by an approved reservation for use. 
(Ord. No. 05-2011, 7-12-2011) 
Sec. 30-5. - Littering prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or deposit litter on the grounds, streets, sidewalks, fountains, ponds, lakes, swimming pools, streams or other bodies of water in any recreational facility, except within public litter receptacles and in such a manner that the litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of the recreational facility. Where public litter receptacles are not provided, all such litter shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for its presence and shall be disposed of elsewhere. It shall be unlawful to take into, carry through, or put into a recreational facility, any litter generated outside the recreational facility. 
(Ord. No. 05-2011, 7-12-2011) 
Sec. 30-6. - Weapons prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any weapon in a park or recreational facility. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to take in a park or recreational facility any weapon, or to use, carry or employ any weapon or similar device in a recreational facility. This subsection shall not apply to firearms as defined by O.C.G.A. § 16-11-171(3). 
(Ord. No. 05-2011, 7-12-2011) 
Sec. 30-7. - Throwing objects prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw any stone or missile at any person or at any public or private building in a recreational facility. 
(Ord. No. 05-2011, 7-12-2011) 
Sec. 30-8. - Annoying noises prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to whistle, hiss or holler at another person in a boisterous, unbecoming or erring manner or make any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise or display, play or operate any sound amplification device including radios, television sets, public address systems, musical instruments, CD players and the like in such a way which either annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, peace or safety of other persons in a recreational facility. 
(Ord. No. 05-2011, 7-12-2011) 
Sec. 30-9. - Personal conduct. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any violent, abusive, loud, boisterous, vulgar, wanton, obscene or otherwise disorderly conduct, disturb or annoy others, or engage in any activity that could cause injury to other persons while on or in connection with a recreational facility. No person shall upon or in connection with a recreational facility by act or speech willfully or unreasonably hinder, interrupt or interfere with any duly permitted activity or unreasonably or willfully intrude on any areas or into the structures designated for the use of a certain person or persons to the exclusion of others by written permit of the Public Works, Utilities and Parks Director, PRCA Superintendent or his/her designee. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person using a park to use, or permit a minor child in his/her custody to use, any device, equipment, apparatus, or facility within any park or recreational facility for any purpose other than the purpose for which the device, equipment, apparatus, or facility was reasonably intended; provided further, that the playing of games, sports or other recreational activities in such a manner as to constitute a nuisance shall be deemed a violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 05-2011, 7-12-2011) 
Sec. 30-10. - Fires restricted. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to build or maintain a fire in a recreational facility except in designated areas which are clearly marked by signs or defined with fire rings or grills placed by parks and recreation employees or by written permit for propane gas or other grills by the Public Works, Utilities and Parks Director, PRCA Superintendent or his/her designee. 
(Ord. No. 05-2011, 7-12-2011) 
Sec. 30-11. - Damaging or removal of any park property or vegetation prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to deface, graffiti, harm or damage any park buildings, wildlife, property, equipment or signs located in any park or recreational facility; or dig up, cut, damage or remove any trees, tree limbs, shrubbery, flowers, rocks, mulch, water, historical artifacts or other vegetation located in any park or recreational facility. 
(Ord. No. 05-2011, 7-12-2011) 
Sec. 30-12. - Possession, use or consumption of alcoholic beverages. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, use, or consume any alcoholic beverage in a recreational facility. Possession, use and consumption of alcoholic beverages within the areas authorized by this section shall only be allowed at events specifically authorized and approved by resolution of the City Council as set forth in the Norcross Alcohol Beverage Ordinance (Code of Ordinances, subpart A, article I, sections 4-4 and 4-5) and shall be subject to all rules, regulations and restrictions of law adopted by the city, including, but not limited to, the Norcross Alcohol Beverage Ordinance (Code of Ordinances, subpart A, article I, sections 4-1 through 4-5) and/or the laws of the state related to the possession, use and consumption of alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. No. 05-2011, 7-12-2011) 
Sec. 30-13. - Vehicles restricted. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle in a recreational facility except upon roadways designated and maintained for vehicular traffic, and except upon walkways when permitted and approved by the Public Works, Utilities and Parks Director, PRCA Superintendent or his/her designee. Law enforcement and parks and recreation employees whose duties require them to drive maintenance vehicles and equipment shall be exempt from the limitations set forth in this section. 
(Ord. No. 05-2011, 7-12-2011) 
Sec. 30-14. - Parking restricted. 
It shall be unlawful to park a vehicle in a recreational facility except in those areas designated by the appropriate signs as vehicle parking areas or in marked parking spaces. It shall be unlawful to leave a vehicle standing or parked in a recreational facility during hours when the recreational facility is closed. In such instances, the vehicle may be towed from the recreational facility at the owner's expense. 
(Ord. No. 05-2011, 7-12-2011) 
Sec. 30-15. - Parking limited to recreational facility users. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to park in a recreation area if the owner of the vehicle is not utilizing the recreational facility unless authorized by the Public Works, Utilities and Parks Director, PRCA Superintendent or his/her designee. It shall be unlawful for persons to congregate within a parking area of a recreational facility so as to disrupt traffic or other persons, or so as to create a safety hazard. 
(Ord. No. 05-2011, 7-12-2011) 
Sec. 30-16. - Commercial activity restricted. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale any merchandise or operate or attempt to operate a concession or engage in any commercial or charitable activity in a recreational facility unless approved by permit approved by the Public Works, Utilities and Parks Director, PRCA Superintendent or his/her designee. 
(Ord. No. 05-2011, 7-12-2011) 
Sec. 30-17. - Violation of facility regulations. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any rules or regulations relating to the use of any recreational facility as established by the Public Works, Utilities and Parks Director or by the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 05-2011, 7-12-2011) 
Sec. 30-18. - Animals. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of every animal owner or custodian whose animal is in a recreational facility to have physical control of the animal by leash or lead line at all times unless otherwise approved by permit approved by the Public Works, Utilities and Parks Director, or his/her designee. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person with an animal, other than service animals as necessary, to access areas of a recreational facility which are restricted to animals. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of every animal owner or custodian of any animal whose animal is in a recreational facility to immediately and properly dispose of waste deposited by the animal. 
(d)  It shall be the duty of every animal owner or custodian of any animal whose animal is in a recreational facility to have in their possession proof of a current rabies vaccination for their animal. 
(e)  Every animal owner or custodian of any animal whose animal is in a recreational facility is subject to all rules, regulations, and restrictions of law adopted by the city, specifically the Norcross Animal Control Ordinance (Code of Ordinances, subpart A, chapter 6), and/or the laws of the state related to animal control. 
(Ord. No. 05-2011, 7-12-2011; Ord. No. 23-2011, 11-7-2011; Ord. No. 13-2018 , § I, 10-1-2018) 
Sec. 30-19. - Pyrotechnics restricted. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, display, use, set off or attempt to ignite any firecracker, fireworks, smoke bombs, rockets, black powder guns or other pyrotechnics unless approved by written permit by the Public Works, Utilities and Parks Director, PRCA Superintendent or his/her designee. 
(Ord. No. 05-2011, 7-12-2011) 
Sec. 30-20. - Engine powered models or toys restricted. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to start, fly or use any fuel-powered engine, jet-type or electric-powered model aircraft, boat or rocket or like-powered toy or model, except at those areas designated by the Public Works, Utilities and Parks Director, PRCA Superintendent or his/her designee for such use and then only in accordance with such rules, regulations and restrictions promulgated by the Public Works, Utilities and Parks Director, PRCA Superintendent or his/her designee. 
(Ord. No. 05-2011, 7-12-2011) 
Sec. 30-21. - Launching hot air balloons and hobby rockets restricted. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to launch hot air balloons and hobby rockets from a recreational facility unless approved by written permit by the Public Works, Utilities and Parks Director, PRCA Superintendent or his/her designee. 
(Ord. No. 05-2011, 7-12-2011) 
Sec. 30-22. - Recreational facility restrictions. 
It shall be unlawful for anyone to enter locked or closed (by field-closed signage) any sport field for recreational use unless approved by permit by the Public Works, Utilities and Parks Director, PRCA Superintendent or his/her designee. 
(Ord. No. 05-2011, 7-12-2011) 
Sec. 30-23. - Rossie Brundage Park. 
(a)  The City Council declares that Rossie Brundage Park is a public recreation area intended for the use and enjoyment of the public. The City Council also declares Rossie Brundage Park as an athletic park for the City. The City Council further finds that there are certain activities in this area that would constitute a danger to the public using the facilities located in this area and may result in personal injuries to those engaged in the activities and damage to the property located within this area. 
(b)  In light of the foregoing declaration the following activities are prohibited in Rossie Brundage Park: 
(1)  Riding or operating vehicles. 
(2)  Other activities that are dangerous and interfere with the public's use of the area or pose a threat to the safety of the public and/or surrounding property. However, before any citation is issued for violation of this subsection the violator shall be given notice that the activity is prohibited and be directed to cease the activity. 
(c)  The Director of Public Works, Utilities, Parks and Recreation or his/her designee is authorized to erect appropriate signage to notify the public of the provisions of this section and to take appropriate action to enforce the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 05-2011, 7-12-2011) 
Sec. 30-24. - Thrasher, Betty Mauldin, South Point, Heritage and Lillian Webb Park. 
(a)  The City Council declares that Thrasher Park, Betty Mauldin Park, South Point Park, Heritage Park and Lillian Webb Park are public recreation areas intended for the peaceful use and enjoyment of the public. The City Council further finds that certain activities in this area constitute a danger to the public using the facilities located in this area and may result in personal injuries to those engaged in the activities and damage to the property located within this area. 
(b)  In light of the foregoing declaration the following activities are prohibited in Thrasher Park, Betty Mauldin Park, South Point Park, Heritage Park and Lillian Webb Park: 
(1)  Riding or operating vehicles. 
(2)  Striking and throwing hard balls, such as baseballs, softballs, lacrosse balls, and golf balls. 
(3)  Playing or any organized activities or sporting games. 
(4)  Other activities that are dangerous and interfere with the public's use of the area or pose a threat to the safety of the public and/or surrounding property. However, before any citation is issued for violation of this subsection the violator shall be given notice that the activity is prohibited and be directed to cease the activity. 
(c)  The Director of Public Works, Utilities, Parks and Recreation or his/her designee is authorized to erect appropriate signage to notify the public of the provisions of this section and to take appropriate action to enforce the provisions of this section. 
(d)  The following activities and actions when occurring in association specifically with the use of the splash pad located in Lillian Webb Park are to be enforced by the Public Works, Utilities and Parks Director, PRCA Superintendent or his/her designee: 
(1)  The splash pad is unsupervised, and therefore all children under the age of ten are to be accompanied by an adult. 
(2)  Roughhousing or violent play is prohibited. 
(3)  Running is prohibited. 
(4)  No bicycles, skateboards, inline skates, scooters, wheeled shoes, or other wheeled toys are allowed in the splash pad. 
(5)  Drinking the water generated by the splash pad is prohibited. 
(6)  Food, drink or glass containers of any kind are prohibited from the splash pad. 
(7)  Users of the splash pad are to respect others at all times. 
(8)  Users of the splash pad are to be mindful of the weather, and use of the splash pad during inclement weather is prohibited. 
(9)  Alcoholic beverages are prohibited from the splash pad. 
(10)  Infants must wear rubber or swim diapers in the splash pad. 
(11)  Animals are prohibited from the splash pad. 
(12)  Sitting on or obstructing the water jets in the splash pad is prohibited. 
(13)  The Public Works, Utilities and Parks Director, PRCA Superintendent or his/her designee reserves the right to deny use of the splash pad to anyone at any time. 
(Ord. No. 05-2011, 7-12-2011) 
Chapter 32 - PUBLIC WORKS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 32-1—32-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Power to construct and maintain roads, including curbs, sidewalks, street lights and devices to control the flow of traffic, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(4); municipal street systems, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-90 et seq.; powers with respect to municipal street system, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-92; regulation of maintenance and use of public roads generally, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-1 et seq. 

Sec. 32-19. - Maintenance and repair. 
The Public Works Department shall maintain and repair the streets and sidewalks of the city as may be necessary. 
(Code 1979, § 5-1-1; Code 1998, § 66-1) 
Sec. 32-20. - Display of merchandise. 
No person shall use any part of the streets or sidewalks of the city for the display of his goods or merchandise, except that goods or merchandise may be displayed on sidewalks in the historic business district provided such display does not interfere with pedestrian travel. 
(Code 1979, § 5-1-3; Code 1998, § 66-2) 
Sec. 32-21. - Obstructions. 
No person shall obstruct, or cause to be obstructed, any of the streets, sidewalks or alleys of the city. 
(Code 1979, § 5-1-4; Code 1998, § 66-3) 
Sec. 32-22. - Temporary obstructions; permission. 
(a)  Notwithstanding the provisions of sections 32-20 and 32-21, the Public Works Department Head may grant written permission for the temporary obstruction of streets and sidewalks, but written permission shall not be granted except in cases of obvious necessity. The Public Works Department Head is authorized and directed to cause any obstruction placed in violation of this section to be immediately removed upon discovery. 
(b)  For the purpose of this section, the term "obstruction" shall include any barricade, excavation, trash, lumber, wood, glass or other object of any kind which will interfere with the free use by the public of any city street or sidewalk. 
(Code 1979, § 5-1-5; Code 1998, § 66-4) 
Sec. 32-23. - Street cutting; permission required. 
(a)  No person shall cut into, tear up, or remove, for any purpose, any street or sidewalk paving within the city, without first having filed a written request with the Public Works Department Head and received from him written permission for cutting into, tearing up or removing the pavement. 
(b)  The written request shall set forth the location and dimensions of the pavement sought to be removed and for what purpose such is to be done. 
(c)  The Public Works Department Head, upon receipt of the application, may issue the applicant written permission. 
(d)  No person shall cut a larger amount, or remove more pavement than specified in the request, and as set forth in the permission issued by the Public Works Department Head; nor cut into, tear up or remove any other pavement without first having obtained written permission. 
(Code 1979, § 5-1-6; Code 1998, § 66-5) 
Sec. 32-24. - Inspection of street cuts. 
The Public Works Department shall generally supervise and inspect all street cuts authorized by the Department. 
(Code 1979, § 5-1-7; Code 1998, § 66-6) 
Sec. 32-25. - Excavation and obstruction markers. 
All excavations, building materials or obstructions of any kind in any street or sidewalk within the city shall be properly barricaded at all times and lighted at night for the protection of vehicles and pedestrians. 
(Code 1979, § 5-1-8; Code 1998, § 66-7) 
Sec. 32-26. - Street cleaning; litter collection. 
The Public Works Department is hereby authorized and directed to take steps to prevent the casting and leaving upon the streets and public places of the city, wastepaper and other litter, in violation of any provisions of this Code or of any ordinance of the city. For the purpose of taking such actions, the Public Works Department shall cause to be erected and maintained at convenient and suitable places upon the city's streets, alleys and public places, suitable containers for the collection, casting and temporary deposit therein of any wastepaper and other similar articles of litter as are likely to be cast upon the streets. The Public Works Department shall provide and arrange for the cleaning and keeping clean of the containers and the removal and disposition of the wastepaper and litter. 
(Code 1979, § 5-1-9; Code 1998, § 66-8) 
Chapter 34 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Cities are authorized to exercise power over parking facilities and traffic control devices, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(4) and (11); power of local authorities generally, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371; jurisdiction of municipal courts over misdemeanor traffic offenses, O.C.G.A. § 40-13-21(a). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 34-1. - Adoption of uniform rules of the road. 
(a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 40-6-370, O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-1-40-6-395, known as the uniform rules of the road, and the definitions in O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1 are hereby adopted as and for the traffic regulations of the city with like effect as if recited in this chapter. 
(b)  Unless another penalty is expressly provided by law, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this section shall be punished according to the provisions of section 1-1, but in no event shall such penalties exceed those provided by state law. 
(c)  For the purpose of regulating vehicles and traffic in the city, there is hereby adopted the following state and federal regulations: 
1.  O.C.G.A. § 40-5-140-40-5-159, "Uniform Commercial Driver's License Act," 
2.  Parts 382, 383, 390, 391, 392, 393, 395, 396, and 397 of Title 49 of the U.S. Code of Federal Regulations, "The Commercial Motor Vehicle Safety Act of 1986;" and 
3.  The Federal "Out of Service" Criteria as amended from time to time. 
4.  O.C.G.A. § 46-7-27, "Rules and Orders;" 
5.  O.C.G.A. § 46-7-39, "Violations;" 
6.  O.C.G.A. § 46-11-4, "Hazardous materials violation;" 
7.  O.C.G.A. § 32-6-1, "Obstruction of, encroachment on, solicitation on, or material injury to public roads;" 
8.  O.C.G.A. § 32-6-22, "Height of vehicles and loads; automobile carriers;" 
9.  O.C.G.A. § 32-6-23, "Width of vehicles and loads;" 
10.  O.C.G.A. § 32-6-30, "General authority of law enforcement officers; penalty for failure to stop for examination; report of violation; consent to stop;" 
(Code 1979, § 10-1-1; Code 1998, § 70-1; Ord. No. 06-2010 , 4-12-2010) 
State Law reference— Adoption of uniform rules of the road by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-372. 
Sec. 34-2. - Temporary traffic regulations. 
In cases where traffic upon the streets of the city may become congested upon occasions of parades, at theaters, fires and any other public assemblages where large numbers of vehicles are assembled, the Police Department may make temporary rules directing and regulating the traffic in these congested districts, and any person who, after being warned of the temporary traffic regulations, shall violate them shall be liable therefor as for other violations of this Code. 
(Code 1979, § 10-1-2; Code 1998, § 70-2) 
Sec. 34-3. - Traffic, speed, truck, parking and other zones, signs and traffic control devices. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Combined gross vehicle weight rating, CGVWR means the combined total gross vehicle weight rating of the vehicle and any trailers. The actual weight of the vehicle is not considered unless it exceeds 18,000 lbs. 
Length means the overall total distance from the front bumper to the rear most point of the vehicle or vehicle combination. 
Oversize vehicle means trucks, truck-trailer combinations, vehicle with trailer combinations with an actual weight or a CGVWR of 18,000 lbs. or more; trucks, truck-trailer combinations, and vehicle with trailer combinations with an overall length of more than 30 feet; motor homes, recreational vehicles, and buses over 25 feet. 
Oversized vehicle route means the roadways designated for all oversized vehicular traffic to use to travel through and around the City of Norcross, Georgia. 
Oversized vehicles allowed means the roadways designated for all vehicular traffic to use without a special permit or a way point. 
Prohibited roadway means all roadways within the city limits of Norcross not designated as an oversize vehicle route. Only oversize vehicles that have a way point on a prohibited roadway or exempt vehicles shall use a prohibited roadway. 
Way point means a terminal, a repair facility, a point of pickup or a point of delivery for an oversize vehicle. The way point shall be specific or contained upon the shipping invoice for the address of the way point. 
(b)  Traffic control signs, markings and devices. Except as may otherwise be provided in this chapter, upon approval by resolution of the City Council, the Police Chief is authorized to designate and maintain by appropriate traffic control signs, markings and devices: 
(1)  Crosswalks at intersections where there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway; 
(2)  Other safety zones for pedestrians; 
(3)  Traffic lanes; 
(4)  Speed, parking, truck or other traffic control zones; 
(5)  Stop, yield, one-way and other directional devices; 
(6)  Parking time limitations or parking prohibitions on designated streets; and 
(7)  Any other sign, marking, device or zone necessary for orderly and safe conditions on the streets of the city. 
(c)  Oversize vehicles. Oversize vehicles are prohibited from city roadways not designated as oversize vehicle routes. Each time the term "oversize vehicles" is used, it shall include all vehicles within that definition specified in subsection (a) of this section. 
(1)  Because of the physical obstacles presented by the road character, all oversize vehicles, all vehicles over 14 feet long, all vehicles with trailers, all buses, all vehicles placarded or carrying hazardous materials, all motor homes, and all recreational vehicles are prohibited from crossing the railroad right-of-way at the North Cemetery Street (aka Holcomb Bridge Road Crossing) and Autry Street crossings. 
(2)  The Chief of Police, or his designee, is authorized to issue a special permit allowing an oversize vehicle to utilize an approved specific route within the city. The permit will include the date the authorization begins and the expiration date. All special permits will expire on December 31 of each year. The special permit will specify the road names or routes to be authorized for travel and the vehicle identification number of each oversize vehicle the permit is issued for. The special permit may have more than one oversize vehicle listed or may specify the fleet belonging to the permittee. 
(3)  Oversized vehicles are allowed on the following roadways: 
a.  SR 13 (Buford Highway). 
b.  SR 140 (Jimmy Carter Boulevard). 
c.  SR 378 (Beaver Ruin Road). 
d.  Atlantic Boulevard. 
e.  Best Friend Drive. 
f.  Brookhollow Parkway. 
g.  Holcomb Bridge Road between Peachtree Industrial Boulevard and Peachtree Corners East. 
h.  Langford Road. 
i.  Peachtree Industrial Boulevard. 
j.  Peachtree Corners East. 
k.  Pinnacle Court. 
l.  Pinnacle Way. 
(4)  Oversized vehicle routes, bypassing the historical district, are established as the following: 
a.  Langford Road. 
b.  Peachtree Industrial Boulevard. 
c.  SR 13 (Buford Highway). 
d.  SR 140 (Jimmy Carter Boulevard). 
e.  SR 378 (Beaver Ruin Road). 
(5)  Exemptions. Oversized vehicles meeting the following criteria are exempt from the oversized vehicle route prohibitions. 
a.  Oversized vehicles with way points elsewhere within the city and on a prohibited roadway. Oversize vehicles must use the route that is most direct and most suited for the vehicle from the nearest oversize vehicle route. 
b.  Oversize vehicles that have their terminal or place of business elsewhere within the city and on a prohibited roadway. 
c.  Oversize vehicles that are in route to or from a vehicle repair facility within the city and on a prohibited roadway. 
d.  Public transit buses following an approved route through the city. 
e.  All school buses. 
f.  Any authorized emergency vehicle as defined in O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1(5) belonging to police, fire, or EMS, or other emergency governmental agency. 
g.  A vehicle belonging to the city, the county, the state, or a utility company; performing work within the city. 
h.  A contractor for the city, the county, the state, or a utility company; performing work on their behalf. 
i.  A vehicle belonging to the railroad or a contractor for the railroad performing work within the city. 
j.  Any vehicle with a special permit issued by the Chief of Police. 
(6)  Any officer with the Police Department may request the operator of an oversize vehicle, traveling on a prohibited roadway, to show work orders, purchase orders, delivery requests, or other documentation to establish their authorization to be upon a prohibited roadway. If the operator does not have proper documentation, the police officer is authorized to issue a summons for violation of this Code section and require the operator to return to the nearest oversized vehicle route. Official traffic control signs will be placed along every designated oversize vehicle route identifying it as a city oversized vehicle route. Official traffic control signs prohibiting oversized vehicles shall be placed where every street intersects with an oversized vehicle route and at every city limit on every roadway entering the city. Each traffic control device erected pursuant to this section shall have this Code section displayed on the traffic control device. Special signs shall be placed along common approaches to the city directing drivers of oversized vehicles to call for directions. The number posted shall be established by the Chief of Police. 
(7)  The driver of an oversize vehicle included in this section is responsible for compliance with the prohibitions of this article and to have proper documentation for every way point with him whenever he is using a prohibited roadway. The City Clerk shall keep and maintain an accurate official schedule setting out all traffic speed zones. The schedule and any amendments or changes thereto shall be adopted by resolution of the City Council and shall be known as the Official Traffic Control Schedule of the City of Norcross, Georgia. An official copy thereof shall be kept in the Office of the City Clerk; shall be available for public inspection; and copies certified by the City Clerk shall be admissible in court as proof of the location of any traffic zone. No person shall be charged with violating a traffic zone, marking, sign or other traffic control device unless appropriate signs, markings or devices are in fact operating or in existence on streets involved. Any violation of any traffic zone, marking, sign or other traffic control device established hereunder shall be a violation of this Code. 
(Code 1979, § 10-1-3; Code 1998, § 70-3; Ord. No. 21-2007, 11-8-2007) 
Sec. 34-4. - Operations of vehicles without insurance. 
O.C.G.A. §§ 33-34-1 et seq., 36-32-7, 40-2-137, 40-6-10 are hereby incorporated by reference into this Code and shall be as if set forth in its entirety. 
(Code 1979, § 10-1-4; Code 1998, § 70-4) 
Secs. 34-5—34-26. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES 

Sec. 34-27. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
In operation means operating in good working condition. 
Operator means any individual driving and/or in possession of a vehicle. 
Owner means the registrant of a motor vehicle, except that such term shall not include a motor vehicle rental company when a motor vehicle registered by such company is being operated by another person under a rental agreement with such company. 
Recorded images means images recorded by a traffic control signal monitoring device on: 
(1)  Not less than two photographs; not less than two microphotographs; not less than two electronic images; or videotape; and 
(2)  Showing a traffic control signal displaying a circular red or red arrow signal along with the rear of a motor vehicle apparently operated in disregard or disobedience of such signal and, on at least one image or portion of tape, clearly revealing the number or other identifying designation of the license plate displayed on the motor vehicle. 
Signature means any manual or facsimile of a person's signature. 
System location means the approach to an intersection toward which a photographic, video, digital or electronic camera is directed and is in operation. 
Traffic control signal monitoring device means a device with one or more motor vehicle sensors working in conjunction with a traffic control signal to produce recorded images of motor vehicles being operated in disregard or disobedience of a circular red or red arrow signal. 
(Ord. No. 01-2006, § 70.5, 2-6-2006) 
Sec. 34-28. - Compliance with traffic control signals. 
(a)  Vehicular traffic facing a steady circular red signal alone shall stop at a clearly marked stop line or, if there is no crosswalk, before entering the intersection, and shall remain standing until an indication to proceed is shown by a steady circular green signal. 
(b)  Vehicular traffic facing a steady red arrow signal indication shall stop at a clearly marked stop line or, if there is no stop line, before entering the intersection, and shall remain standing until an indication to proceed is shown by a steady green arrow signal indication. 
(c)  The driver of a motor vehicle shall be liable for a civil monetary penalty imposed pursuant to this article if such motor vehicle is found, as evidenced by information obtained from a traffic control signal monitoring device, to have failed to comply with a traffic light signal as designated in subsections (a) and (b) of this section within the city limits. 
(Ord. No. 01-2006, § 70.6, 2-6-2006) 
Sec. 34-29. - Proof; certificate substantiating violation based on image from monitoring device. 
(a)  Proof that a particular vehicle entered an intersection in violation of section 34-28(a) or (b) as detected by a traffic control signal monitoring device, together with proof that the particular vehicle is registered with the Georgia Department of Public Safety (or any other state or local vehicle registration office) in the charged person's name, shall raise the evidentiary presumption and constitute prima facie evidence in any prosecution of a violation of that section that the charged person was the person driving the vehicle depicted in the recorded image. 
(b)  A certificate, sworn to or affirmed by a trained law enforcement officer or a technician employed by the Police Department, or a copy thereof, based on inspection of recorded images produced by a traffic control signal monitoring device shall be considered prima facie evidence of the facts contained therein. 
(c)  Consistent with O.C.G.A. § 40-6-20(f)(7), recorded images made for the purpose of this subsection shall not be a public record. 
(d)  The provisions of this article shall not limit law enforcement agencies to the use of traffic control signal monitoring devices in enforcing O.C.G.A. § 40-6-20(a); and, when there is evidence obtained from another source or sources which constitutes a prima facie case of a violation of O.C.G.A. § 40-6-20(a), such violation may be prosecuted as otherwise provided by law in lieu of, but not in addition to, enforcement under this article. 
(e)  Such presumption shall be rebutted if the owner or lessee of the vehicle files a sworn notarized statement with the Clerk of the Municipal Court prior to the return date established on the citation identifying the name and address of the operator of the vehicle at the time of the alleged violation. 
(f)  Such presumption shall be rebutted if the owner, or lessee of the vehicle testifies under oath in open court that he or she was not the operator of the vehicle at the time of alleged violation. 
(g)  Such presumption shall be rebutted if a certified copy of a police report, showing that the vehicle had been reported to the police as stolen prior to the time of the alleged violation, is presented, prior to the return date established on the citation issued pursuant to this section, to the court adjudicating the alleged violation. 
(h)  Such presumption shall be rebutted if the recorded image depicts the vehicle passed through the intersection in violation of section 34-28(a) or (b) as part of a funeral procession. 
(i)  Such presumption shall be rebutted if the recorded image depicts the vehicle passed through the intersection in violation of section 34-28(a) or (b) in order to avoid impeding the efforts of an emergency vehicle to pass through the intersection. 
(Ord. No. 01-2006, § 70.7, 2-6-2006) 
Sec. 34-30. - Penalty. 
(a)  Imposition of a penalty pursuant to this section shall not be deemed a criminal conviction as an operator and shall not be made a part of the operating record of the person upon whom such liability is imposed nor shall it be used for insurance purposes in the provision of motor vehicle insurance coverage. The civil monetary penalty imposed by this section for each violation shall be no more than $70.00. 
(b)  Failure to respond to any notice of violation by the prescribed date shall be a waiver of the right to contest the violation, and the person cited shall be liable for a civil monetary penalty of not more than $70.00, and such penalty shall be considered a judgment and shall carry interest at the legal rate. 
(Ord. No. 01-2006, § 70.8, 2-6-2006) 
Sec. 34-31. - Citation. 
(a)  A citation for a violation of this section may be executed by the city by sending by first class mail a copy thereof to the address of the owner or lessee of the vehicle as shown, in the case of vehicle owners, in the records of the Georgia Department of Public Safety (or any other state vehicle registration office) or in the case of vehicle lessees or renters, in the records of the lessor. Said citation shall be postmarked no later than ten days after the date of the alleged violation. 
(b)  No proceedings for contempt or arrest shall be instituted for failure to appear on the return date of the citation. 
(Ord. No. 01-2006, § 70.9, 2-6-2006) 
Sec. 34-32. - Administration. 
(a)  A private entity may enter into an agreement with the city to be compensated for providing the traffic light signal violation monitoring system or equipment, and all related support services, to include consulting, operations and administration. However, only a trained law enforcement officer or a technician employed by the Police Department may swear to or affirm the certificate required by section 34-29. 
(b)  No portion of any fine collected through the use of a traffic control signal monitoring devices may be paid to the manufacturer or vendor. Compensation to the manufacturer or vendor shall be based on the value of such equipment and shall not be based on the number of citations issued or the revenue generated by traffic control signal monitoring devices. 
(Ord. No. 01-2006, § 70.10, 2-6-2006) 
Sec. 34-33. - Signage. 
(a)  The city shall erect signs on every highway, which comprises a part of the state highway system at that point on the highway, which intersects the jurisdictional limits of the city. A sign shall be erected also by the city on each public road on the approach to the next traffic control signal for such road when a traffic control device is monitoring such next signal for such road. 
(b)  Such signs shall be at least 30 inches by 30 inches in measurement and shall warn motorists that traffic control signal monitoring device are being employed. 
(Ord. No. 01-2006, § 70.11, 2-6-2006) 
Sec. 34-34. - Warning period. 
Only warning notices and not citations shall be sent during the 30-day period commencing with each installation of a traffic control signal monitoring device. 
(Ord. No. 01-2006, § 70.12, 2-6-2006) 
Sec. 34-35. - Speed detection devices/approved maximum speed limits. 
The limits specified in this Code section shall be the maximum lawful vehicle speeds, and the City of Norcross shall be authorized to run speed detection devices in accord with O.C.G.A. 40-14-2. 
LIST OF ROADWAYS  for  CITY OF NORCROSS 
ON-SYSTEM 

 
OFF-SYSTEM 

 
(Ord. No. 14-2010, 10-14-2010; Ord. No. 17-2010, 10-4-2010; Ord. No. 01-2012, pt. I, 1-3-2012; Ord. No. 10-2012, pt. I, 4-2-2012; Ord. No. 06-2013, § I, 10-7-2013; Ord. No. 10-2016 , § I, 12-5-2016) 
Secs. 34-36—34-56. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PARKING[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate or prohibit stopping, standing or parking, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(1); stopping, standing and parking, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-200 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 34-57. - Parking prohibited for certain purposes. 
No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway for: 
(1)  Displaying the vehicle for sale. 
(2)  Washing, greasing, or repairing the vehicle except repairs necessitated by sudden emergency; in such emergency the vehicle shall be moved or towed away with all due haste. 
(Code 1979, § 10-2-1; Code 1998, § 70-36) 
Sec. 34-58. - Obstructing traffic. 
No person shall park any vehicle upon a street, other than an alley, in such manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than eight feet in width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic. 
(Code 1979, § 10-2-2; Code 1998, § 70-37) 
Sec. 34-59. - Limited parking times; hours designated. 
(a)  No person shall park or stand any truck or other freight-carrying vehicle in excess of one-half-ton capacity for a period longer than one hour at any time during the day or night. 
(b)  No person shall stop or stand any truck or bus with a body more than eight feet wide or ten feet high, for more than one hour, on any street or public place without the driver being actually present and in charge thereof. 
(c)  Any motor vehicle which is left unattended on a public street, road or highway or other public property for a period of at least five days and when reasonably appearing to the Police Department that the individual who left such motor vehicle does not intend to return to remove such vehicle shall be presumed to have been abandoned and shall be impounded by the Police Department. The cost of such impoundment shall be borne by the owner of such vehicle. 
(Code 1979, § 10-2-3; Code 1998, § 70-38) 
Sec. 34-60. - Downtown parking. 
(a)  Designated parking areas for employees of downtown businesses. 
(1)  All businesses licensed to do business by the city that are located within the downtown area (hereinafter "downtown businesses") shall be eligible to apply to the City Manager annually for parking passes (hereinafter "permits") that will grant a license to the businesses for their employees to park in specific locations on property owned or leased by the city. 
(2)  Each such parking lot (hereinafter a "restricted parking lot") will be restricted exclusively for the use of employees of the businesses on Jones and South Peachtree Street and shall be prominently marked with signage that specifically identifies each such lot as being restricted parking for permit holders only and that vehicles without permits are subject to being towed. 
(3)  On or before November 15 of each year, each business shall complete an application on a form designated by the City Manager which shall, at a minimum, identify the business address, and state the number of employees for which such business wishes to assign permits. 
(4)  The City Manager shall allocate the number of permits to be issued to each business based on the number of permitted parking spaces available, and the number of permits applied for. Each such permit shall be numbered and shall expire on December 31 of the calendar year following the year in which the application was submitted. The City Manager, in his discretion, may extend the time for applications through December 15 of each calendar year for existing businesses and may accept applications out of time and issue additional permits for new businesses in the downtown area. 
(5)  Upon issuing the annual permits to each business, the City Manager shall, as a condition of granting the permits, provide each business with a certification form for each permit issued and a copy of this downtown parking ordinance [this section 34-60]. Each business shall provide a copy of this downtown parking ordinance to each employee to be issued a permit (hereinafter a "permit holder") and shall require each such person to certify, in writing, that he/she has been provided with a copy of the downtown parking ordinance, and that he/she has read and understands the new parking policy before issuing the permit to the employee. Each business shall retain the original certifications for each permit holder through the calendar year for which such permit is issued. 
(6)  Each business shall be responsible for maintaining a list of the names, addresses and vehicles of each permit holder. The business shall have sole discretion to determine which employees receive such permits and shall require each permit holder to return the permit to the employer at the conclusion of his/her employment. The business shall have authority to reassign the permit of a former employee to another employee, so long as the business complies with the certification requirement in the paragraph next above. 
(7)  In the event that a permit is lost or stolen, the business shall apply for a replacement permit from the City Manager upon presentation of a written request for a replacement permit that identifies the lost or stolen permit number. The license to park in the restricted parking lots shall be revoked as to each such lost or stolen permit number. 
(b)  Designated parking for downtown business customers. 
(1)  The City Manager shall have authority to designate public parking areas in the downtown area as "customer or visitor parking only." 
(2)  Each such area designated as "customer or visitor parking only" shall be prominently marked by appropriate signage. 
(3)  Permit holders shall be required to park in any available restricted parking lot and shall not park in any area designated as "customer or visitor parking only" if there is a space available in a restricted parking lot. 
(4)  Persons that violate the provisions of this section shall be subject to a penalty as set forth in section 34-80. 
(5)  The City Manager shall have the authority to restrict access to the restricted parking lots from time to time to accommodate maintenance, repairs and/or special events. 
(Ord. No. 18-2009, 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 34-61. - Prohibited display of vehicles for sale or as advertising devices. 
(a)  An owner or lessee of any real property shall not authorize any motor vehicle to be displayed or parked on such real property for the purpose of selling or advertising the sale of such used motor vehicle. 
(b)  No motor vehicle shall be displayed for sale from any commercial or industrial site not specifically zoned for that purpose. 
(c)  All violations of this section shall be punishable by a civil violation notice in the amount of $100.00 for the first vehicle on a first offense and $500.00 per vehicle for each additional vehicle and any repeat violation of this section. The Chief of Police, his designee, any City Code Enforcement Officer, or owner or lessee of any real property upon which a vehicle is displayed or parked in violation of this subsection may have any such vehicle towed from such real property and stored at the expense of the owner or lessee of such vehicle and may then dispose of said vehicle in accordance with Chapter 11 of O.C.G.A. Title 40. 
(Ord. No. 11-2014, § I, 12-1-2014) 
Secs. 34-62—34-76. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - OFF-STREET PARKING IN RESIDENTIAL AREAS 

Sec. 34-77. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Automobile means any four-wheeled vehicle designed principally for carrying 11 passengers or less and used for transportation of persons. 
Bus means any vehicle originally designed, whether now used for that purpose or not, to carry more than ten passengers or every motor vehicle, other than a taxicab or van, designed and used for the transportation of persons for compensation. 
Driver or operator means every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a vehicle. 
Gross weight means the weight of a vehicle without load, plus the weight of any load thereon. 
Motor vehicle means every vehicle which is self-propelled. Excepted from this definition are motorcycles, motor driven cycles, and electric personal assistive mobility devices. 
Motorcycle means every motor vehicle having a seat or saddle for the use of the rider and designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with the ground but excluding tractors, all-terrain vehicles, and mopeds. 
Motor-driven cycle means every motorcycle including every motor scooter, with a motor which produces five horsepower or less, every bicycle with a motor attached, and every moped. 
Park or parking means a vehicle that is standing, whether occupied or not, other than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers or cargo. 
Pole trailer means every vehicle without motive power designed to be drawn by another vehicle and attached to the towing vehicle by means of a reach or pole, or by being boomed or otherwise secured to the towing vehicle, and ordinarily used for transporting long or irregularly shaped loads such as poles, pipes, or structural members capable generally of sustaining themselves as beams between the supporting connections. 
Private truck means every truck used or maintained primarily for its owner's or operator's personal transportation of property or persons and bearing a state license plate issued therefor. 
Residential area means any street length between street intersections where more than 50 percent of the frontage is in use for residence purposes, or where designated by ordinance. 
School bus means a vehicle that is either publicly owned or privately owned and operated solely for the purpose of transporting pupils and/or teachers to or from school or on activities connected with school or a vehicle owned by a church or owned in common with other churches and used and operated exclusively for the transporting of members and patrons to and from church or church activities. 
Semitrailer means a detachable load carrying unit without motive power, other than a pole trailer, designed to be coupled on the rear of a truck tractor by which it is partly supported. 
Special mobile equipment means every vehicle not designed or used primarily for the transportation of persons or property and only incidentally operated or moved over a highway, including but not limited to: well-boring apparatus and road construction and maintenance machinery such as asphalt spreaders, bituminous mixers, bucket loaders, tractors other than for agricultural purposes or used for personal yard maintenance and other than truck tractors, ditchers, wreckers, leveling graders, finishing machines, motor graders, road rollers, scarifiers, earth moving carry-alls and scrapers, power shovels and drag lines, front-end loaders, cherry pickers, backhoes, and self-propelled cranes and earth moving equipment, dumptrucks, truck-mounted transit mixers, cranes or shovels, and other large vehicles to which machinery has been attached. 
Trailer means every load carrying unit without motive power, other than a pole trailer, designed for carrying persons or property and for being driven by a motor vehicle whether or not part of its weight rests upon the towing vehicle. Excepted from this definition are house trailers, auto trailers, boat trailers, and trailers used to transport agricultural or personal use yard equipment, whether pulled by an automobile or private truck and not used as or in connection with a motor vehicle truck or tractor used as a common or contract carrier for hire. 
Truck means every motor vehicle with more than six wheels designed, used or maintained primarily for commercial transportation of property, including all step vans. Excepted from this definition are pick-up trucks and other private trucks. 
Truck tractor means the noncargo carrying power unit operated in combination with a semitrailer or other trailer, except that a truck tractor and semitrailer engaged in the transportation of automobiles may transport motor vehicles on part of the power unit. 
Van means a motor vehicle not unlike a station wagon designed, used, or maintained primarily for personal transportation of the individual owner and not having more than six wheels. 
(Code 1979, § 10-3-1; Code 1998, § 70-71) 
Sec. 34-78. - Prohibited vehicles. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the owner or driver of the following classifications of vehicles to park any such vehicle or vehicles off the street in any residential area unless a permit has been obtained from the City Manager or his designee: bus, school bus, pole trailer, special mobile equipment, truck tractor, trailer and semitrailer, or any other vehicle that has more than six wheels or is more than 30 feet in length or the gross weight is more than 18,000 pounds or has more than three axles. 
(b)  On-street parking of vehicles in the classifications listed in subsection (a) of this section shall be governed by the provisions of division 1 of this article. 
(Code 1979, § 10-3-2; Code 1998, § 70-72) 
Sec. 34-79. - Permit. 
(a)  Any person, driver, operator or agent who wishes to park a prohibited vehicle off-street in a residential area may apply at the city with the City Manager's office for a permit to exempt a prohibited vehicle from the operation of this division. Upon a valid showing of need, the City Manager may issue a special parking permit for any such vehicle. A vehicle displaying such special permit shall be exempt from the penalties set forth in this division. 
(b)  Any permit issued under this section shall be valid for one year from the date of its issue. 
(c)  When applying for a special permit, the person, owner, agent, operator or driver shall bring the vehicle to the City Hall for visual inspection by the City Manager or his designee. Permits may be applied for during the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., Monday through Friday. The person, owner, agent, operator or driver shall give a statement specifying the need to have the vehicle exempted from the provisions in this division. 
(d)  The City Manager or his designated agent is hereby authorized to issue special permits under this section upon a valid showing of need. 
(Code 1979, § 10-3-3; Code 1998, § 70-73) 
Sec. 34-80. - Penalty. 
It is hereby declared an offense of any owner, agent, driver or operator to violate the provisions of this section. Any person found guilty of such violation shall, upon conviction, be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-11. 
(Code 1979, § 10-3-4; Code 1998, § 70-74) 
Secs. 34-81—34-103. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PARADES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate or prohibit processions or assemblages on the highways, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(3). 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 34-104. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Parade means a procession of pedestrians, vehicles, or animals, or any combination thereof, traveling in unison along or upon a street, road, or highway, organized and conducted for the purposes of attracting the attention of the general public and/or expressing or celebrating views or ideas by use of verbal, visual, literary, or auditory means of communication. A parade shall not mean a procession of vehicles operated in compliance with ordinary traffic laws or a procession of pedestrians along or upon public sidewalks or private property. 
Parade permit means a permit as required by this article. 
Sporting event means all events, whether organized or unorganized, in which persons gather primarily for participation in or observation of actions by the participants involving physical or mental exertion. 
(Code 1979, § 10-4-2; Code 1998, § 70-106) 
Sec. 34-105. - Interference. 
No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct, or impede, or interfere with any parade or parade assembly or with any person, vehicle or animal participating or used in a parade. 
(Code 1979, § 10-4-15(a); Code 1998, § 70-107) 
Sec. 34-106. - Driving through parades. 
No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles or person comprising a parade when such vehicles or persons are in motion or are conspicuously designated as a parade. 
(Code 1979, § 10-4-15(b); Code 1998, § 70-108) 
Sec. 34-107. - Parking on parade route. 
The Chief of Police shall have the authority, when reasonably necessary, to prohibit or restrict parking of vehicles in any areas where such parking would disrupt the conduct of a parade. The Chief of Police shall post signs to such effect. It shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave unattended any vehicle in violation thereof. No person shall be liable for parking on an unposted street in violation of this article. 
(Code 1979, § 10-4-15; Code 1998, § 70-109) 
Sec. 34-108. - Prohibited conduct. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to stage, present, or conduct any parade without first obtaining a permit. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person knowingly to participate in a parade for which a permit has not been granted. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any person in charge of or responsible for the conduct of a duly licensed parade to knowingly fail to comply with any condition of the permit. 
(Code 1979, § 10-4-17; Code 1998, § 70-110) 
Secs. 34-109—34-129. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 34-130. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to facilitate the orderly flow of traffic and to limit obstruction to the orderly flow of traffic upon the streets, roadways, highways, sidewalks, and other thoroughfares of the city. 
Sec. 34-131. - Required. 
No person shall engage in, participate in, aid, form or start any parade unless a parade permit has been obtained from the Police Department. 
(Code 1979, § 10-4-3(a); Code 1998, § 70-141) 
Sec. 34-132. - Application. 
A person seeking issuance of a parade permit shall file an application with the Police Department on forms provided by the Police Department not less than ten days nor more than 30 days before the date on which it proposes to conduct the parade. 
(Code 1979, § 10-4-4; Code 1998, § 70-143) 
Sec. 34-133. - Contents of application. 
The application for a parade permit shall set forth the following information: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the persons seeking to conduct such parade. 
(2)  If the parade is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by any organization, the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization and of the authorized and responsible heads of such organization. 
(3)  The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be the parade chairperson and who will be responsible for its conduct. 
(4)  The date when the parade is to be conducted. 
(5)  The route to be traveled, if any, the starting point and termination point. 
(6)  The approximate number of persons who, and animals and vehicles which, will constitute such parade; the type of animals and description of vehicles. 
(7)  The hours when such parade will start and terminate. 
(8)  A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or only a portion of the widths of the streets, if any, proposed to be transversed. 
(9)  If such parade is to be held in a city park, a statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or only a portion of the city park, or other public area on which the parade is proposed to take place. 
(10)  The location by streets of any assembly areas for such parade. 
(11)  The time at which units of the parade will begin to assemble at such assembly area. 
(12)  The interval of space to be maintained between units of such parade. 
(13)  If the parade is designed to be held by, on behalf of, or for any person other than the applicant, the applicant for such permit shall file with the Police Department a communication in writing from the person proposing to hold the parade, authorizing the applicant to apply for the parade on his behalf. 
(14)  Information regarding any public address or loudspeaker system to be used during such parade, including the approximate number of decibels to be emitted from such system. 
(Code 1979, § 10-4-5; Code 1998, § 70-144) 
Sec. 34-134. - Late applications. 
Late applications for a parade permit will not be considered. 
(Code 1979, § 10-4-6; Code 1998, § 70-145) 
Sec. 34-135. - Fee. 
A fee shall be remitted to the Police Department at the time of filing the application for a parade permit. The amount of the fee shall be as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges. 
(Code 1979, § 10-4-7; Code 1998, § 70-146) 
Sec. 34-136. - Standards for issuance. 
The Police Department shall issue a parade permit when, from a consideration of the application and from such other information as may otherwise be obtained, it is found: 
(1)  The conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route or place of occurrence. 
(2)  The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of police officers of the city to properly police the line of movement or the place of occurrence and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police protection to the city. 
(3)  The conduct of such parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of ambulances and other emergency vehicles as to prevent normal ambulance and other emergency service to portions of the city other than that to be occupied by the proposed parade and areas contiguous thereto. 
(4)  The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at assembly points of the parade will not unduly interfere with police, fire and other emergency services to areas contiguous to such assembly areas. 
(5)  The conduct of such parade will not interfere with the movement of firefighting equipment en route to a fire. 
(6)  The conduct of the parade is not reasonably likely to cause injury to persons or property, to provoke disorderly conduct or to create a disturbance. 
(7)  The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays en route. 
(Code 1979, § 10-4-8; Code 1998, § 70-147) 
Sec. 34-137. - Notice of rejection. 
The Police Department shall act upon the application for a parade permit within three business days after the filing thereof. If the Police Department disapproves the application, they shall mail to the applicant, within three business days after the date which the application was filed, a notice of their action stating the reasons for their denial of the permit. Notice shall be deemed complete when mailed. 
(Code 1979, § 10-4-9; Code 1998, § 70-148) 
Sec. 34-138. - Appeal procedure. 
Any person aggrieved shall have the right to appeal the denial of a parade permit to the City Council. The appeal shall be taken within 60 days after notice. The City Council shall act upon the appeal within 30 days after its receipts. 
(Code 1979, § 10-4-10; Code 1998, § 70-149) 
Sec. 34-139. - Alternative permits. 
The Police Department, in denying an application for a parade permit, shall be empowered to authorize the conduct of the parade on a date, at a time, or over a route, or in a place, different from that named by the applicant. An applicant desiring to accept an alternate permit shall, within five days after notice of the action of the Police Department, file a written notice of acceptance with the Police Department. An alternate parade permit shall conform to the requirements of and shall have the effect of a parade permit under this article. 
(Code 1979, § 10-4-11; Code 1998, § 70-150) 
Sec. 34-140. - Notice to the city and other officials. 
Immediately upon the issuance of a parade permit, the Police Department shall send a copy thereof to the following: 
(1)  The Mayor. 
(2)  Each member of the City Council. 
(3)  The City Attorney. 
(4)  The Director of the Department of Public Works. 
(5)  The City Clerk. 
(Code 1979, § 10-4-12; Code 1998, § 70-151) 
Sec. 34-141. - Contents of permit. 
Each parade permit shall state the following information: 
(1)  Starting time. 
(2)  The portions of the streets, if any, to be transversed that may be occupied by the parade. 
(3)  The portions of any parks or public property to be occupied by the parade. 
(4)  The maximum length of the parade in miles or fractions thereof. 
(5)  Such other information as the Mayor, City Council, City Attorney, and Chief of Police shall find necessary to the enforcement of this article. 
(Code 1979, § 10-4-13; Code 1998, § 70-152) 
Sec. 34-142. - Duties of the permittee. 
(a)  Compliance. A permittee under this division shall comply with all permit directions and conditions and with all applicable laws and ordinances. 
(b)  Possession of permit. The parade chairperson or other person heading or leading such activity shall carry the parade permit on his person during the conduct of the parade. 
(c)  Parade cleanup. The parade chairperson or other person heading or leading such activity shall be solely responsible for the cleanup of any papers, bottles, cans, animal excretions, or any other refuse left by participants in the parade. 
(1)  The parade chairperson or other person heading or leading such activity shall have a reasonable amount of time, but not to exceed 48 hours, to carry out such cleanup after any such activity. 
(2)  If such cleanup is not completed by the parade chairperson or other person heading or leading such activity within a reasonable amount of time, but not to exceed 48 hours, the city may commence cleanup and hold the parade chairperson or other person heading or leading such activity financially liable for any and all costs directly incurred by the city in such cleanup activity. 
(3)  In no instance shall the parade chairperson or other person heading or leading such activity be responsible for cleanup of the refuse left by spectators or other nonparticipants in the parade. 
(Code 1979, § 10-4-14; Code 1998, § 70-153) 
Sec. 34-143. - Ratification of permit. 
The Chief of Police shall have the authority to revoke a parade permit issued under this division upon application of the standards for issuance as set forth in this article. 
(Code 1979, § 10-4-16; Code 1998, § 70-154) 
Chapter 36 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to provide stormwater, sewerage collection and disposal systems, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(6); water resources, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-1 et seq.; adoption of ordinances, rules and regulations relating to payment for street improvements and construction of water, gas and sewer connections; payment of costs of connections, O.C.G.A. § 36-39-7. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 36-1. - Application for service; deposits. 
Application for any city utility service shall be made at the Office of the General Government Administration Department and shall include completion of an application history form and may require payment of a utility deposit in accordance with the schedule of rates established by the City Council. The schedule of rates shall be maintained on file in the Office of the General Government Administration Department where it shall be available for inspection by the public. Deposits shall be placed in an escrow account and when service is discontinued the deposits shall be refunded or applied on the accounts for which they were made. 
(Code 1979, § 6-1-1; Code 1998, § 74-1) 
Sec. 36-2. - Utility bills; payment; penalty; discontinuance of service. 
(a)  All charges for utility services including, but not limited to, electrical charges, water charges, sewer charges, security light charges, and solid waste service charges shall be billed in one bill. All bills for such utility services are due and payable, in full, upon receipt. 
(b)  Failure of a customer to pay all amounts due by the tenth day of the month following prior billing date shall subject the customer to a penalty in the amount of ten percent of the total utility bill. 
(c)  Failure of a customer to pay all amounts due by the 15th of the month following prior billing date shall subject the customer to discontinuance of service after the 20th of the month. This subsection shall not apply if the amount due is less than $25.00. No disconnection may occur if the temperature is forecast not to exceed 32 degrees Fahrenheit at any time during the 24-hour period of the date of the proposed disconnection. If the city receives notice that an occupant of the premises to be disconnected has a serious medical problem which would be aggravated by the disconnection of service, no disconnection will occur unless served by certified return receipt letter. Notice may be delivered in writing or [by] telephone to be followed in writing. The notice to the City shall include the statement of a physician explaining the medical problem, and further it will be necessary that the occupant responsible for the account give a date as to when payment will be made and same subject to the General Government Administration Department Head for approval. Should this fail to be met along with keeping the current bill paid, service will be discontinued in 48 hours after notice by certified return receipt letter. The procedure under this subsection will not be required when there is an unauthorized use of the utility service. The foregoing described notice of failure to pay utility account will carry a cost from the customer in the amount set forth in the schedule of rates established by the City Council. 
(d)  Utility service shall be reconnected during regular business hours upon the payment of all past due charges, penalties and fees and a reconnection fee in the amount set forth in the schedule of rates established by the City Council. Any customer requesting service to be reconnected after 4:00 p.m. or on a weekend and outside of business hours as stated in this Code shall be required to pay in advance a reconnection fee in the amount set forth in the schedule of rates established by the City Council. 
(e)  Any utility service account that is paid by check and same is returned for any reason by the financial institution, the utility account shall be treated as outlined in subsections (c) and (d) of this section, with the exception of utility service accounts which are delinquent by 60 days or more for which no further extension of time will be granted prior to discontinuation of service. 
(f)  If any customer has two checks returned, as described in subsection (e) of this section, within a six-month period, future payments on the affected account will be accepted only in the form of cash, money orders, credit card or cashier's checks. This requirement may be reviewed by the General Government Administration Director after a 12-month period. 
(Code 1979, § 6-1-2; Code 1998, § 74-2; Ord. No. 18-95, § VIII, 11-6-1995; Ord. No. 07-96, 3-4-1996; Ord. No. 14-96, 7-8-1996; Ord. No. 17-97, 9-8-1997; Ord. No. 23-97, 12-1-1997; Ord. No. 03-00, 2-7-2000; Ord. No. 02-2011, 4-4-2011) 
Sec. 36-3. - Unpaid accounts constituting lien. 
The city shall have a lien upon any real property where there exists delinquent electrical, water, sewerage or sanitation accounts arising out of the use of the property by the owner or occupant when the account is billed in the owner's name. The amount of the lien shall have the same priority as ad valorem taxes. 
(Code 1979, § 6-1-3; Code 1998, § 74-3; Ord. No. 23-97, 12-1-1997) 
Sec. 36-4. - Reconnect charge. 
Any customer terminating utility service and requesting restoration of service at the same location within a period of 60 days shall be assessed a reconnect charge in the amount set forth in the schedule of fees and charges established by the City Council. This section shall not apply to apartment complexes. 
(Code 1979, § 6-1-4; Code 1998, § 74-4) 
Sec. 36-5. - Charges for property damage. 
The city shall charge the person responsible for costs incurred in repairing or replacing any of its utility service property which is damaged by automobiles, trucks, tractors, domestic animals, or other cause. 
(Code 1979, § 6-1-5; Code 1998, § 74-5) 
Sec. 36-6. - Utility meters; location. 
(a)  All utility meters shall remain the property of the city. 
(b)  All utility meters shall be located outside the building, structure or facility serviced in a readily accessible location designated and approved by the appropriate department head. In any case where a meter is located in such a manner as to prevent a city employee from reaching it, the customer may be billed by the city on the basis of estimated usage. In any case where a meter is concealed inside any building or structure or is otherwise inaccessible to city employees, the city shall so notify the customer, who shall then be required to have the meter relocated within 60 days. The city shall be authorized to discontinue service to any customer who fails to relocate such a meter within the 60 days. 
(Code 1979, § 6-1-6; Code 1998, § 74-6) 
Sec. 36-7. - Tests of utility meters. 
The city shall test the accuracy of any utility meter of any customer upon a request for such a test by the customer and the payment, in advance, of a fee in the amount set forth in the schedule of fees and charges established by the City Council. Should such a test reveal that a meter was registering within the three percent limit of accuracy, no refund of the fee shall be made. If the meter is found to be incorrect beyond the three percent range, the meter test fee shall be refunded. The meter shall be repaired or adjusted to function properly. 
(Code 1979, § 6-1-7; Code 1998, § 74-7) 
Sec. 36-8. - Damaging, injuring or interfering with property of public utility companies or the city. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person intentionally and without authority to injure or destroy any meter, pipe, conduit, wire, line, post, lamp or other apparatus belonging to the city or any public utility company engaged in the manufacture or sale of electricity, gas, water, telephone or other public services; intentionally and without authority to prevent a meter from properly registering the quantity of such service supplied; in any way to interfere with the proper action of such company or the city; intentionally to divert any services of such company or the city; or otherwise intentionally and without authority to use or cause to be used, without the consent of the company or the city any service manufactured, sold or distributed by the company or the city. 
(b)  Where there is no evidence to the contrary, the person performing any of the illegal acts set forth in subsection (a) of this section and the person who with knowledge of such violation receives the benefit of such service without proper charge as a result of the improper action shall be presumed to be responsible for the act of tampering or diversion. 
(Code 1979, § 6-1-8; Code 1998, § 74-8) 
State Law reference— Similar provision, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-25. 
Sec. 36-9. - Unauthorized connections and unauthorized reconnection prohibited. 
(a)  No person other than authorized city personnel shall connect to or tap onto any utility service belonging to the city. 
(b)  No person shall reconnect or turn on any water or electric connection where the same has been disconnected by the city authority for nonpayment of utility bill or for other purposes. 
(Code 1979, § 6-1-9; Code 1998, § 74-9) 
Sec. 36-10. - City's right to discontinue service. 
(a)  The city shall have the right to discontinue the supply of any city utility service to any customer without notice for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  For fraudulent representation as to the use of the utility service. 
(2)  For any disapproval of customer equipment or installation on account of defects or hazardous conditions. 
(3)  For repairs or emergency operations. 
(4)  For unavoidable shortage or interruptions in the city's source of supply. 
(5)  Whenever such action is necessary to protect the city from fraud or abuse. 
(6)  For abuse or tampering with connections, meters or other utility equipment of the city. 
(b)  The city shall have the right to discontinue the supply of any city utility service to any customer upon reasonable notice for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  If entry to its meter is refused, or if access thereto is obstructed or hazardous. 
(2)  For nonpayment of any utility service bill within the collection period as established in section 36-2. 
(3)  Upon violation of any of the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1979, § 6-1-10; Code 1998, § 74-10) 
Sec. 36-11. - Levelized billing. 
Residential customers may receive and be entitled to levelized utility billing, from month to month, subject to and upon the following terms and conditions: 
(1)  Eligibility. Residential customers may receive and be entitled to levelized utility billing if: 
a.  They are residential customers receiving electric and/or water/sewer service; 
b.  Such customer has in writing exercised the option and elected to receive levelized billing; 
c.  Such customer has maintained an account for at least 12 months with no history of late payments; and 
d.  The General Government Administration Department shall concur in the delivery of levelized billing to the particular customer; 
(2)  The monthly levelized billing account will be calculated by the City averaging the current month's charges with all charges for utility services for the immediate past 11 months, excluding for both periods, fixed charges as defined herein, and taxes. All appropriate taxes will be billed based on the current month actual charges and late charges will be assessed. 
(3)  A penalty will not be charged to a customer on account balances. However, any levelized bill amount which is not paid by the due date will be subject to appropriate penalties. Refunds of credit balances will not be made except upon final billing. A customer may terminate eligibility for levelized billing at any time and at that time pay the balance due or receive the credit balance but in such event, the customer cannot elect to receive levelized billing for a period of at least 12 months from the date of termination; 
(4)  If a utility customer shall move to a location not serviced by the city, the balance owed by such customer or the credit due to the customer will be applied to the final bill. If the final billing results in a balance due to the customer, a refund check will be issued to the customer but if there is a balance due to the city, such balance shall be due in full and shall be paid by the due date reflected on the bill; 
(5)  If service to a customer shall be cut off or terminated for nonpayment, the account balance is due and must be paid prior to reconnection. Twelve consecutive months of service without termination for nonpayment shall be required before eligibility is restored; 
(6)  A utility customer transferring to another eligible location serviced by the city may continue on the levelized billing plan. The billing history of the new location will be used to calculate the level payment amount. If sufficient history is not available due to prolonged vacancy or because the account is new, only the available monthly charges will be averaged and if no history is available, the first month's bill will be the actual charges and averaging will commence with the second month; and 
(7)  Fixed charges as used herein means contributions to the share program, garbage collection fees and security light fees. 
(Code 1998, § 74-11; Ord. No. 20-98, 12-7-1998; Ord. No. 02-2011, 4-4-2011) 
Secs. 36-12—36-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER, SEWER SERVICE[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to acquire, construct, extend, operate, maintain and collect fees for water and sewerage systems, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-5. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 36-41. - Application; deposits; special contracts. 
(a)  Application for water and sewer service shall be made at the Office of the General Government Administration Department and deposits paid as provided in section 36-1. 
(b)  The Mayor and Council, on recommendation of the City Engineer, may vary the deposits required and negotiate special contracts for customers with extraordinary service needs, such as industrial users and private fire protection. 
(Code 1979, § 6-2-1; Code 1998, § 74-41) 
Sec. 36-42. - Tap fees and service rates. 
(a)  Water and sewer tap fees and service rates shall be as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges established by the City Council, which schedule shall be maintained on file in the Office of the Public Works Department where it is available for inspection by the public. 
(b)  The Mayor and Council, on recommendation of the City Engineer, may vary the water and sewer service rates and negotiate special contracts for customers with extraordinary service needs, such as industrial users and private fire protection. 
(c)  The Mayor and Council shall review the water and sewer service rates at least annually and revise them as may be necessary to provide for the receipt of adequate revenues to meet the requirements of the water and sewer system of the city for debt service, operation and maintenance, and the establishment of required reserves. 
(d)  No free water or sewer service or use of facilities shall be permitted. All water service connections shall be metered. 
(Code 1979, § 6-2-2; Code 1998, § 74-42; Ord. No. 17-95, 10-2-1995) 
Sec. 36-43. - Private fire protection service. 
Charges for private fire protection service shall be as provided in the schedule of fees and charges established by the City Council and maintained on file in the Office of the General Government Administration Department where it shall be available for inspection by the public. Each private fire protection service line shall be equipped with an approved detector meter in accordance with the terms negotiated by the city with the developer at the time of the development review. 
(Code 1979, § 6-2-3; Code 1998, § 74-43) 
Sec. 36-44. - Responsibility and liability—City. 
(a)  The city shall run a service line from its distribution line to the property line of the user, where the distribution line exists or is to be constructed, and runs immediately adjacent and parallel to the property to be served. 
(b)  The city may install its meter at, or near, the property line, or, at the city's option, on the user's property within three feet of the property line. 
(c)  The city reserves the right to refuse service unless the user's lines or pipings are installed in such a manner as to prevent cross connections or backflows. 
(d)  Under normal conditions the user will be notified of any anticipated interruptions of service by the city. 
(Code 1979, § 6-2-4; Code 1998, § 74-44) 
Sec. 36-45. - Same—User. 
(a)  Water furnished by the city shall be used for consumption by the user, members of his household and employees only and shall not be piped to adjacent property. Water shall not be used for irrigation, fire protection, nor other purposes, except when water is available in sufficient quantity without interfering with the regular consumption in the area served. Disregard of this rule shall be sufficient cause for refusal or discontinuance of service, or both. 
(b)  Where a meter, or meter box, is placed on the premises of a user, a suitable place shall be provided by user therefor, unobstructed and accessible at all times to the meter reader. 
(c)  The user shall furnish and maintain a private cut-off valve on the user's side of the meter. 
(d)  The user's piping and apparatus shall be installed and maintained at the user's expense, in a safe and efficient manner, and in accordance with the sanitary regulations of the state health department. 
(e)  No private wells shall be permitted to be used in connection with the lines of the city's water system. 
(Code 1979, § 6-2-5; Code 1998, § 74-45) 
Sec. 36-46. - Access to premises and extensions of system. 
(a)  Duly authorized employees of the city shall have access at all times to the premises of the user for the purpose of installing or removing city property, inspecting piping, reading and testing meters, or for any other purpose in connection with the water service and its facilities, or the sewer service and its facilities. 
(b)  Extensions to the system shall be made only when the user shall grant or convey, or shall cause to be granted or conveyed, to the city a permanent easement or right-of-way across any property traversed by the water or sewer lines. 
(Code 1979, § 6-2-6; Code 1998, § 74-46) 
Sec. 36-47. - Change of occupancy. 
Not less than three days' notice must be given to the General Government Administration Department to discontinue water and sewer service or to change occupancy. The outgoing user shall be responsible for all water consumed up to the time of departure. The new occupant shall apply for water service within 48 hours after occupying the premises and failure to do so will make him liable for paying for the water consumed since the last meter reading. 
(Code 1979, § 6-2-7; Code 1998, § 74-47) 
Sec. 36-48. - Suspension of service. 
(a)  When water service is discontinued and all bills paid, the deposit shall be refunded to the user by the city. 
(b)  Upon discontinuance of service for nonpayment of bills, the deposit will be applied by the city toward settlement of the account. Any balance will be refunded to the user; however, if the deposit is insufficient to cover the bill, the city may proceed to collect the balance in the usual way provided by law for collection thereof. 
(c)  The city reserves a right to discontinue its service without notice for the following additional reasons: 
(1)  To prevent fraud or abuse; 
(2)  Willful disregard of the city's rules; 
(3)  Emergency repairs; 
(4)  Insufficiency of water supply beyond the city's control; 
(5)  Direction of public authorities; or 
(6)  Strike, riot, fire, flood, unavoidable accident. 
(Code 1979, § 6-2-8; Code 1998, § 74-48) 
Sec. 36-49. - Complaints, adjustments. 
(a)  If the user believes his bill to be in error he shall present his claim to the Office of the General Government Administration Department before the bill becomes delinquent. If a claim is made after the bill becomes delinquent it shall not be effective in preventing discontinuance of service as heretofore provided. The user may pay such bill under protest and such payment shall not prejudice his claim. 
(b)  Water meters will be tested at the request of the user as provided in section 36-7. 
(c)  If the seal of a meter is broken by other than the city's employee, or if the meter fails to register correctly or is stopped for any cause, the consumer shall pay an amount estimated from the record of his previous bills or from other data, or from both. 
(Code 1979, § 6-2-9; Code 1998, § 74-49) 
Sec. 36-50. - Adjustments to bills for pipe breakage, swimming pools. 
(a)  In instances where the user suffers a pipe breakage on property owned or occupied by the user, the user may apply for an adjustment to the user's sewer bill in the following manner: 
(1)  The user shall prove to the director of the municipal utility and/or his designated agents, that there was a break in the user's pipes. 
(2)  The user shall prove that the breakage in the pipes was remedied in a timely manner after the breakage was discovered and that the repair was completed in a satisfactory manner as determined by the director of the municipal utility and/or his designated agents. 
(3)  The user shall submit a request for adjustment within 15 days after the date the bill upon which an adjustment is requested was mailed by the city to the user. 
(b)  Provided all of the above are done in strict compliance, then a designated city agent shall average the user's usage for the preceding three months. From the average usage over the preceding three months, an average monthly bill shall be determined. To the extent that the usage during the period of pipe breakage exceeded the average usage by more than twice, then the user shall be entitled to an adjustment and a corresponding refund by the city. If the average usage does not exceed the bill by two times, then no adjustment shall be made. 
(c)  No sewer adjustment shall be allowed for the filling of swimming pools or other similar purposes. 
(d)  No water adjustments shall be allowed under the circumstances set forth in this section. 
(Code 1979, § 6-2-10; Code 1998, § 74-50) 
Secs. 36-51—36-73. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - WATER CONSERVATION 

Sec. 36-74. - Purpose and public notification. 
(a)  The purpose of this division shall be to establish emergency procedures for water conservation through a series of steps depending on the severity of the water shortage or low lake levels caused by drought conditions and to limit outdoor water usage which can reasonably be expected to have significant imminent effects on limited water resources. 
(b)  The public shall be notified, through the news media, that this division is in effect, and of the step which is being implemented; by posting notices at City Hall at least 24 hours prior to the implementation of the steps that are being taken to conserve water. 
(Code 1979, § 6-2-21; Code 1998, § 74-81) 
Sec. 36-75. - Outdoor water usage. 
Outdoor water usage shall be defined as lawn and garden watering, noncommercial car washing, and filling of private swimming pools. 
(Code 1979, § 6-2-22; Code 1998, § 74-82) 
Sec. 36-76. - Exceeding of water withdrawal permit or request from EPD; Step 1 and Step 2. 
When it appears that the county's water withdrawal from Lake Lanier will be exceeded, Step 1 in the water conservation plan will be implemented. Step 1 shall involve a ban on all outside watering from 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. seven days per week. Step 1 shall also be implemented when the county is requested to institute water conservation measures by the state environmental protection division. Step 1 shall remain in effect until the danger of permit exceedance is diminished sufficiently to eliminate concern over its exceedance and/or until the state environmental protection division authorizes relaxation of water conservation measures. Should Step 1 not be effective in reducing water consumption below permitted withdrawal limits, or if requested by the state environmental protection division or county, Step 2 shall be implemented and shall include cessation of all outdoor use of water on Saturday and Sunday and a continued ban on outdoor water used from 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. on weekdays. 
(Code 1979, § 6-2-23; Code 1998, § 74-83) 
Sec. 36-77. - Step 3 authorization. 
Should Steps 1 and 2 not be effective in reducing water consumption to desired levels which will satisfy the state environmental protection division and which will ensure that the water withdrawal permit is not exceeded, then Step 3 will be implemented upon request by the county and approved by the Mayor and Council. Step 3 will involve a ban on all outdoor use of water. 
(Code 1979, § 6-2-24; Code 1998, § 74-84) 
Sec. 36-78. - Implementation of steps. 
When it appears that water withdrawals will exceed permit limits, Step 1 shall be implemented upon approval of the City Council. Proper notice will be made through the news media and by posting same at the City Hall so the public can be reasonably expected to receive the notification. Should Step 1 not be effective, then Steps 2 and 3 will be implemented in the same manner as Step 1. 
(Code 1979, § 6-2-25; Code 1998, § 74-85) 
Sec. 36-79. - Enforcement of article provisions. 
The Department of Public Works through its department head or his designees is hereby granted the authority to enforce the provisions of this division. On a first offense, a written warning will be given to the violator, and a record of this violation will be maintained by the Department of Public Works. Should a subsequent violation occur, punishment shall be as provided in section 1-11. Members of the Police Department are authorized to enforce this division in the municipal court. 
(Code 1979, § 6-2-26; Code 1998, § 74-86) 
Sec. 36-80. - Restriction on outdoor water of landscape. 
Outdoor watering for purposes of planting, growing, managing, or maintaining ground cover, trees, shrubs, or other plants may occur only between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m.; provided, however, that this limitation shall not create any limitation upon the following outdoor water uses: 
(1)  Commercial raising, harvesting, or storing of crops; feeding, breeding, or managing livestock or poultry; the commercial production or storing of feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits, or for use in the production of poultry, including, but not limited to, chickens, hens, ratites, and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; or the commercial production of aquacultural, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs, and apiarian products or as otherwise defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; 
(2)  Capture and reuse of cooling system condensate or stormwater in compliance with applicable City of Norcross ordinances and state guidelines; 
(3)  Reuse of gray water in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.2 and applicable local board of health regulations; 
(4)  Use of reclaimed wastewater by a designated user from a system permitted by the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources to provide reclaimed wastewater; 
(5)  Watering personal food gardens; 
(6)  Watering new and replanted plant, seed, or turf in landscapes, golf courses, or sports turf fields during installation and for a period of 30 days immediately following the date of installation; 
(7)  Drip irrigation or irrigation using soaker hoses; 
(8)  Hand watering with a hose with automatic cutoff or handheld container; 
(9)  Use of water withdrawn from private water wells or surface water by an owner or operator of property if such well or surface water is on said property; 
(10)  Watering horticultural crops held for sale, resale, or installation; 
(11)  Watering athletic fields, golf courses, or public turf grass recreational areas; 
(12)  Installation, maintenance, or calibration of irrigation systems; or 
(13)  Hydroseeding. 
(Ord. No. 16-2010, 12-6-2010) 
Sec. 36-81. - Enforcement. 
(a)  [Restrictions on use.] No person shall use or allow the use of water in violation of the restrictions on outdoor water use contained in Ordinance No. 16-2010. 
(b)  [Enforcement authority.] The Community Director's designee shall be the enforcement authority for Ordinance No. 16-2010. The county/City Manager may also authorize other departments as may be deemed necessary to support enforcement. 
(c)  Criminal and alternative penalties. Any violation of this section [Ordinance No. 16-2010] may also be enforced by a citation or accusation returnable to the magistrate court/municipal court or by any other legal means as set forth in this Code. 
(Ord. No. 16-2010, 12-6-2010) 
Sec. 36-82. - Repealer. 
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with Ordinance No. 16-2010 are repealed. 
(Ord. No. 16-2010, 12-6-2010) 
Sec. 36-83. - Effective date. 
Ordinance No. 16-2010 shall go into effect on December 6, 2010. 
(Ord. No. 16-2010, 12-6-2010) 
Secs. 36-84—36-101. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SEWER USE[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 36-102. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Biochemical oxygen demand, BOD means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees Celsius, expressed in milligrams per liter. 
Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the building wall. 
Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal. 
Combined sewer means a sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage. 
Garbage means solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage, and sale of produce. 
Industrial wastes means the liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing processes, trade, or business as distinct from sanitary sewage. 
Natural outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface water or groundwater. 
pH means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution. 
Properly shredded garbage means the wastes from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1.27 centimeters) in any dimension. 
Public sewer means a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights, and which is controlled by the city water and sewerage system. 
Sanitary sewer means a sewer which carries sewage and to which stormwater, surface water, and groundwater are not intentionally admitted. 
Sewage means a combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, together with such groundwater, surface water, and stormwater as may be present. 
Sewage treatment plant means any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage. 
Sewage works means all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating, and disposing of sewage. 
Sewer means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage. 
Slug means any discharge of water, sewage, or industrial waste which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-hour concentration of flows during normal operation. 
Storm drain, storm sewer means a sewer which carries stormwater and surface water and drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes, other than unpolluted cooling water. 
Superintendent means the Director of the water and sewer departments of the city, or his authorized deputy, agent, or representative. 
Suspended solids means solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids, and which are removable by laboratory filtering. 
Watercourse means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
(Code 1979, § 6-3-1; Code 1998, § 74-116) 
Sec. 36-103. - Use of public sewer required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the city, any human or animal excrement, garbage, or other objectionable waste. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge to any natural outlet within the city any sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this article. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided in this article, it shall be unlawful for any person to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage. 
(d)  The owner of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes, situated within the city and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary sewer is hereby required at his expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this article, within 60 days after date of official notice to do so, provided that said public sewer is within 200 feet of the property line. 
(e)  Any deviation from subsection (d) of this section shall be approved by resolution of the Mayor and Council. 
(Code 1979, § 6-3-2; Code 1998, § 74-117) 
Sec. 36-104. - Private sewage disposal. 
(a)  Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of section 36-103(d), the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewer disposal system complying with the requirements of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act (O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq.). 
(b)  At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage disposal system as provided in section 36-103(d), a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this article, and any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material. 
(Code 1979, § 6-3-3; Code 1998, § 74-118) 
Sec. 36-105. - Building sewers and connections. 
(a)  No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the superintendent. 
(b)  There shall be two classes of building sewer permits: 
(1)  For residential and commercial service; and 
(2)  For service to establishments producing industrial wastes. 
In either case, the owner or his agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the city. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the superintendent. A connection inspection fee shall be paid to the city at the time the application is filed. The amount of the fee shall be as established by resolutions of the city. 
(c)  All costs and expense incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. 
(d)  A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building; except where one building stands at the rear of another or an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer. 
(e)  Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the superintendent to meet all requirements of this article. 
(f)  The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing codes as adopted by the city, or other applicable rules and regulations of the city. 
(g)  Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer. 
(h)  No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer. 
(i)  The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing codes adopted by the city or other applicable rules and regulations of the city. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the superintendent before installation. 
(j)  The applicant for the building sewer connection permit shall notify the superintendent when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the superintendent or his representative. 
(k)  All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city. 
(Code 1979, § 6-3-4; Code 1998, § 74-119) 
Sec. 36-106. - Use of public sewers. 
(a)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. 
(b)  Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers, or to an outlet approved by the superintendent. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged to a storm sewer or natural outlet on approval of the local, state, or federal agency of jurisdiction. 
(c)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewers: 
(1)  Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid, or gas. 
(2)  Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant including but not limited to cyanides in excess of two mg/l as CN in the wastes as discharged to the public sewer. 
(3)  Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5, or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structure, equipment, and personnel of the sewage works. 
(4)  Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails, paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders. 
(d)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described substances, materials, waters, or wastes if it appears likely in the opinion of the superintendent that such wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage treatment process, or equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving stream, or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance. In forming his opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the superintendent shall give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant, and other pertinent factors. The substances prohibited are: 
(1)  Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit (65 degrees Celsius). 
(2)  Any waters or wastes containing fats, wax, grease, or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 degrees and 150 degrees Fahrenheit (0 and 65 degrees Celsius). 
(3)  Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to the review and approval of the superintendent. 
(4)  Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes, or concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not. 
(5)  Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, and similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such material received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established by the superintendent for such materials. 
(6)  Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be established by the superintendent as necessary, after treatment of the composite sewage, to meet the requirements of the state, federal, or other public agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters. 
(7)  Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the superintendent in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations. 
(8)  Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5. 
(9)  Materials which exert or cause: 
a.  Unusual concentration of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, Fuller's earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate). 
b.  Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions). 
c.  Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment works. 
d.  Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting slugs as defined herein. 
(10)  Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters. 
(e)  If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in subsection (d) of this section, and which in the judgment of the superintendent, may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the superintendent may: 
(1)  Reject the wastes. 
(2)  Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers. 
(3)  Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge and/or wastes not covered by existing sewer charges under the provisions of subsection (j) of this section. 
If the superintendent permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the superintendent and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances, and laws. 
(f)  Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the superintendent, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand, or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the superintendent, and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. 
(g)  Where preliminary treatment of flow-equalizing facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense. 
(h)  When required by the superintendent, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the superintendent. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense, and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times. 
(i)  All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples taken at said control manhole. If no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb, and property. 
(j)  No statement contained in this article shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment therefor, by the industrial concern. 
(Code 1979, § 6-3-5; Code 1998, § 74-120) 
Sec. 36-107. - Protection from damage. 
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of the sewage works. Any person violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct. 
(Code 1979, § 6-3-6; Code 1998, § 74-121) 
Sec. 36-108. - Power and authority of Inspectors. 
(a)  The superintendent and other duly authorized employees or representatives of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing in accordance with the provisions of this article. The superintendent or his representatives shall have no authority to inquire into any processes including metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining, ceramic, paper, or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or waterways or facilities for waste treatment. 
(b)  While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in subsection (a) of this section, the superintendent or duly authorized employees of the city shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company and the company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the city employees and the city shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to its property by city employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions as required in section 36-106(h). 
(c)  The superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the city holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within such easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on such easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. 
(Code 1979, § 6-3-7; Code 1998, § 74-122) 
Sec. 36-109. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person found to be violating any provision of this article except section 36-107 shall be served by the city with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. 
(b)  Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided for in subsection (a) of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(c)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this Code shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned the city by reason of such violation. 
(Code 1979, § 6-3-8; Code 1998, § 74-123) 
Secs. 36-110—36-114. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - FATS, OILS AND GREASE ("FOG") REGULATION[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 02-2009, adopted March 2, 2009, added §§ 74-124 through 74-137 to the Code. Inasmuch as ch. 74 had been redesignated and reorganized as ch. 36 in the 2009 recodification, said provisions have been redesignated to read as herein set out. The redesignation, implemented at the editor's discretion, inserts the new material into the proper area and maintains the organization and numerical sequencing of the Code. 

Sec. 36-115. - Short title. 
This division shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Norcross Fats, Oil and Grease ("FOG") Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 02-2009, 3-2-2009) 
Sec. 36-116. - Policy statement. 
The Norcross City Council hereby declares that the objective of this division is to aid in preventing the introduction and accumulation of fats, oils, and greases into the City wastewater system which will or tend to cause or contribute to sanitary sewer blockages and obstructions. Food service establishments and other industrial or commercial establishments generating wastewater containing fats, oils or greases are subject to this article. This article regulates such originators by requiring that grease interceptors and other approved strategies be installed, implemented, and maintained in accordance with the provisions hereof. 
(Ord. No. 02-2009, 3-2-2009) 
Sec. 36-117. - Definitions. 
Those definitions set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-15-20, in Ga. Comp. R. & Regs. r. 391-3-6-.24(2), and in the City of Norcross Sewer Use Ordinance, City of Norcross Code of Ordinances, section 36-102, all as may be amended from time to time, are adopted and are incorporated by reference into this article as if fully set forth herein. In addition to the terms defined in said section 36-102, the following terms shall apply to the FOG Ordinance: 
PUDSSS shall mean the current City of Norcross Public Utilities Department Sanitary Sewer Standards as may be amended from time to time. 
30 percent rule The "30 percent rule" requires that the depth of both bottom solids and oil/grease in a trap shall not equal or be greater than 30 percent of the total operating depth of the trap. The operating depth of a trap is the internal depth from the inlet or outlet water elevation to the bottom of the trap. 
Food service establishment means and includes establishments for the preparation or serving of meals, lunches, short orders, sandwiches, frozen desserts, or other edible products. The term includes, but is not limited to, restaurants; coffee shops; cafeterias; short order cafes; luncheonettes; taverns; lunch rooms; places manufacturing, wholesaling, or retailing sandwiches, salads or other fast foods; soda fountains; institutions, both public and private; food carts; itinerant restaurants; industrial cafeterias; catering establishments; food vending machines and vehicles and operations connected therewith; and similar facilities by whatever name called. 
Grease trap means a device in which the grease content of nonsanitary sewage is intercepted and congealed, and from which grease is removed for proper disposal. The terms "grease trap" and "grease interceptor" shall be interchangeable. 
(Ord. No. 02-2009, 3-2-2009) 
Sec. 36-118. - Requirements. 
(a)  All food establishments that discharge to the POTW shall provide a grease trap or interceptor as indicated below. Additionally, the Director may require any originator who generates a wastewater which contains greater than 200mg/L FOG to install a grease trap. 
(b)  All grease traps and interceptors shall be emptied of all material, including solids and liquids, each time these are serviced. Partial pumping, including skimming, is strictly prohibited. All grease traps and interceptors shall be serviced as specified in section 5-2016.9 of this FOG ordinance. All grease traps and interceptors shall be serviced by a state-licensed hauler and a completed manifest shall be kept on site by the originator for every service event. All grease waste shall be taken to a licensed and approved disposal facility for disposal and in no manner shall any grease trap or interceptor contents be discharged by a hauler to the City collection system, either sewer or stormwater. Any violation may result in full prosecution under all applicable state and local laws and ordinances on the first offense. 
(c)  All facilities installed by any originator pursuant to this FOG ordinance shall comply with all other City ordinances and with all building codes that may be enforced in the City from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 02-2009, 3-2-2009) 
Sec. 36-119. - Prohibition. 
Those discharges that are prohibited pursuant to City of Norcross Code of Ordinances subsection 36-106(c), "Discharge Prohibitions," are also prohibited by this FOG Ordinance, 
(Ord. No. 02-2009, 3-2-2009) 
Sec. 36-120. - Penalties. 
(a)  Violations. Violating any provisions of section 36-119 for a total of three violations within 18 months shall be punishable by a fine for each successive violation not to exceed $1,000.00. Additionally, any originator violating any provision of this FOG Ordinance may be liable to pay restitution in the discretion of the court for: 
(1)  The total cost incurred by the City to repair or replace facilities damaged as a result of the violation. 
(2)  Any injury or damage to person or property or loss of services resulting from the violation. 
(b)  Abnormal occurrences. If, in the judgment of the Director, an originator is causing or may cause water pollution to such an extent as to be or become dangerous to the public health, safety or welfare, the Director may require such corrective measures as may be necessary for the protection of the public on an emergency basis, and shall have the power and authority to cause all operation of the originator to cease until appropriate corrective measures have been taken by issuing an order to the owner or operator thereof directing the cessation of the operation, or by ordering the utility providing water service to the originator to cease providing such service. 
(Ord. No. 02-2009, 3-2-2009) 
Sec. 36-121. - Grease trap regulations—New facility. 
(a)  Grease trap requirements. All food establishments discharging wastewater containing FOG to the POTW shall install, operate, and maintain at their own expense a sufficiently sized grease trap necessary to achieve and maintain compliance as indicated below. Installation and maintenance shall conform to the current City of Norcross Public Utilities Department Sanitary Sewer Standards ("PUDSSS"). 
(1)  Outdoor grease traps. New food establishments shall have a grease trap as outlined in the PUDSSS. A size variance may be issued in an extreme case but shall be verified and documented by inspection. The size variance shall conform to PUDSSS size variance guidelines and is subject to approval by the Director. All scullery sinks, mop sinks, floor drains, dishwashers, hub drains and open receptacles shall drain into the outside grease trap. 
(2)  Outdoor grease trap design. Outdoor grease trap design and installation shall conform to the PUDSSS. The trap shall be located for easy access for originator cleaning, pump-out, and official inspection. Dishwasher and food grinder wastewater should be discharged through a suitably sized solids interceptor prior to the emptying into the outdoor grease trap. 
(3)  Indoor grease traps. All indoor grease trap design and installation shall conform to the DWRSSS. All scullery sinks shall discharge into an indoor grease trap. 
(4)  Mechanical grease traps. Mechanically operated grease traps (Big Dipper, skimmers, etc.) may not be used by any originator tied to the POTW collection system, 
(5)  Prohibited discharge. It is prohibited to discharge the following materials into an indoor grease trap: 
a.  Wastewater with a temperature higher than 120 degrees Fahrenheit. 
b.  Acid or caustic trap cleaners. 
c.  Any discharge from a dishwasher without approval from the Director. 
(b)  Sampling point. To allow for observation, sampling, and measurement of wastewaters, a sampling point on the effluent discharge side of the grease trap, as required by the DWRSSS, shall be provided at originator's expense. The sampling point shall be maintained and kept safe and accessible to the City at all times. 
(c)  Variances. All originators tied to the City system shall install a minimum 1,500-gallon exterior grease interceptor. Variances may be granted if the originator can show that they discharge a limited amount of FOG during all aspects of their operation. If a variance is granted, a minimum of a 100-pound grease trap shall be installed along with an effluent test point that meets the testing requirements of the City grease program. If at any time the originator exceeds the City discharge limit, the originator may be required to upgrade to a minimum of a 1,500-gallon outdoor interceptor at the originator's expense. The originator may also be subject to any fines or penalties associated with the illegal discharge at the discretion of the Director. 
(Ord. No. 02-2009, 3-2-2009) 
Sec. 36-122. - Grease trap regulations—Existing facility. 
(a)  Upgrade. If a food establishment in existence prior to codification of this division has no grease trap or, as documented by inspection, it is determined that the current grease trap is insufficient for the volume of food service waste being treated, the Director may require that the establishment upgrade to an adequately sized grease trap and sampling point as outlined in section 36-121 above. 
(b)  Best management practices (BMPs). In order to enhance the overall efficiency of the grease trap, food establishments should implement BMPs to reduce FOG and solids loading to their grease trap. Examples of BMPs are: 
(1)  Scrape food from pots, pans, plates and utensils into a garbage can. 
(2)  Installation of a solid waste interceptor. 
(3)  Prewash plates by spraying them off with cold water over a small mesh catch basin positioned over a drain. The catch basin should be cleaned into a garbage can as needed. 
(4)  Pour all liquid grease and oil from pots and pans into a waste grease bucket stored at the pot-washing sink. Heavy solids buildup of oil and grease on pots and pans should be scraped off into the waste grease bucket. 
(Ord. No. 02-2009, 3-2-2009) 
Sec. 36-123. - Grease trap maintenance. 
(a)  General. All grease traps shall be maintained by the owner so as to be in continuously efficient operation. Maintenance shall include the complete removal of all contents by a properly licensed waste hauler. Top skimming, decanting or back flushing of the grease trap or its waste is prohibited. Further, the discharge of liquid, semisolids, or solids into a grease trap from vehicles after servicing is prohibited. Vehicles capable of separating water from grease shall not discharge separated water into the grease trap or into the wastewater collection system. Cleaning and maintenance of all grease traps shall include removal of materials from the tank walls, baffles, cross pipes, inlets and outlets, both T's and the cover. Recyclable fats, oils and greases shall not be discharged into the POTW. Any violation in the removal of grease waste shall result in prosecution under state law. Maintenance shall be performed at frequencies as required by subsections (1) and (2) below. 
(1)  Outdoor grease interceptor. Maintenance shall be performed at intervals of not less than once every 90 days and as required by the "30 percent rule". Any solids interceptor should be emptied and cleaned daily. Outdoor grease interceptors shall have a minimum of 1,500 gallon capacity. 
(2)  Indoor grease trap. Maintenance shall be performed at intervals not less than once every 30 days. A variance is required to operate an indoor grease trap in place of a 1,500-gallon minimum outdoor interceptor. Indoor grease traps shall have a minimum of 100-pound capacity. Any current originator tied to the City collection system that currently operates an indoor grease trap, regardless of size, shall prove to the satisfaction of the Director that they are not discharging illegally or upgrade to a 1,500-gallon minimum outdoor grease interceptor. Originators may not operate indoor grease traps with a capacity less than 100 pounds. A solids interceptor tied to an indoor grease trap should be emptied and cleaned daily. 
(3)  Pumping variance. : Variances may be granted if the originator can prove at their expense to the Director's satisfaction that the discharge from the originator's grease trap or interceptor is meeting the City's discharge limit up to 180 consecutive days for outdoor grease interceptors or 120 consecutive days for indoor grease traps. 
(b)  Additives. It is specifically prohibited to use any additive, such as enzymes, chemicals, or bacteria, as a substitute for grease trap maintenance. The direct addition of such additives to a grease trap is also prohibited. 
(c)  Waste removal. The originator shall be responsible for the proper removal and legal disposal of the grease trap waste. All waste removed from each grease trap shall be tracked by an approved three-part manifest and the contents shall be disposed of at a facility permitted to receive such waste. In no manner shall any grease trap contents be discharged to the City sewer or stormwater system. 
(d)  Manifest transmittal. The originator shall maintain a legible copy of the completed three-part manifest on site for each service event. Failure to provide all manifests for review by City grease inspectors shall result in a $200.00 fine per violation at the discretion of the Director. 
(Ord. No. 02-2009, 3-2-2009) 
Sec. 36-124. - Record keeping by originator. 
It shall be a violation of this division for an originator to allow the removal of their grease trap waste without documentation by an approved three-part manifest. The originator shall be responsible for maintaining a copy of these manifests on site for a period of three years and subject to the Director's review without prior notification. The manifest shall contain the information listed below: 
Food service establishment: 
Facility name, address, and telephone number; 
Trap type and size; 
Date and volume removed from the trap; 
Authorized signature (verifying the grease trap was cleaned and in operable condition). 
Service company information (waste hauler): 
Pumper name, address, and telephone number; 
Pumper permit number; 
Date and volume removed from the trap; 
Disposal method; 
Authorized signature of pumper. 
Disposal site: 
Facility name, address, and telephone; 
Number facility EPD permit number; 
Date and volume received; 
Authorized signature verifying receipt of waste. 
(Ord. No. 02-2009, 3-2-2009) 
Sec. 36-125. - Grease trap inspections by Public Utilities Department. 
(a)  Inspection. Inspection of a grease trap shall be performed according to the "30 percent rule" as defined herein. 
(b)  Failed inspection. If a grease trap fails the initial inspection, the inspector may notify the originator that the grease trap shall be cleaned out within seven calendar days. After seven calendar days, the grease trap should be reinspected. 
(c)  Failed reinspection. If at the first reinspection, the grease trap is found to still be in noncompliance, a notice of violation (NOV) may be issued and the originator may be told that the grease trap shall be cleaned immediately. After three working days (Monday through Friday, inclusive), the grease trap may be reinspected. 
(d)  Mechanical grease traps. : Mechanically operated grease traps may not be used by any originator tied to the City collection system. 
(Ord. No. 02-2009, 3-2-2009) 
Sec. 36-126. - Notice of violation (NOV) by Public Utilities Department. 
(a)  Issue of notice of violation (NOV). , As outlined in section 36-109 of the City of Norcross Code of Ordinances, whenever the Director discovers a violation of any provision of this division, a written NOV may be issued to the originator. If satisfactory remedy has occurred within the time frame specified in the NOV, the requirement for a written explanation of the violation and a plan for satisfactory correction and prevention by the originator may be waived by the Director. 
(b)  Disregard of notice of violation (NOV). If an originator served with an NOV fails to initiate/complete corrective action within the time frame specified within the NOV, the Director may pursue one or more of the following options: 
(1)  Have the grease trap pumped and place the appropriate charge on the originator's monthly sewer/water bill. 
(2)  Terminate water and sewer service to the establishment. 
(3)  File an appropriate action in the courts to compel compliance. 
(4)  Any combination of the above enforcement actions. 
(Ord. No. 02-2009, 3-2-2009) 
Secs. 36-127—36-131. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 36-132. - Purpose. 
This article shall serve as the policy and rate ordinance for the Stormwater Utility of the city as established by the Stormwater Utility Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 16-2008, § 1, 5-5-2008) 
Sec. 36-133. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Dwelling unit means a structure, which contains one or more bedrooms, a bathroom and a kitchen facility. 
Equivalent runoff unit (ERU) means 100 square feet, or any portion thereof, of horizontal impervious area on a developed property within the city as of the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived. The horizontal impervious surface area includes, but is not limited to, all areas covered by structures, roof extensions, patios, porches, driveways and sidewalks. 
Nonresidential property means improved property containing multiple dwelling unit residential properties, condominiums, apartments, commercial and office buildings, public buildings and structures, industrial and manufacturing buildings, storage buildings and storage areas, parking lots, parks, recreation properties, tennis courts, swimming pools, public and private schools and universities, research facilities and stations, hospitals and convalescent centers, airports, agricultural uses, water and wastewater treatment plants, and any other form of use not otherwise mentioned which is not a residential property. 
Public water influence zone means those areas lying downstream of a culvert or other stormwater management conveyance system. On the downstream side of the conveyance system, the public water influence zone will extend for a length of six times the diameter (or width) of the culvert from which runoff is being discharged (Field Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, Third Edition, pg. 99), and within the horizontal limits set forth in the aforementioned field manual. For example, if a 48-inch diameter culvert is discharging to a private property, the public water influence zone shall extend 24 feet (six times 48 inches) from the end of the culvert and for the specified width (i.e., typically the width of the creek). The city stormwater utility may perform maintenance and/or capital construction activities only within that portion of the public water influence zone which the city has an ownership interest in, or for which a dedicated easement has been granted to, and accepted by the city for such purpose. 
Residential property means improved property containing one residential structure which contains one or more bedrooms, with bathroom and kitchen facilities, designed for occupancy by one family. A residential property may include a stick-built, industrialized, or manufactured home located on one or more individual lots or parcels of land. Improved property may be classified as a residential property, even if there is present incidental structures associated with residential uses such as garages, carports, storage buildings, guesthouses, servants or caretakers' quarters, cottages or barns, or the presence of a commercial use within the residence, as long as such use does not result in additional areas of impervious surfaces. Residential property shall not include improved property containing structures used primarily for nonresidential purposes, manufactured homes located within manufactured home parks where the land is owned by someone other than the owners of the manufactured homes, or multiple dwelling unit residential properties. 
(Ord. No. 16-2008, § 2, 5-5-2008) 
Sec. 36-134. - Scope of responsibility for stormwater management systems and facilities. 
(a)  The city owns or has rights established by written agreements which allow it to operate, maintain, improve and access those stormwater management systems and facilities which are located: 
(1)  Within public road rights-of-way; 
(2)  On private property but within easements granted to, and accepted by, the city, or are otherwise permitted to be located on such private property by written agreements for rights-of-entry, rights-of-access, rights-of-use or other permanent provisions for operation, maintenance, improvement and access to the stormwater management system facilities located thereon; 
(3)  On private property but within a public water influence zone after the city secures a right-of-entry, right-of-access, permanent easement, temporary easement or other form of written consent from the property owner; 
(4)  On land dedicated to, and accepted by, the city solely for the operation, maintenance, improvement and access to the stormwater management systems and facilities located thereon; or 
(5)  On public land which is owned by the city and/or land of another governmental entity upon which the city has agreements providing for the operation, maintenance, improvement and access to the stormwater management systems and facilities located thereon. 
(b)  Operation, maintenance and/or improvement of stormwater management systems and facilities which are located on private or public property not owned by the city, and for which there has been no written agreement granting easements, rights-of-entry, rights-of-access, rights-of-use or other form of dedication thereof to the city for operation, maintenance, improvement and access of such stormwater management and systems and facilities shall be and remain the legal responsibility of the property owner, except as otherwise provided for by the state and federal laws and regulations. 
(c)  It is the express intent of this article to protect the public health, safety and welfare of people and property in general, but not to create any special duty or relationship with any individual person, or to any specific property within or outside the boundaries of the city. The city expressly reserves the right to assert all available immunities and defenses in any action seeking to impose monetary damages or equitable remedies upon the city, its elected officials, appointed officials, officers, employees and agents arising out of any alleged failure or breach of duty or relationship. 
(d)  If any permit, plan approval, inspection or similar act is required by the city as a condition precedent to any activity or change upon property not owned by the city pursuant to this or any other regulatory ordinance, regulation or rule of the city, or under federal or state law, the issuance of such permit, plan approval or inspection shall not be deemed to constitute a warranty, express or implied, nor shall it afford the basis for any action, including any action based on failure to permit, negligent issuance of a permit, negligent plan approval, or negligent maintenance of any permitted stormwater management system or facility not expressly dedicated to and accepted by the city for further maintenance in an action seeking the imposition of money damages or equitable remedies against the city, its elected officials, appointed officials, officers, employees or agents. 
(Ord. No. 16-2008, § 3, 5-5-2008) 
Sec. 36-135. - Stormwater utility customers. 
(a)  There shall be one stormwater utility service area which shall include all property which is now in or may be in the future annexed into the city. Within the stormwater utility service area, there shall be one customer class that will be reflective of the demand that those customers' properties place on the city stormwater management program and drainage system. The specified customer class shall consist of all improved nonresidential and residential properties. 
(b)  Documentation pertaining to the designated city stormwater utility service area and information regarding the stormwater utility customer class definition shall be kept on file in the Office of the Stormwater Manager for public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 16-2008, § 4, 5-5-2008) 
Sec. 36-136. - Stormwater user fee charge—Rate schedule. 
(a)  In order to adequately fund the cost of providing stormwater services and facilities while fairly and equitably apportioning the cost of providing stormwater services and facilities among improved properties throughout the city, the City Council has established the following stormwater user fee charge rates. A user fee charge rate schedule shall be on file in the Office of the City Clerk. 
(b)  Stormwater user fee charge rates shall be assigned to all improved properties as follows: 
(1)  Residential properties shall be treated as containing one ERU for each 100 square feet, or portion thereof, of impervious area located on the property to establish the total number of ERUs for billing. 
(2)  Nonresidential properties shall be treated as containing one ERU for each 100 square feet, or portion thereof, of impervious area located on the property to establish the total number of ERUs for billing. 
(3)  The stormwater user fee charge rate shall be $2.17 per ERU (100 square feet of impervious area) per year. 
All properties shall be billed periodically for stormwater services on a schedule established by the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 16-2008, § 5, 5-5-2008) 
Sec. 36-137. - Same—Exemptions. 
(a)  Except as provided in this section or otherwise provided by law, no public or private property located in the incorporated areas of the city shall be exempt from the stormwater user fee charges. No exception, credit, offset, or other reduction in stormwater user fee charges shall be granted based on age, tax status, economic status, race, religion or other condition unrelated to the stormwater utility's cost of providing stormwater management services and facilities. 
(b)  Exemptions to the stormwater user fee charges are as follows: 
(1)  Parcels which contain 500 square feet, or less, of impervious surfaces shall be exempt from stormwater user fee charges. 
(2)  Railroad rights-of-way (tracks) shall be exempt from stormwater user fee charges. However, railroad stations, maintenance buildings, and/or other improved property used for railroad purposes shall not be exempt from stormwater user fee charges. 
(3)  Georgia Department of Transportation (GDOT) streets and rights-of-way shall be exempt from stormwater user fee charges. This exemption is in recognition of routine drainage system maintenance and capital construction services undertaken by GDOT in association with GDOT rights-of-way, road and drainage conveyance systems. However, maintenance buildings and/or other improved property used for GDOT purposes shall not be exempt from stormwater user fee charges. All other state, federal, and county properties are subject to the user fee charges on the same basis as private properties. 
(4)  The county streets and rights-of-way shall be exempt from stormwater user fee charges. This exemption is in recognition of routine drainage system maintenance and capital construction services undertaken by the county. However, other improved property used for county purposes shall not be exempt from stormwater user fee charges. 
(5)  In consideration for the city allowing the stormwater utility to use the city's existing streets, curbs, gutters, drainageways and ditches, storm sewers, culverts, inlets, catchbasins, pipes, headwalls and other structures, natural and manmade within and owned by the city which controls and diverts surface water for the purposes of collecting, diverting, transporting and controlling surface waters and stormwaters, the utility shall not charge the city a stormwater user fee charge for the city's impervious surface area resulting from the city's impervious surfaces which are owned and/or maintained by the city within the public rights-of-way. 
(6)  Any property whereby 100 percent of the stormwater runoff is contained or infiltrated on the property and no stormwater runoff is discharged, via overland flow or manmade conveyance, to adjacent properties or rights-of-way for all storm events up to and including the 100-year 24-hour storm event. 
(Ord. No. 16-2008, § 6, 5-5-2008) 
Sec. 36-138. - Same—Credits. 
(a)  The Stormwater Manager shall grant credits or adjustments based on the technical and procedural criteria set forth in the Stormwater Utility Credit Technical Manual. Copies of the credit technical manual will be maintained by and be made available by the Stormwater Manager. 
(1)  A stormwater user fee charge credit shall be determined based on the technical requirements, standards and criteria contained in the credit technical manual. The amount of credit, or reduction of the stormwater user fee charge, shall be in accordance with the criteria contained in the credit technical manual. 
(2)  Any credit allowed against the stormwater user fee charge is conditioned on continuing compliance with the city's design and performance standards as stated in the credit technical manual and/or upon continuing provision of the controls, systems, facilities, services, and activities provided, operated, and maintained by the property owner or owners upon which the credit is based. The Stormwater Manager may revoke a credit at any time for noncompliance with applicable standards and criteria as established in the credit technical manual or this article. 
(3)  In order to obtain a credit, the property owner must make application to the city on forms provided by the Stormwater Manager for such purpose, and in accordance with the procedures outlined in the credit technical manual. 
(4)  Property owners may apply for any credits and/or adjustments in accordance with the credit manual. 
(5)  The application for any credit or adjustment must be in writing and must include the information necessary to establish eligibility for the credit or adjustment, and be in the format established by the Stormwater Manager. Incomplete applications will not be accepted for consideration and processing. 
(b)  When an application for a credit is deemed complete by the Stormwater Manager, he shall have 30 days from the date the complete application is accepted to either grant the credit in whole, grant the credit in part, or deny the credit. 
(Ord. No. 16-2008, § 7, 5-5-2008) 
Sec. 36-139. - Same—Billing, delinquencies, collections, adjustments. 
Failure to receive a stormwater utility bill is not justification for nonpayment. The property owner, as identified from public land records of the county, shall be obligated to pay the appropriate stormwater user fee charge for that property. 
(1)  Billing. 
a.  Stormwater user fee charges shall begin to accrue January 1, 2008, and shall be billed retroactively. A bill for stormwater user fee charges may be sent through the United States Postal Service or by alternative means, notifying the owner of the property being billed of the amount of the stormwater user fee charge, less credits, the date the payment is due and the date when payment is past due. 
b.  The stormwater user fee charge will be billed and collected as deemed most effective and efficient by the City Council. 
c.  Frequency of the billing of stormwater user fee charges shall be specified by the City Council. 
d.  Failure to receive a bill shall not be justification for nonpayment. Regardless of the party to whom the bill is initially directed, the owner of each developed property subject to stormwater user fee charges shall be obligated to pay stormwater user fee charges and any interest on delinquent stormwater user fee charge payments. 
e.  If a customer is underbilled or if no bill is sent for a particular tract of improved property, the city stormwater utility may back bill for a period of up to one year, but shall not assess penalties for any delinquency due to the failure to send a bill or an underbilling. 
(2)  Delinquencies and collection. 
a.  A one percent per month late charge shall be assessed against the customer for the unpaid balance of any stormwater user fee charge that becomes delinquent. 
b.  Unpaid stormwater user fee charges shall be collected by filing suit to collect on an unpaid account and by using all methods allowed by state law to collect on any judgment obtained thereby, including enforcement of any lien resulting from any such judgment. Unless reduced to a judgment and a writ of fieri facias is issued, the unpaid stormwater user fee charge shall not constitute a direct lien against the owner and/or the property. 
(3)  Adjustments. The Stormwater Manager shall administer the procedures and standards for the adjustment of the stormwater user fee charge. 
a.  Customers who believe their stormwater user fee is incorrect may seek an adjustment of the stormwater user fee charge allocated to a property at any time by submitting the request in writing to the Stormwater Manager and setting forth in detail the grounds upon which relief is sought. 
b.  Customers requesting the adjustment shall be required, at their own expense, to provide supplemental information to the Stormwater Manager including, but not limited to, a survey certified by a registered land surveyor or a professional engineer. Submittal of this information will be required if the Stormwater Manager or his designee cannot make a determination based on field inspection and/or review of existing city aerial photography. Failure to provide the required information within the time limits established by the Stormwater Manager, as may be reasonably extended, may result in denial of the adjustment request. 
c.  Once a completed adjustment request and all required information is received by the Stormwater Manager, the Stormwater Manager shall have 30 calendar days within which to render a written decision. Concurrent payment of any charges allocated to the property is not required as a condition precedent to this request for review. 
d.  In considering an adjustment request, the Stormwater Manager shall consider whether the calculation of the stormwater utility user fee charge for the property is correct. 
e.  The Stormwater Manager's decision shall be in writing and will be mailed to the address provided on the adjustment request, and service shall be complete upon mailing. 
f.  If the result of an adjustment is that a refund is due the applicant, the refund will be applied as a credit on the applicant's next stormwater bill. 
(Ord. No. 16-2008, § 8, 5-5-2008) 
Sec. 36-140. - Appeals, hearings. 
(a)  Appeals. An appeal to the City Manager may be taken by any property owner or customer aggrieved by any decision of the Stormwater Manager. The appeal shall be taken within 30 days of the decision of the Stormwater Manager by filing with the City Manager a notice of appeal in writing specifying the grounds thereof. Upon the filing of the notice of appeal, the Stormwater Manager shall forthwith transmit to the City Manager all documentation constituting the record upon which the decision appealed from was taken. 
(b)  Hearing. The City Manager shall fix a reasonable time for hearing the appeal and give written notice to the appellant at least ten days prior to the hearing date. The notice shall indicate the place, date and time of the hearing. The City Manager shall affirm, reverse, affirm in part, or reverse in part the decision of the Stormwater Manager after hearing the evidence. If the decision of the Stormwater Manager is reversed in whole or in part, resulting in a refund or credit due to the property owner, then such refund or credit shall be calculated retroactive to the date of the initial appeal. 
(c)  Decisions. The decision of the City Manager shall be final, and there shall be no further administrative action. Any person aggrieved or dissatisfied with the decision of the City Manager may appeal that decision to the superior court of the county by writ of certiorari. 
(Ord. No. 16-2008, § 9, 5-5-2008) 
Secs. 36-141—36-163. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ELECTRICITY[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Limitation on action expanding the power of regulation over any business activity regulated by the public service commission, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(5). 

Sec. 36-164. - Application for service; deposits; right to reject; special contracts. 
(a)  Application for electric services shall be made at the Office of the General Government Administration Department and deposits paid as provided in section 36-1. 
(b)  The city shall have the right to reject any application for service not available under its rate schedules, or which involves excessive cost, or which might affect the supply of service to others, or for other good and sufficient reasons. 
(c)  In any case where the investment to the city to supply electrical service to a consumer is deemed to be onerous or a hardship by the city due to special equipment, topographical constraints such as rock in the matter of underground service, etc., or an election by a consumer outside the corporate limits to have city service, the city may, due to the large or special investment required to provide such service, enter into special contracts with such consumer. The subject matter of these contracts may be deposits, rates, or the imposition of equipment or labor costs upon the consumer. In the latter event all such equipment supplied shall be deemed the property of the city by contract and shall not be deemed to confer any interest in the city electrical system. No such contract shall conflict with O.C.G.A. § 46-3-1 et seq., or O.C.G.A. § 46-1-1 et seq., Territorial Rights. For purposes of this provision the word "consumer" shall be deemed to include any person or entity with whom the city contracts, to include developers or builders. 
(Code 1979, § 6-4-1; Code 1998, § 74-206) 
Sec. 36-165. - Service rates. 
Electric service rates shall be as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges established by the City Council. The schedule of rates shall be maintained on file in the Office of the General Government Administration Department where it shall be available for inspection by the public. 
(Code 1979, § 6-4-2; Code 1998, § 74-207) 
Sec. 36-166. - Classification of service. 
Service shall be classified for the purpose of determining the applicable rate schedule in accordance with the nature of the customer's establishment, as follows: 
(1)  Residential service. A residential service shall be defined as a single- or three-phase service to a single private house, apartment, or other living quarters occupied by a person or persons constituting a distinct household. It shall include any private garage adjacent to, connected with, and used exclusively by the resident. It shall also include a service connection to any farm building or establishment which is used primarily for the production, processing, and/or utilization of material produced on the farm. Any of these shall be billed on the rate schedule for residential service. 
(2)  General service. A general service shall be defined as a single- or three-phase service at one point of connection furnishing electric energy to any business enterprise. 
(3)  Industrial service. An industrial service shall be defined as a single- or three-phase service at one point of connection furnishing electric energy in the manufacture of a finished product; the extraction, fabrication or processing of a raw material; or the transportation or preservation of a raw material or finished product. 
(4)  Combination residential or commercial service (residential-commercial). Any customer having his residence and place of business on the same premises may receive service for both at a single point of connection and through a single meter if he so desires. If service is received through a single meter, the service will be classified and billed according to the rate schedule of the primary electrical purpose of the service. 
(5)  Distinction between residential and commercial service. Residential service shall include, in addition to all domestic uses of energy, the use of energy for the production, processing, and/or utilization of materials produced on farms. For example, feed grinding, milk pasteurizing, poultry houses, and dairy barns will be classified as residential service. Materials produced elsewhere, as in the case of commercial feed grinding plants, commercial poultry hatcheries, creameries, etc., shall be classified as general service. 
(Code 1979, § 6-4-3; Code 1998, § 74-208) 
Sec. 36-167. - Customer's responsibility. 
(a)  The customer shall have full responsibility for the current upon the customer's premises at and from the point of delivery thereof, and for the wires, apparatus, devices, and appurtenances thereon used in connection with the service. The customer shall indemnify, save harmless, and defend the city against all claims, demands, cost or expense for loss, damage, or injury to persons or property in any manner directly or indirectly arising from, connected with, or growing out of the transmission or use of current by the customer at or on the customer's side of the point of delivery. 
(b)  The customer shall be liable and hold harmless the city from any damage resulting from connected electrical loads caused by the installation and/or reconnection of meters. The customer shall be responsible for the proper disconnection of all electrical loads when requesting the installation and/or reconnection of meters. 
(Code 1979, § 6-4-4; Code 1998, § 74-209) 
Sec. 36-168. - Changes in customer's wiring or equipment. 
All equipment supplied by the city for the use of each customer has a definite capacity and, for this reason, it shall be the responsibility of the customer to notify the city in writing before any change is made in the load characteristics or change of purpose or location of his installation. Failure to give such notice shall render the customer liable for any damage to meters or accessories, transformers, or wires of the city caused by the additional or changed installation. 
(Code 1979, § 6-4-5; Code 1998, § 74-210) 
Sec. 36-169. - Customer faulty fuse checks; customer responsibility. 
(a)  When the electric department receives a report of interruption of service from a customer, and upon answering the report determines that the service interruption was due to faulty fuses, a charge in the amount set forth in the schedule of rates established by the City Council shall be assessed on the basis of whether the call was made during regular work hours or outside regular work hours. 
(b)  It shall be the practice of the electric department, upon receiving a trouble report, to advise the customer of the possibility of faulty customer-owned equipment and of the charges imposed by this section, but failure to do so will not relieve the customer of his responsibility for this charge. 
(Code 1979, § 6-4-6; Code 1998, § 74-211) 
Sec. 36-170. - Electric light service to city ball fields. 
On any day when the temperature reaches 90 degrees Fahrenheit or above, all ball games scheduled to be played in the evening on city ball fields and requiring lighting may be cancelled. 
(Code 1979, § 6-4-7; Code 1998, § 74-212) 
Sec. 36-171. - Clearing and maintenance of rights-of-way. 
(a)  The city shall have the right to cut and trim trees and shrubbery to the extent necessary to keep them clear of electric distribution lines, and to cut all dead, weak, leaning, or dangerous trees which may endanger the lines by falling. 
(b)  All customers shall allow the city to clear and trim trees which may endanger the electric lines of the city and imperil service to any customer. No customer shall plant trees or shrubs along the city's rights-of-way which may at some time in the future endanger the electric lines of the city. 
(c)  The city shall use all reasonable care and diligence in the clearing, reclearing, and maintenance of rights-of-way and electric distribution lines. 
(d)  The city shall make a reasonable attempt to give notice to landowners of scheduled or planned clearing, reclearing and alterations within the rights-of-way. 
(Code 1979, § 6-4-8; Code 1998, § 74-213) 
Sec. 36-172. - Foreign electricity. 
No other source of supply of electricity shall be introduced or used by a customer of the city in conjunction with service supplied by the city without the written consent of the city and without complying in all respects with the provisions of the electrical code adopted by the city. 
(Code 1979, § 6-4-9; Code 1998, § 74-214) 
Sec. 36-173. - Resale of electricity. 
All purchased electric service on the premises of the customer shall be supplied exclusively by the city, and the customer shall not directly or indirectly sell, sublet, assign or otherwise dispose of the electric service or any part thereof without the consent of the city. In the case of centrally metered rental facilities, a cost of utilities may be included in rent charged the tenant. 
(Code 1979, § 6-4-10; Code 1998, § 74-215) 
Sec. 36-174. - Extensions. 
(a)  The city will construct, own, operate and maintain overhead and/or underground facilities, either secondary, primary, or high voltage located on the highway, or on rights-of-way acquired by the city and used or usable as a part of the city's general supply system. 
(b)  The city's obligation to extend its facilities to a new point of delivery is limited to the assumption of new investment of the extent warranted by the revenue anticipated from the business to be supplied. 
(c)  Where the business in prospect does not warrant the expenditure required to serve it, the city will determine, from the circumstances of each case, what guarantees of revenue, contractual agreements, or additional aids in construction which, consistent with sound business practices and the best interests of all customers, shall be required of the prospective customer or customers. 
(d)  The city will construct, own, and maintain underground supply facilities, either secondary, primary, or high voltage located on the highway, or on rights-of-way acquired by the city and used or usable as a part of the city's general supply system. Customers or land developers desiring this type of underground service will be required to bear a cost difference of underground as opposed to overhead construction. 
(e)  No electric energy sold by the city shall be used as a reserve, or standby service, or in any way in conjunction with any other source of power without the city's prior written consent. 
(Code 1979, § 6-4-11; Code 1998, § 74-216) 
Secs. 36-175—36-201. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - SOLID WASTE[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Authorization to provide garbage and solid waste collection and disposal, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(2); Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.; local, multijurisdictional and regional solid waste plans, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-31.1. 

Sec. 36-202. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Bag means a plastic sack designed to store refuse with sufficient wall strength to maintain physical integrity when lifted by the top. Total weight of a bag and its contents shall not exceed 35 pounds. 
Bin means a receptacle made of plastic with a capacity of 18 gallons used for the purpose of curbside collection of certain recyclable items. 
Cart means a receptacle, not to exceed 95 gallons, with wheels and lid, designed for the purpose of curbside collection of refuse. 
Commercial subscriber means a producer at a commercial unit which has chosen to subscribe to the optional recycling services offered by the franchisee and billed through the city and has entered into a recycling service agreement with the franchisee. 
Commercial unit means all premises, locations or entities, public or private (including condominium units and multifamily units), requiring refuse collection within the city using roll-offs, dumpsters or carts, other than a residential unit or a multiple dwelling. 
Construction debris means waste building materials resulting from construction, remodeling, repair or demolition operations. 
Dumpster means a metal receptacle designed to be lifted and emptied mechanically for use primarily at commercial units. 
Dwelling unit ; means a residence for one family. A dwelling unit shall be deemed occupied when either water or domestic light and power services are being supplied thereto." 
Effective date means August 16, 1994. 
Excluded waste means any items of hazardous waste, as defined by applicable laws, and any other items that have been banned from sanitary landfills or would require special handling by federal, state or local laws or regulations. Franchisee shall not be required to collect or dispose of excluded waste. 
Franchisee means the entity which has been granted a franchise right by the city to operate a refuse collection and recycling service within the city. 
Garbage means putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, and consumption of food. 
Multiple dwelling ; means a building designed for and containing more than four dwelling units. 
Producer means an occupant of a residential or commercial unit who generates refuse. 
Recyclable items means newspapers; aluminum and steel cans; plastics (clear milk jugs and soda bottles, no. 1 and no. 2); brown, clear, and green glass; and any other recyclable items which the franchisee and the city agree to add to the list of items which are to be included in the recycling program. As to commercial customers only it shall also mean old corrugated cardboard (OCC) and all grades of white office paper (mixed paper). 
Refuse means all putrescible and nonputrescible solid waste (except human body wastes), including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, and solid market and industrial wastes. In addition, for purposes of commercial roll-off services only, the term "refuse" includes construction debris. 
Residential unit means any freestanding structure that contains from one to four dwelling units. 
Roll-off means a 20, 30, or 40-yard container or compactor used to collect and transport refuse from commercial units. 
Rubbish means nonputrescible solid wastes (excluding ashes), consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, wood, glass, bedding, crockery and similar materials. 
Yard waste means those items as defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22(42). 
(Code 1979, § 5-2-1; Code 1998, § 62-1; Ord. No. 18-95, § VI, 11-6-1995; Ord. No. 03-96, 2-5-1996; Ord. No. 10-2018 , § I, 9-4-2018) 
Sec. 36-203. - Administration. 
(a)  The Mayor is hereby authorized on behalf of the city to enter into an agreement with a franchisee to provide for solid waste management to include, but not be limited to, the collection, removal and disposal of solid waste for all citizens and businesses operating within the city. The Mayor shall, with the approval of the City Council, execute an agreement binding the city to the franchisee for such a period of time as may be allowed by law and as determined by the City Council to be in the best interest of all the citizens of the city. 
(b)  The Public Utilities Department Head shall have the power and authority to enforce the duties and obligations of the franchisee under the franchise agreement between the franchisee and the city. 
(c)  To the extent it is necessary to carry out the administration of the solid waste management code, the Public Works Department Head shall have the authority to establish rules and regulations not inconsistent with any terms contained in the solid waste management franchise agreement between the franchisee and the city. 
(d)  The Public Utilities Department Head shall have the power and authority to enforce the requirements for solid waste management as specified throughout this article. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to adhere to the provisions provided for in this article. 
(Code 1979, § 5-2-2; Code 1998, § 62-2) 
Sec. 36-204. - Operation by franchisee. 
(a)  All refuse accumulated in the city shall be collected, conveyed and disposed of by the franchisee at a permitted subtitle D sanitary landfill designated by franchisee. The franchisee shall have the ability to recommend regulations concerning precollection practices for both refuse collection and recyclable item collection, the days of collection, type and location of waste containers and recycling bins, and such other matters pertaining to the collection, conveyance, and disposal as it shall find necessary, and to recommend changes and modifications to the same. The franchisee shall agree that it has been provided with a copy of this article, and is familiar with and to the extent required will adhere to its provisions. 
(b)  All refuse accumulated in the city shall be collected, conveyed and disposed of by the franchisee, except as otherwise provided for in this article. No other person shall collect, convey over any of the streets or alleys of the city, or dispose of any refuse accumulated in the city. Nothing contained in this chapter shall preclude any producer from recycling any garbage or rubbish generated by that producer; provided, that recycling function is carried on entirely by that producer and is transported to a recycling facility in a vehicle owned or leased by and driven by that producer. 
(Code 1979, § 5-2-3; Code 1998, § 62-3) 
Sec. 36-205. - Precollection practices. 
It shall be the duty of the producer to keep all refuse pending collection and disposal as follows: 
(1)  All refuse shall be placed at the curbside in carts provided by franchisee or in bags. Recyclable items shall be placed at the curbside in bins provided by the franchisee. 
(2)  Tree branches and heavy brush which will not fit into carts or bags shall be cut in lengths not exceeding four feet in length and stacked in a compact pile on the right-of-way in front of the residence adjoining the curb, but such piles shall not extend into the street. Sticks, hedge clippings and small brush shall be gathered into bundles and tied securely so that each bundle does not exceed four feet in length nor weigh more than 50 pounds. The franchisee will not collect logs and limbs over four inches in diameter or over four feet long. Dead animals weighing ten pounds or more, animal waste, rocks, bricks, dirt, and tires will not be collected. 
(3)  All carts and bins shall be kept clean and free of accumulated waste and shall be treated by the producer with an effective insecticide, if necessary, to prevent nuisance. 
(4)  The producer shall prevent the continued, excessive and unsightly accumulation of refuse upon the property occupied by him or public thoroughfares adjoining his property. 
(5)  It is a violation of this article to place, or to cause to be placed, excluded waste in any cart, bag, bin, dumpster, or other container for collection. 
(6)  Inoperative, privately used or worn out household appliances (including refrigerators, stoves, washing machines, dryers, discarded furniture) will not be collected at the curb by the franchisee for the regular fee; however, the franchisee is authorized to charge a fee predetermined by the franchisee and the city. Upon reasonable notice to the franchisee, hot water heaters, mattresses and box springs shall be picked up at the curb at no charge. Producers shall be responsible for removing any chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) and Freon gas from white goods prior to arranging for collection by franchisee. A tag from a licensed remover shall be prominently displayed on any applicable items prior to collection. The producer must contact the city to request the pick-up by franchisee of any items described in this subsection. 
(7)  Refuse generated from the conduct of business or commercial enterprise carried on from residential units will be collected at a commercial small business collection rate. Where the structure is the primary dwelling unit occupied by one or more families, incidental commercial activity shall result in residential rates. However, the volume of refuse each week shall not exceed the allowed one 95-gallon cart and five-bag residential limit. All determinations of the rates to be applicable to a residential unit shall be made by the city. 
(8)  Carts, bins and bags shall be picked up at the curb only. Carts, bins and bags placed in any other location shall not be picked up. 
(9)  All items placed at the curb on trash pick-up day may be considered refuse and be removed. 
(10)  Refuse and recyclable items shall be put out by 6:30 a.m. on pick-up days. Carts, bins and bags shall not be placed on the easement in front of the adjoining curb more than 12 hours prior to the regularly scheduled pick-up day. Carts or bins shall not be left on the easement in front of the residential unit adjoining the curb more than 12 hours following the regularly scheduled pick-up day. 
(11)  Refuse bins and carts must be stored or placed only in the rear yard or inside enclosed structures where they are not visible from the street, with the exception of the regularly scheduled pick-up day hours permitted. 
Exception: Attached townhome /condo unit developments. When unable to store refuse bins and carts in rear yard or enclosed structure due to lack of reasonable access, refuse bins and carts must be stored at the townhome or condo unit dwelling as is physically possible. The area is to be maintained in a clean, trash free and organized state. 
(Code 1979, § 5-2-4; Code 1998, § 62-4; Ord. No. 10-97, 5-5-1997; Ord. No. 09-2012, 3-5-2012) 
Sec. 36-206. - Refuse containers for residential units. 
Each residential unit will be provided one 18-gallon bin and one 95-gallon cart by the franchisee without charge for the deposit of refuse and recyclable items, as the case may be. Any new residential unit added to the collection route shall be supplied a cart and a bin by the franchisee without charge. 
(Code 1979, § 5-2-5; Code 1998, § 62-5; Ord. No. 10-2018 , § I, 9-4-2018) 
Sec. 36-207. - Storing of refuse. 
(a)  Public places. No person shall place any refuse in any street, alley, or other public place, or upon any private property whether owned by such person or not, within the city unless it is in proper containers for collection or express approval has been granted by the city and the franchisee. No person shall throw or deposit any refuse in any stream, body of water, or other nondesignated area. 
(b)  Unauthorized accumulation. Any unauthorized accumulation of refuse on any premises is hereby declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited. Such violation may be punishable under chapter 26, article III or under the terms of this article as the city may elect. Failure to remove any existing accumulation of refuse shall be deemed a violation of this article. 
(c)  Scattering of refuse. No person shall cast, place, sweep, or deposit anywhere within the city any refuse in such a manner that it may be carried or deposited by animals or the elements upon any street, sidewalk, alley, sewer, parkway, or other public place or into any occupied premises within the city. 
(d)  Scattering of garbage. When a producer places refuse at the curb and it is subsequently scattered by animals or the elements, the producer shall clean up the refuse. When the franchisee scatters refuse at the curb during its performance under its franchise, the franchisee shall clean up the refuse. 
(e)  Unauthorized collection. No person other than the producer or franchisee may go through or remove refuse or recyclable items from the residential carts or bins located at the curbside of the residential units. 
(Code 1979, § 5-2-6; Code 1998, § 62-6) 
Sec. 36-208. - Collection practice—Residential unit service. 
(a)  Refuse accumulated by residential units shall be collected from the curb once each week. 
(b)  There shall be no collections on Sundays, nor before 6:30 a.m., nor after 7:00 p.m. absent an emergency situation as determined by the city and the franchisee. 
(c)  Franchisee reserves the right to charge an additional fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges for every bag collected beyond the specified five-bag limit. 
(d)  The collection and disposal of yard waste shall be in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 12-8-40.2, and the franchisee shall not be required to perform, except as in accordance with such state law. 
(Code 1979, § 5-2-7(a); Code 1998, § 62-7; Ord. No. 10-2018 , § I, 9-4-2018) 
Sec. 36-209. - Same—Commercial service. 
(a)  In order to obtain a business license, the applicant must show proof that sanitation service has been arranged with the city and appropriate deposits have been paid for the proposed business. 
(b)  In order to obtain a commercial building permit, the applicant must show proof that sanitation service has been arranged with the city and appropriate deposits have been paid for the proposed construction. 
(c)  Overloading will be the responsibility of the producer. Any damage to equipment, containers, or trucks owned by the franchisee due to improper loading, overloading, or loading with improper material will be the responsibility of the producer. 
(d)  Offloading will be the responsibility of the producer. Damage to trees, shrubs, under groundwater lines, sewer lines, gas lines, driveways, pavement, etc., at the construction site will be the responsibility of the producer. No dirt will be hauled. 
(e)  The franchisee shall provide curbside collection of refuse placed in carts to all commercial units which do not generate sufficient refuse to warrant dumpster or roll-off service. Such curbside service shall be provided at such specific frequency as shall be agreed upon between the city and the producer, and shall be at the rates set forth in the schedule of rates on file with the General Government Administration Department. 
(f)  The franchisee shall collect refuse placed in dumpsters or roll-offs of all commercial units which generate sufficient refuse to warrant dumpster or roll-off service. The appropriate dumpster or roll-off capacity and the frequency of collection shall be as agreed upon between the city and the producer, and shall be at the rates set forth in the schedule of rates on file with the General Government Administration Department. 
(g)  The franchisee shall provide dumpsters, roll-offs, and/or carts to commercial units as agreed by the city and the individual producers. Dumpsters or roll-offs shall be placed in an accessible, outside location on a hard (i.e., concrete) surface according to individual agreements. Individual producers shall be responsible for maintaining such surface. The city reserves the right to amend the placement of containers allowing for safe and efficient service by the franchisee. 
(h)  The franchisee shall provide dumpsters, compactors, roll-offs, and/or 95-gallon carts to commercial subscribers as agreed between the franchisee and the individual commercial subscribers. Dumpsters, compactors or roll-offs shall be placed in accessible, outside locations on a hard (i.e., concrete) surface according to individual agreements. Commercial subscribers shall be responsible for maintaining such surfaces. The city reserves the right to amend the placement of containers allowing for safe, efficient service by the franchisee. 
(i)  The city shall notify the franchisee on a daily basis of all service requests for extra pickups. 
(Code 1979, § 5-2-7(c); Code 1998, § 62-8; Ord. No. 03-96, 2-5-1996) 
Sec. 36-210. - Residential unit recycling services. 
The franchisee shall provide curbside collection service for the collection of recyclable items from each residential unit within the city one time per week. Bins shall be placed at curbside by 6:30 a.m. on the designated collection day. It is the intent under this chapter for the franchisee to collect certain commingled recyclable items but the franchisee will not be required to collect recyclable items which are mixed with refuse, whether or not normally collected by sanitation crews. The franchisee will notify the city of any such addresses where the residents are so commingling recyclable items and will tag the bins as being unacceptable for collection. 
(Code 1979, § 5-2-7(b); Code 1998, § 62-9; Ord. No. 10-2018 , § I, 9-4-2018) 
Sec. 36-211. - Commercial unit recycling services. 
(a)  The franchisee shall offer and provide curbside collection of mixed paper placed in 95-gallon carts provided by the franchisee to commercial subscribers which do not generate sufficient mixed paper to warrant dumpster, compactor or roll-off service. 
(b)  The franchisee shall collect OCC and mixed paper placed in dumpsters, compactors or roll-offs of those commercial subscribers which generate sufficient OCC or mixed paper to warrant dumpster, compactor or roll-off service. The franchisee shall not be obligated to collect and may reject any OCC load which in franchisee's judgment is contaminated with refuse. The franchisee shall notify the city of any such addresses where the commercial subscribers are commingling recyclable items with refuse and shall tag the dumpsters, compactors or roll-offs as being unacceptable for collection. 
(Code 1998, § 62-10; Ord. No. 03-96, 2-5-1996; Ord. No. 10-2018 , § I, 9-4-2018) 
Sec. 36-212. - Multiple dwelling recycling services. 
(a)  Effective date. The effective date of this section 36-212 shall be November 1, 2018. 
(b)  Applicability . This section 36-212 shall be effective for and apply to all new multiple dwelling properties constructed after November 1, 2018, all multiple dwelling properties that are under construction as of November 1, 2018, and all existing multiple dwelling properties that are issued a certificate of occupancy (CO) under section 103-123 after November 1, 2018. Existing multiple dwelling properties that were issued and are currently operating under an existing certificate of occupancy issued prior to November 1, 2018 are exempt from this section so long as their current certificate of occupancy is effective. 
(c)  Recycling program . All multiple dwelling properties subject to this section 36-212 shall establish a recycling program by contracting with the franchisee to provide on-site recycling services to their tenants as a condition precedent to the issuance of their property's first certificate of occupancy (CO). 
(d)  Program requirements . 
(1)  Service responsibility . All multiple dwelling properties subject to this section 36-212 shall provide an on-site recycling program. The multiple dwelling property owner shall not be responsible for tenants' actual use of the recycling system, so long as the system itself has been properly established and maintained. The multiple dwelling recycling program shall be maintained regardless of any change of building ownership or franchisee. 
(2)  Service agreements . The franchisee shall offer and provide collection of OCC and mixed paper placed in dumpsters, compactors or roll-offs for all multiple dwellings that are subject to this section 36-212 providing for multiple dwelling recycling services. 
(3)  Containers and location. 
a.  Containers provided by franchisee, including compactors, shall be clearly labeled in english and in other languages if appropriate, including an indication of the material to be placed in the container and the word "recycling" or "recyclable" or the "chasing arrows" recycling symbol. 
b.  The types of containers used for collection of recyclables shall be established between the multiple dwelling property owner or owner's representative and the franchisee. 
c.  The franchisee or multiple dwelling property owner will provide any recycling containers needed to establish the recycling program. 
d.  The recycling containers at a multiple dwelling property shall be placed in a location or locations at least as convenient to tenants as the refuse containers, including trash chutes, insofar as is practical. 
e.  Indoor common-area collection/storage areas shall be established in accordance with appropriate city fire and/or life safety codes. 
f.  Exterior recyclables storage areas shall be established in accordance with city requirements for approved commercial refuse containers. 
g.  The multiple dwelling property owner shall maintain all recycling areas, including the containers, in a clean, sanitary and litter-free manner. 
(4)  Promotion and education . A multiple dwelling property owner subject to this section 36-212 and/or the managing agent of said property, if applicable, is responsible for notifying and educating residents of the property on recycling issues and practices through an informal and on-going education campaign. Every new resident of a multiple dwelling property shall be provided, within 30 days of occupancy, general recycling information and current program recycling guidelines. All existing residents of multiple dwelling properties shall be provided at least annually with general recycling information and current program recycling guidelines by the property owner and/or the managing agent of the property. 
(Ord. No. 10-2018 , § I, 9-4-2018) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 10-2018 , § I, adopted September 4, 2018 added a new § 36-212 and renumbered former §§36-212—36-216 as §§ 36-213—36-217. 
Sec. 36-213. - Holidays. 
The franchisee shall not be required to make collections on the following holidays: New Year's Day, Martin Luther King Day, Memorial Day, Fourth of July, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day. If such a holiday is also a usual collection day, those persons affected will receive one pickup that week on a revised schedule. Franchisee shall notify the city 30 days in advance of such a holiday of the revised schedule. Commercial container collections may be affected by holidays in that collections may be made at other than usual times. 
(Code 1979, § 5-2-7(d); Code 1998, § 62-11; Ord. No. 10-2018 , § I, 9-4-2018) 
Editor's note— Former § 36-212. See editor's note, § 36-212. 
Sec. 36-214. - Severe weather. 
In case of severe weather conditions including, but not limited to, ice, snow or extreme cold which may endanger lives and property by performance under this article, the franchisee may: 
(1)  Suspend service until such time as weather conditions change; 
(2)  Continue service, but shall not be bound to regular route schedule; 
(3)  Shall not be bound to collect extraordinary amounts of tree limbs and rubbish resulting from such weather conditions; and 
(4)  The rules and regulations regarding precollection practices shall continue to apply. 
(Code 1979, § 5-2-7(e); Code 1998, § 62-12; Ord. No. 10-2018 , § I, 9-4-2018) 
Editor's note— Former § 36-213. See editor's note, § 36-212. 
Sec. 36-215. - Service charges. 
(a)  Solid waste service charges for the purpose of financing the collection and disposal of refuse in the city shall be as established in the franchise agreement between the franchisee and the city and shall be levied upon every residence, business and commercial establishment in the city. The schedule of rates shall be maintained on file in the Office of the General Government Administration Department where it is available for inspection by the public. 
(b)  All producers residing in residential units who are 62 years old or older shall enjoy free service from the franchisee. To qualify for free service, all residential unit producers 62 years old or older must comply with the provisions of this code as it pertains to such an exemption. All exemptions shall expire when the producer ceases to occupy the dwelling. 
(c)  Any person desiring to be exempted under subsection (b) of this section shall apply in writing to the General Government Administration Department, setting forth in the application the reasons why he should be exempted. No person shall be excepted unless and until he has been notified by the General Government Administration Department that his request for exception has been approved. 
(d)  The Public Works Department Head is hereby authorized to require additional service charges of any commercial establishment that requests and receives additional or special solid waste collection and disposal services greater than those normally provided by the Department. Any such additional charges shall be based upon the cost to the city of providing such additional or special services. 
(e)  Delinquent accounts shall be subject to enforcement, collection and stoppage of services as described in the most recent edition of the City of Norcross Customer Utility Manual that has been approved by the City Council. 
(Code 1979, § 5-2-8; Code 1998, § 62-13; Ord. No. 18-95, § VI, 11-6-1995; Ord. No. 10-2018 , § I, 9-4-2018) 
Editor's note— Former § 36-214. See editor's note, § 36-212. 
Sec. 36-216. - Collection of service. 
Solid waste deposits and service charges shall be collected and/or billed in the same manner and on the same bill as fees for water, sewage and electric service. The billing and collection of solid waste charges shall be governed by the provisions of this chapter on fees and charges for municipal utilities and by the provisions for collection of delinquent taxes, fees and other revenue. 
(Code 1979, § 5-2-9; Code 1998, § 62-14; Ord. No. 10-2018 , § I, 9-4-2018) 
Editor's note— Former § 36-215. See editor's note, § 36-212. 
Sec. 36-217. - Unauthorized accumulation of solid waste; nuisance. 
Any unauthorized accumulation of solid waste on any premises is hereby declared to be a nuisance as provided for under this Code. Failure to remove any existing accumulation of solid waste within such reasonable time as may be fixed by written notice from the Code Enforcement Department Head shall be deemed a violation of this section and may, depending upon circumstances, be deemed a violation of other sections of this Code. 
(Code 1979, § 5-2-11; Code 1998, § 62-15; Ord. No. 10-2018 , § I, 9-4-2018) 
Editor's note— Former § 36-216. See editor's note, § 36-212. 
Chapter 38 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 38-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Business includes any and all persons which own, lease, have license to, or otherwise control any amount of real property within the geographical boundaries of the city for the express purpose of operating, maintaining or facilitating the operation or maintenance of taxicabs, limousines and other passenger-carrying vehicles. 
Driver means any person who is employed by a person or entity who has or is required to have a business license issued by the city who, in the course of this employment, operates a taxicab, limousine or other passenger-carrying vehicle, upon the streets of the city. This definition includes persons who are self-employed. 
Vehicle for hire means any taxicab, limousine, or other passenger-carrying vehicle operated for hire and designed or used for the purpose of transporting passengers for consideration or charges which are determined by agreement, contract, mileage, or by the length of time the vehicle is used. The vehicles regulated by the state public service commission are excluded from this definition. 
(Code 1979, § 9-5-2; Code 1998, § 78-1) 
Sec. 38-2. - Compliance with chapter. 
No person shall conduct the business of operating vehicles for hire in the incorporated area of the city without first meeting the requirements of this chapter and having been issued a business license for operation in the geographical boundaries of this city. No business licensed for operating vehicles for hire shall employ any driver that has not first met the requirements of this chapter and been issued a driver's permit. 
(Code 1979, § 9-5-1; Code 1998, § 78-2; Ord. No. 23-95, § III, 12-4-1995) 
Secs. 38-3—38-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUSINESS LICENSE 

Sec. 38-23. - Required. 
No person shall authorize or permit a vehicle for hire to be operated within the geographical boundaries of the city without first obtaining a license from the city. 
(Code 1979, § 9-5-3; Code 1998, § 78-36) 
Sec. 38-24. - Application. 
An application for a business license under this article shall be filed with the General Government Administration Department. Such application shall be verified under oath and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The dispatch location or dispatch terminus from which the business will be conducted. 
(2)  Proof of automobile liability insurance covering public liability and property damage issued by an insurance company approved by the state on all vehicles licensed for use in the city. Such insurance shall insure passengers and third persons against personal injury and property damage in the amounts complying with state law. Such proof of insurance must evidence that all motor vehicles used for passenger conveyance operated by the applicant and/or licensee are insured as required by state law. 
(3)  A list of all drivers who will be scheduled for licensing under this section. The list must indicate whether the drivers are company employees or independent contractors. 
(4)  A copy of the rate schedule. 
(5)  A statement of the daily hours of operation. 
(6)  The name, address and telephone number of a responsible individual who will be the registered agent for the purpose of service of process. 
(Code 1979, § 9-5-4(a); Code 1998, § 78-37) 
Sec. 38-25. - Fee. 
Each application for a business license under this article shall be accompanied by a fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges for each vehicle to be operated in the city. Fees are nonrefundable, are not prorated, and are not transferable. 
(Code 1979, § 9-5-4(b); Code 1998, § 78-38) 
Sec. 38-26. - Suspension, revocation. 
A business permit issued under this article may be suspended or revoked for the following reasons: 
(1)  The applicant furnishes fraudulent or untruthful information or omits information required in the application for a license or permit. 
(2)  Failure to pay all fees, taxes or other charges imposed by the provisions of this article. 
(3)  Violations of any part of this article. 
(4)  Charging a fare in excess of those fares on file with the General Government Administration Department. 
(5)  Allowing the required insurance coverage to lapse. 
(Code 1979, § 9-5-18(a); Code 1998, § 78-39) 
Secs. 38-27—38-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DRIVER'S PERMIT 

Sec. 38-56. - Required. 
No driver shall operate a vehicle for hire upon the streets of the city, and no person who owns or controls a vehicle for hire shall permit it to be so driven, and no taxicab licensed by the city shall be driven at any time, unless the driver of such taxicab shall have first obtained and shall have then in force a driver's permit issued under the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1979, § 9-5-5; Code 1998, § 78-71) 
Sec. 38-57. - Application. 
(a)  An application for a vehicle for hire driver's permit shall be filed with the General Government Administration Office and/or the Police Department on forms provided by the city. Such application shall be verified under oath and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The names and addresses of four residents of the county who have known the applicant for a period of six months and who will vouch for the sobriety, honesty and general good character of the applicant. 
(2)  The experience of the applicant in the transportation of passengers. 
(3)  The educational background of the applicant. 
(4)  A concise history of his employment. 
(5)  Disclosure of all crimes or infractions, including traffic violations, which the applicant has been convicted of, on probation or parole for or or imprisoned for during the past five years. 
(b)  Each application shall be accompanied by a certificate from a reputable physician of the county certifying, that in his opinion, the applicant is not inflicted with any disease or infirmity which might make him an unsafe or unsatisfactory driver. At the time the application is filed, the applicant shall pay to the General Government Administration Office and/or the Police Department a regulatory fee set forth in the schedule of regulatory fees which is maintained on file in the Office of the General Government Administration Department where it shall be available for inspection by the public. All permits are renewable on the anniversary date of issue on proper forms as directed by the City Manager's office. 
(Code 1979, § 9-5-6; Code 1998, § 78-72; Ord. No. 23-95, § III, 12-4-1995; Ord. No. 9-98, 5-4-1998) 
Sec. 38-58. - Current state operator's permit required. 
Before any applicant under this article is finally passed upon by the City Manager's office, the applicant shall show that he has a current class I motor vehicle operator's permit issued by the state. 
(Code 1979, § 9-5-7; Code 1998, § 78-73) 
Sec. 38-59. - Fees. 
The fee for a permit required by this article, and for a renewal thereof, shall be as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges. 
(Code 1979, §§ 9-5-10(c), 9-5-14; Code 1998, § 78-74; Ord. No. 23-95, § III, 12-4-1995) 
Sec. 38-60. - police investigation. 
The City Manager's office shall conduct an investigation of each applicant for a driver's permit and a report of such investigation and a copy of the traffic and police record of the applicant, if any, shall be attached to the application for the consideration of the General Government Administration Department Head. 
(Code 1979, § 9-5-8; Code 1998, § 78-75) 
Sec. 38-61. - Consideration. 
The City Manager shall, upon consideration of the application for a permit under this article and the reports and certificate required to be attached thereto, approve or reject the application. If the application is rejected, the applicant may request a personal appearance before the City Manager to offer evidence why his application should be reconsidered. 
(Code 1979, § 9-5-9; Code 1998, § 78-76) 
Sec. 38-62. - Issuance. 
(a)  Upon approval of the application for a driver's permit under this article, the City Manager's office shall issue a permit to the applicant which bears his name, address, age, signature and photograph. 
(b)  Such permit shall remain the property of the city. The permittee is solely responsible for returning such permit to the city if he ceases to operate a vehicle for hire within the city. 
(Code 1979, § 9-5-10(a), (b); Code 1998, § 78-77) 
Sec. 38-63. - Duration. 
Every permit issued under the provisions of this article shall expire on December 31 of the year in which the same was issued. 
(Code 1979, §§ 9-5-10(c), 9-5-14; Code 1998, § 78-78; Ord. No. 23-95, § III, 12-4-1995) 
Sec. 38-64. - Renewal. 
The permittee shall contact the City Manager's office on or before December 15 of each year for renewal scheduling. In order to have his permit renewed, a driver must show that he is currently permitted and in good standing with the city. A new annual permit shall be issued upon such showing and the payment of a renewal fee. 
(Code 1979, § 9-5-14; Code 1998, § 78-79; Ord. No. 23-95, § III, 12-4-1995) 
Sec. 38-65. - Display. 
Every driver of a vehicle for hire shall post his driver's permit in such a place to be in full view of all passengers while such driver is operating a taxicab. 
(Code 1979, § 9-5-11; Code 1998, § 78-80) 
Sec. 38-66. - Loss. 
Loss of a driver's permit issued under this article shall result in automatic revocation of such permit. 
(Code 1979, § 9-5-13; Code 1998, § 78-81) 
Sec. 38-67. - Failure to comply with laws. 
Every driver permitted under this article shall comply with all city, state and federal laws, including all Uniform Rules of the Road (O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-1—40-6-395) as set out in state law and adopted by the city. Failure to do so will justify the City Manager's office suspending or revoking a taxicab driver's permit issued by the city. 
(Code 1979, § 9-5-16; Code 1998, § 78-82) 
Sec. 38-68. - Suspension, revocation—Grounds. 
A driver's permit issued under this article may be suspended or revoked for the following reasons: 
(1)  The applicant furnishes fraudulent or untruthful information or omits information required in the application for a license or permit. 
(2)  Failure to pay all fees, taxes or other charges imposed by the provisions of this article. 
(3)  Violations of any part of this article. 
(4)  Charging a fare in excess of those fares on file with the General Government Administration Department. 
(5)  Having a conviction of any felony during the time which the permit is issued for. 
(6)  Having four or more traffic violations, while operating any taxicab, limousine or passenger-carrying vehicle during any 12-month period. 
(7)  Refusing to accept a passenger solely on the basis of race, color, national origin, religious belief, or gender. 
(8)  Failure to have the driver's permit posted in the taxicab in a place and manner clearly visible from the passenger compartment. 
(Code 1979, §§ 9-5-12, 9-5-18(b); Code 1998, § 78-83) 
Sec. 38-69. - Same—Operation of vehicle. 
Any person who operates a vehicle for hire within the city at the time when his privilege to do so has been suspended or revoked shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1979, § 9-15-18(c); Code 1998, § 78-84) 
Sec. 38-70. - Same—Duty of City Manager. 
(a)  The City Manager's office, upon receiving the record of conviction of any person upon a charge of driving a vehicle for hire while the permit of such person to do so was suspended, shall revoke such person's permit. 
(b)  The City Manager's office, upon receiving the record of conviction of any person upon a charge of driving a vehicle for hire while the permit of such person was revoked, shall extend the period of revocation for an additional one year. 
(Code 1979, § 9-5-18(d), (e); Code 1998, § 78-85) 
Sec. 38-71. - Same—Reapplication. 
Any driver who has had a permit revoked for any reason must reapply for and be issued a new driver's permit before such driver may operate a taxicab, limousine or other passenger-carrying vehicle upon the streets of the city. 
(1)  If the permit was revoked due to the driver's losing the permit, the driver may reapply for a permit immediately. 
(2)  If the permit was revoked for any other reason, the driver may not apply for a new permit for a period of six months. 
(Code 1979, § 9-5-17; Code 1998, § 78-86) 
Sec. 38-72. - Liability of vehicle owner. 
Any person who knowingly authorizes or permits a taxicab, limousine or other passenger-carrying vehicle, owned by him or under his control, to be operated for hire within the city by any person who is not authorized under this section, or who is not permitted under this section, or is in violation of any of the provisions of this article, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each day that a person knowingly authorizes or permits a taxicab, limousine or other passenger-carrying vehicle, owned or operated by him or under his control, to be driven within the city by any person who is not authorized under this article or is in violation of any of the provisions of this article shall be considered a separate violation. 
(Code 1979, § 9-5-18(f); Code 1998, § 78-87) 
Subpart B - PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE 
Chapter 101 - GENERAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 101-1. - Code chapter 1 applies. 
The provisions of chapter 1 of this Code apply to this subpart. 
Sec. 101-2. - Status. 
While this subpart is a codification of the ordinances pertaining to land development regulations, provisions in subpart A of this Code may also pertain to land development. The failure to include provisions in this subpart does not excuse failure to comply with such provisions. 
Sec. 101-3. - Enforcement. 
All provisions of subpart B of this Code shall be enforced by the Building Inspector of the city or anyone else so designated by the Community Development Director, except as otherwise provided (e.g., Fire Department). The City Clerk shall not in any manner be responsible for the enforcement of this part. 
(Code 1979, § 8-1-1; Code 1998, § 82-1) 
Sec. 101-4. - Permits. 
Whenever in this part a permit is required an application shall be made to the Community Development Department. Obtaining approvals required by such application shall be the responsibility of the applicant. Issuance of permits and collection of fees shall be the responsibility of the Community Development Department. 
(Code 1979, § 8-1-2; Code 1998, § 82-2) 
Sec. 101-5. - Annexation petition review. 
(a)  All petitions for annexation to the city shall conform with those methods prescribed by O.C.G.A. § 36-36-1 et seq. All petitions for annexation shall be submitted first to the Planning and Zoning Board for review. After such meeting, the recommendation of the board shall be forwarded to the Mayor and Council. Failure to submit a recommendation within five days of the review shall be deemed a recommendation of approval. All recommendations are deemed advisory only and shall not bind the Mayor and Council. 
(b)  The Community Development Director shall notify all adjoining property owners in the city by letter of the time, date and place when such petition shall be acted on by the Mayor and Council. 
(c)  If a change in zoning or a noncomplying use is proposed for the property to be annexed, then the application must also comply with section 115-314. 
(Code 1979, § 8-1-3; Code 1998, § 82-3; Ord. No. 04-96, 2-5-1996) 
Secs. 101-6—101-28. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, AUTHORITIES, AND COMMITTEES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 101-29. - Downtown Development Authority. 
(a)  There is hereby determined and declared to be a present and future need for a Downtown Development Authority (as more fully described and defined in the Downtown Development Authorities Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-42-1 et seq.) to function in the city. 
(b)  There is hereby activated in the city the public body corporate and politic known as the Downtown Development Authority of Norcross, Georgia, which was created upon the adoption and approval of the Downtown Development Authorities Law (O.C.G.A. § 36-42-1 et seq.). 
(c)  The authority shall consist of a Board of Directors having seven members appointed by the Mayor and City Council. The Directors shall be either: 
(1)  A taxpayer residing in the City; 
(2)  An owner or operator of a business located within the downtown development geographic area and a taxpayer residing in the county; or 
(3)  A person having a combination of the qualifications specified in subsections (c)(1) and (2) of this section, provided however, that no sitting Mayor or Councilmember shall be a member of the board. 
(d)  Not less than four of the board members having the qualifications specified in subsections (c)(1) through (3) of this section shall be a person who, in the judgment of the Mayor and City Council, either have or represent a party who has an economic interest in the redevelopment and revitalization of the downtown development district. 
(e)  After the Directors have served their term of office of either two, four, or six years, the terms for all Directors appointed or reappointed shall be four years. Members shall not receive a salary but they may be reimbursed for their expenses. Successors to the Directors shall be appointed by the Mayor and Council. 
(f)  The Board of Directors hereinbefore appointed shall organize itself, carry out its duties and responsibilities and exercise its powers and prerogatives in accordance with the terms and provisions of the Downtown Development Authorities Law (O.C.G.A. § 36-42-1 et seq.) as it now exists and as it might hereafter be amended or modified. 
(g)  The Mayor and Council, having found that in their judgment the city historic district is no longer representative of a central business district as contemplated by the Downtown Development Authorities Law, hereby changes its designation of the downtown development district of the Downtown Development Authority to the geographic area represented by all parcels within the corporate boundaries of the city which are included in the Norcross Town Center Study prepared by Jordan, Jones and Goulding in 2001 and all parcels having any part of said parcel within 600 feet of the eastern boundary of the right-of-way of Buford Highway and hereby designates this area as the downtown development district. 
(h)  The action taken by the Mayor and Council of the city is not intended in any way to affect any public cooperation, industrial development or payroll authority previously created by legislative act or constitutional amendment including, without limitation, its existence, purpose, organization, powers or function. 
(i)  The Mayor and Council do hereby appoint the person who holds the Office of City Attorney from time to time and/or the person who holds the Office of City Clerk from time to time to act as the hearing officer duly empowered to conduct such public hearings (on the issuance of tax exempt revenue bonds) regarding matters involving the Downtown Development Authority, and empowers either of them to take such actions as may be necessary or appropriate in the conduct of such office. The Mayor is authorized to approve the issuance of revenue bonds of the issuer. 
(Code 1979, § 8-1-4; Code 1998, § 82-4; Ord. No. 21-2003, 12-5-2003; Ord. No. 02-2004, 2-2-2004; Ord. No. 05-2004, 7-6-2004; Ord. No. 10-2011, pt. I, 9-12-2011) 
State Law reference— Downtown Development Authorities Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-42-1 et seq. 
Sec. 101-30. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— A resolution of February 6, 2012 repealed § 101-30, which pertained to the Norcross Development Authority and derived from the Code of 1979, § 8-1-5; the Code of 1998, § 82-5; Ord. No. 14-2009, adopted September 14, 2009; and Ord. No. 15-2011, pts. I, II, adopted September 12, 2011. 
Sec. 101-31. - Municipal-County Planning Commission. 
(a)  There is hereby determined and declared to be a present and future need for the city to participate in the Municipal-County Planning Commission. 
(b)  There is hereby created and activated in the city a position entitled, representative of the city to the Municipal-County Planning Commission. 
(c)  The appointed representative for the city shall be a person who is a resident of the city and shall be a person who has demonstrated special interest, experience or education in issues affecting the city and the county. The position shall be filled by recommendation of the Mayor and appointment by the City Council. 
(d)  The representative shall serve for four years from the date of appointment. If a vacancy shall occur in this position other than by expiration of the representative's regular four-year term, the vacancy shall be filled by recommendation of the Mayor and appointment by the City Council for the unexpired portion of the term remaining. The Board of Commissioners of the county shall have the power to remove the representative appointed hereunder for cause, after written charges have been drawn and after a public hearing has been held. 
(e)  The representative appointed may participate in all discussions before the Municipal-County Planning Commission to represent the interest of the city and is hereby empowered to vote in the city's best interest on any issue which affects property within the city. 
(f)  The representative shall receive all rights and privileges of this position provided by law and may be reimbursed for expenses incurred in connection with official duties on behalf of the city while serving on the Municipal-County Planning Commission. 
(Code 1979, § 8-1-7; Code 1998, § 82-7) 
Sec. 101-32. - Planning and Zoning Board. 
(a)  The Planning and Zoning Board shall consist of five members, who shall be residents of the city, recommended by the Mayor and appointed by the City Council. The terms of the members shall be for four years. Members are eligible for reappointment. Any vacancy in membership shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as the initial appointment. All members shall serve without compensation but may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in connection with their official duties. 
(b)  The Planning and Zoning Board shall elect its chairperson and vice-chairperson from among its members. The chairperson and vice-chairperson shall serve for one year or until they are reelected or their successors are elected. The Planning and Zoning Board shall appoint a secretary-treasurer, who may be an officer or an employee of the city. The Planning and Zoning Board shall make its own rules of procedures and determine its time of meeting. All meetings of the Planning and Zoning Board at which official action is taken shall be open to the public and all records of the Planning and Zoning Board shall be a public record. 
(c)  The Planning and Zoning Board shall be advisory in nature and must view all matters before them in full recognition of the criteria set forth in the city land use plan. 
(d)  From and after the time when the Planning and Zoning Board shall have organized and selected its officers and shall have adopted its rules of procedure, then the Planning and Zoning Board shall have all the powers, duties and responsibilities set forth by state law, city Charter and this Code. 
(Code 1979, § 8-1-9; Code 1998, § 82-9) 
Sec. 101-33. - Construction Board of Appeals created. 
(a)  Appointment. There is hereby established a board to be called the Construction Board of Appeals, which is established by the Mayor and City Council. 
(b)  Membership and terms. 
(1)  Members. The Construction Board of Appeals shall be comprised of three members, appointed by the City Council. Members shall serve for a four-year term and shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor and City Council. 
(2)  Qualifications. The membership of the Construction Board of Appeals shall consist of members who, in the opinion of the Mayor and City Council, are qualified by experience and training to pass judgment on matters pertaining to building construction and are not employees of the city. 
(3)  Quorum and voting. A simple majority of the board shall constitute a quorum. The board may modify or reverse a decision of the Building Official by an affirmative vote of the majority of the full Construction Board of Appeals. 
(4)  Chairperson. The Construction Board of Appeals shall annually select one of its members to serve as chairperson. 
(5)  Secretary of the board. The chairperson of the Construction Board of Appeals shall appoint a secretary of the board and shall make a detailed record of all its proceedings, which shall set forth the reasons for its decision, the vote of each member, the absence of a member and any failure of a member to vote. 
(6)  Compensation. The members of the Construction Board of Appeals shall be compensated in the same manner as other similar boards or commissions of the city. 
(c)  Application. The application for appeal shall be filed with the City Clerk within 30 days after written notice of any adverse determination of the Building Official affecting the applicant. 
(d)  Notice of meeting. The Construction Board of Appeals shall meet upon notice from the chairperson, within ten business days of the filing of an appeal. Failure to hold a hearing related to any appeal within ten days of filing of the appeal shall result in a de facto approval of the applicant's appeal request. 
(e)  Decision of the board. 
(1)  Limitations on authority. Application for an appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of the building code or the rules legally adopted thereunder has been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this Code do not fully apply, or an equally good or better form of construction is proposed. The Construction Board of Appeals shall have no authority to waive requirements of this Code. 
(2)  The Construction Board of Appeals shall take a definitive action related to any appeal within ten business days of hearing the appeal. Failure to render a definitive action related to any appeal within ten days of hearing the appeal shall result in a de facto approval of the applicant's appeal request. 
(3)  All appeal hearings and decisions of the Construction Board of Appeals shall be made in a public meeting, as mandated under state law. 
(4)  All decisions of the Construction Board of Appeals shall be furnished in writing to the applicant and to the Building Official within three days of a final action. 
(f)  Administration. The Building Official shall take immediate action in accordance with the decision of the Construction Board of Appeals. 
(g)  Further appeals. Every decision of the Construction Board of Appeals shall be final, subject however to such remedy as any aggrieved party might have at law or in equity. 
(Ord. No. 24-2008, 8-11-2008) 
Sec. 101-34. - Norcross Public Arts Commission. 
(a)  There is hereby determined and declared to be a present and future need for a commission to promote the growth of art and culture within the city which shall henceforth be named the Norcross Public Arts Commission. 
(b)  The Norcross Public Arts Commission shall have the following duties and responsibilities: 
(1)  To cultivate a growing, creative arts community, to promote continuous growth and development of neighboring cultural resource; 
(2)  To seek funding from donations and public grant funding to promote growth and interest in public arts; 
(3)  To review and make recommendations to the mayor and council for the placement of all permanent art in public areas, including parks, buildings and parking lots; 
(4)  To organize and make recommendations to the mayor and council for public arts events in the city, and 
(5)  To prepare a "master arts plan" for approval by the mayor and council after receiving public comment; and 
(6)  To prepare and present to a proposed budget to the mayor and council for its operation not later than 60 days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year. 
(c)  The Norcross Public Arts Commission shall consist of a board of directors having seven members, all being taxpayers residing in the city. All directors shall be appointed by the mayor and city council by resolution as follows: 
(d)  Membership and terms. 
(1)  Members . The Norcross Public Arts Commission shall be comprised of seven members, appointed by the city council. Members shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor and city council with terms to be determined by the Norcross Public Arts Commission. 
(2)  Qualifications . The membership of the Norcross Public Arts Commission shall consist of members who, in the opinion of the mayor and city council, are qualified by experience and training to pass judgment on matters pertaining to the arts and culture and are not employees of the city. 
(3)  Quorum and voting . A simple majority of the board shall constitute a quorum. 
(4)  Chairperson . The Norcross Public Arts Commission shall annually select one of its members to serve as chairperson. 
(5)  Secretary of the board . The chairperson of the Norcross Public Arts Commission shall appoint a secretary of the board and shall make a detailed record of all its proceedings, which shall set forth the reasons for its decision, the vote of each member, the absence of a member and any failure of a member to vote. 
(6)  [Directors' compensation.] Directors shall not receive a salary but they may be reimbursed for their expenses. 
(f)  The Norcross Public Arts Commission may make bylaws and regulations for its governance and may delegate to one or more of its officers, agents, and employees such powers and duties as may be deemed necessary and proper. 
(g)  The mayor and council do hereby appoint the person who holds the office of city attorney from time to time and/or the person who holds the office of city clerk from time to time to act as the hearing officer duly empowered to conduct such public hearings as may be necessary regarding matters involving the Norcross Public Arts Commission, and empowers either of them to take such actions as may be necessary or appropriate in the conduct of such office. The mayor is authorized to approve the issuance of revenue bonds of the issuer. 
(h)  The mayor and council shall have the power to dissolve the Norcross Public Arts Commission by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 02-2016 , § I, 5-2-2016) 
Sec. 101-35. - Norcross Discovery Garden Park Board. 
(a)  There is hereby determined and declared to be a present and future need for a commission to inspire appreciation of nature through organic gardening, education and demonstration within the city which shall henceforth be named the Norcross Discovery Garden Park Board. 
(b)  The Norcross Discovery Garden Park Board shall have the following duties and responsibilities: 
(1)  To manage the Norcross Discovery Garden Park ("discovery garden park"), 
(2)  To cultivate a growing, creative discovery garden park, 
(3)  To promote continuous growth and development of discovery garden park, 
(4)  To seek funding from donations and public grant funding to promote growth and interest in discovery garden park, 
(5)  To review and make recommendations to the Mayor and Council for the funding and design of discovery garden park, 
(6)  To organize and make recommendations to the Mayor and Council for events at discovery garden park, 
(7)  To prepare a "master discovery garden park plan" for approval by the Mayor and Council after receiving public comment; and 
(8)  To prepare and present to a proposed budget to the Mayor and Council for its operation not later than 60 days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year. 
(c)  The Norcross Discovery Garden Park Board shall consist of a board of directors having five members, all being taxpayers residing in the city. All directors shall be appointed by the Mayor and City Council by resolution as follows: 
(d)  Membership and terms. 
(1)  Members. The Norcross Discovery Garden Park Board shall be comprised of five members, appointed by the City Council. Members shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor and City Council with terms determined by the Norcross Discovery Garden Park Board. 
(2)  Qualifications. The membership of the Norcross Discovery Garden Park Board shall consist of members who, in the opinion of the Mayor and City Council, are qualified by experience and training to pass judgment on matters pertaining to discovery garden park and are not employees of the city. 
(3)  Quorum and voting. A simple majority of the board shall constitute a quorum. 
(4)  Chairperson. The Norcross Discovery Garden Park Board shall annually select one of its members to serve as chairperson. 
(5)  Secretary of the board. The chairperson of the Norcross Discovery Garden Park Board shall appoint a secretary of the board and shall make a detailed record of all its proceedings, which shall set forth the reasons for its decision, the vote of each member, the absence of a member and any failure of a member to vote. 
(6)  Directors shall not receive a salary but they may be reimbursed for their expenses. 
(f)  The Norcross Discovery Garden Park Board may make bylaws and regulations for its governance and may delegate to one or more of its officers, agents, and employees such powers and duties as may be deemed necessary and proper. 
(g)  The Mayor and Council do hereby appoint the person who holds the office of City Attorney from time to time and/or the person who holds the office of City Clerk from time to time to act as the hearing officer duly empowered to conduct such public hearings as may be necessary regarding matters involving the Norcross Discovery Garden Park Board, and empowers either of them to take such actions as may be necessary or appropriate in the conduct of such office. The Mayor is authorized to approve the issuance of revenue bonds of the issuer. 
(h)  The Mayor and Council shall have the power to dissolve the Norcross Discovery Garden Park Board by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 03-2016 , § I, 6-6-2016) 
Sec. 101-36. - Sustainable Norcross Commission. 
(a)  There is hereby determined and declared to be an established and continuing future need for a commission, which is named the Sustainable Norcross Commission, to support the city in its recommendation, development and implementation of sustainability goals and best practices in alignment with its most recent Comprehensive Plan. 
(b)  The Sustainable Norcross Commission shall have the following duties and responsibilities: 
(1)  To help embed sustainability into the routine practices and procedures of the city as a driver for economic development, cost efficiencies and community health and engagement. 
(2)  To support the city in maintaining the Atlanta Regional Commission's (ARC) Green Cities compliance and certification. 
(3)  To assist in the development, implementation and ongoing oversight of a master Sustainability Plan for the city that: i) aligns with ARC certification measures; ii) encompasses synergies with existing city and board plans; iii) incorporates flexibility for interface with future sustainability programs, certifications, innovation, technologies and practices. 
(4)  To serve as a leader and model for other city boards and commissions with respect to sustainability. 
(5)  To lead both residential and commercial community outreach, education and engagement around sustainability. 
(6)  To recommend, support and collaborate with the city on community initiatives that promote sustainability such as a farmers market and recycling events. 
(7)  To identify and advise the city on operational opportunities to multiply sustainability impacts, increase efficiencies, reduce duplication, and enhance awareness and communication around sustainability. 
(8)  To prepare and present a proposed budget to the Mayor and Council for recommended initiatives in accordance with city budget calendar. 
(c)  Membership and terms. 
(1)  Members. The Sustainable Norcross Commission shall be comprised of seven members, who are appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the Mayor and City Council with renewable two-year terms. Commission members shall be either: 
i.  A taxpayer residing in the city; 
ii.  An owner or operator of a business located within the city and a taxpayer residing in Gwinnett County; or 
iii.  A person having expert qualifications consistent with subsection (c)(2) of this section and a taxpayer residing in Gwinnett County up to a limit of two. 
(2)  Qualifications. The membership of the Sustainable Norcross Commission shall consist of members who, in the opinion of the mayor and city council, are qualified 
by experience and training to pass judgment on matters pertaining to the environment and sustainability and are not employees of the city or currently serving elected officials. 
(3)  Quorum and voting. A simple majority of the board shall constitute a quorum. 
(4)  Chairpersons. The Sustainable Norcross Commission shall annually select one of its members to serve as chairperson, and one as vice chairperson who shall serve as chairperson if and as needed. 
(5)  Secretary of the commission. The chairperson of the Sustainable Norcross Commission shall appoint a secretary who shall make a detailed record of all its proceedings, which shall set forth the reasons for its decision, the vote of each member, the absence of a member and any failure of a member to vote. Alternatively, in accordance with Municipal Code [Charter] Section 3.11, paragraph i, the Sustainable Norcross Commission may elect as its secretary an employee of the city. 
(6)  [Salary.] Commission members shall not receive a salary; however they may be reimbursed for approved expenses. 
(d)  The Sustainable Norcross Commission shall make bylaws and regulations for its governance and may delegate to one or more of its officers, agents, and employees such powers and duties as may be deemed necessary and proper. 
(e)  The mayor and council does hereby appoint the person who holds the office of city attorney and/or the person who holds the office of city clerk to act from time to time as the hearing officer duly empowered to conduct such public hearings as may be necessary regarding matters involving the Sustainable Norcross Commission, and empower either of them to take such actions as may be necessary or appropriate in the conduct of such office. 
(f)  The mayor and council shall have the power to dissolve the Sustainable Norcross Commission by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 04-2017 , § I, 9-5-2017; Ord. No. 02-2018, 2-5-2018 ) 
Secs. 101-37—101-54. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW BOARD 

Sec. 101-55. - Created. 
An Architectural Review Board is hereby created. 
(Ord. No. 06-2006, § 106-440, 7-10-2006) 
Sec. 101-56. - Membership and appointment. 
(a)  The Architectural Review Board shall consist of five members appointed by the Mayor and City Council. A minimum of four members must be citizens of the city. 
(b)  The Architectural Review Board membership shall include at least one architect, one engineer, one citizen at large, and at most one person that is not a citizen of the city. 
(Ord. No. 06-2006, § 106-441, 7-10-2006; Ord. No. 15-2007, § 106-441, 6-4-2007) 
Sec. 101-57. - Terms of office; vacancies; removal; disqualification. 
(a)  The term of office of each member of the Architectural Review Board shall be three years with staggered terms, as determined by the Council upon initial appointment. Members shall serve at the pleasure of the Council. 
(b)  Any member of the Architectural Review Board shall be disqualified to act upon a matter in which the member has an interest. 
(Ord. No. 06-2006, § 106-442, 7-10-2006; Ord. No. 15-2007, § 106-442, 6-4-2007) 
Sec. 101-58. - Rules of procedure; meetings; minutes; records. 
(a)  The Architectural Review Board shall set a meeting date which will recur each month for the purposes of reviewing applications for certificate of appropriateness. 
(b)  The Architectural Review Board shall use as the basis of its approvals the architectural design guidelines of the city, and the LCI study. 
(c)  The Council shall designate a chairperson from among the initial installation of the membership. After a period of one year, and every year thereafter, the board shall elect from amongst its members a chairperson. 
(Ord. No. 06-2006, § 106-443, 7-10-2006; Ord. No. 15-2007, § 106-443, 6-4-2007; Ord. No. 04-2016 , § IA, 7-5-2016; Ord. No. 08-2018 , § I, 6-4-2018) 
Sec. 101-59. - Powers. 
(a)  The authority of the Architectural Review Board shall encompass all of the area bound by the city limits. 
(b)  The Architectural Review Board shall be review approval authority of the following: 
(1)  Reserved. 
(2)  New construction residential facades, including paint color. 
(3)  New construction commercial facades. 
(4)  Modifications to existing commercial facades. 
(5)  Public building facades. 
(6)  Public monuments, ground signs, pavilions. 
(7)  Reserved. 
(8)  New solar panel landscape screening per subsection 115-38(f). 
(Ord. No. 06-2006, § 106-444, 7-10-2006; Ord. No. 03-2007, 2-5-2007; Ord. No. 18-2007, 9-10-2007; Ord. No. 09-2011, 9-12-2011; Ord. No. 04-2016 , § IB, 7-5-2016; Ord. No. 03-2018 , § 1, 4-2-2018; Ord. No. 08-2018 § I, 6-4-2018; Ord. No. 16-2018 , § III, 10-1-2018) 
Sec. 101-60. - Appeal of Architectural Review Board decision. 
Appeals of decisions of the Architectural Review Board shall be taken to the City Council in the following manner. Any person, jointly or severally, aggrieved by any decision of the Architectural Review Board may within 30 calendar days of the decision request in writing an appeal to the City Council. The city shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal by the City Council and give at least 15 calendar days public notice thereof and due notice to the parties in interest. The City Council shall make a decision within 30 calendar days from the date of the hearing unless such time is extended with the approval of the appealing party. Decisions shall be made based on the record presented to the Architectural Review Board and the substantial evidence standard shall apply. All decisions of the City Council regarding appeals of decisions of the Architectural Review Board shall be final and shall in all instances be subject to judicial review in the manner prescribed by law. In reviewing a decision of the Architectural Review Board, the City Council may remand the matter to the Architectural Review Board for further action. When a decision is made by the City Council on appeal to approve a plan, said approval shall constitute final plan approval for purposes of this article. 
(Ord. No. 02-2007, 2-5-2007) 
Sec. 101-61. - Administrative certificate of appropriateness decisions. 
(a)  The Community Development Director shall have the authority to grant administrative certificate of appropriateness approval to minor architectural modifications. The following types of changes and activities shall be considered minor and shall require administrative approval from the Director: 
(1)  Repainting of an existing building to a similar color. 
(2)  Revisions of window or door placement. 
(3)  The replacement of awnings or installation of new awnings when utilizing two colors or less. 
(4)  New construction of or modifications to an existing deck. 
(5)  Paint colors for existing and infill residential properties in the Traditional Norcross Character Area in accord with item TN-040 of the 2006 Norcross Architectural and Site Design Standards Manual. 
(6)  Other similar changes as determined by the Community Development Director, and with the consent of the board chairperson. 
(7)  Fences will be governed by section 115-115 of the city Code. The Community Development Director shall review designs for compatibility with the city's architectural palette. 
(b)  The basis for approval or denial of an administrative request shall be whether the changes or activities: 
(1)  Meet, or fail to meet, the requirements of the zoning chapter; 
(2)  Are consistent, or inconsistent, with applicable design guidelines; 
(3)  Are consistent, or inconsistent, with the intent or purpose of this article; or 
(4)  Would not result in a development that is architecturally attractive or aesthetically pleasing. 
In making a decision to approve or deny an application, the Community Development Director shall consult the minutes of the Architectural Review Board at which prior approval took place, if applicable. If the application is denied, the reasons for denial shall be provided in writing to the applicant along with a notice that the applicant may file an application for a certificate of appropriateness to the Architectural Review Board to accomplish the requested action if found otherwise to be in compliance with the zoning chapter. 
(Ord. No. 10-2007, 4-1-2007; Ord. No. 11-2009, 7-6-2009; Ord. No. 08-2018 § I, 6-4-2018) 
Sec. 101-62. - Public notice requirements. 
For all development proposals that may not be considered administratively, a sign shall be placed upon the subject property. Such sign must be erected prior to the date of the public meeting by the Architectural Review Board. The sign shall be erected on the property in question as least ten days prior to the public meeting, in a conspicuous location and shall state the time, place, date, and purpose of the meeting. 
(Ord. No. 17-2008, 1-1-2008) 
Secs. 101-63—101-82. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CITIZENS' ADVISORY COMMITTEE 

Sec. 101-83. - Citizens' participation plan—Established. 
A citizens' participation plan, which shall include ad hoc citizens' advisory committees, as necessary, is hereby established to: 
(1)  Inform the citizens of the city of the community development plan and projects; 
(2)  Involve the citizens of the city in the planning process under the community development plan; and 
(3)  Maintain a community based citizens' group to monitor existing community development block grant activities, as required by law. 
(Code 1979, § 8-6-1; Code 1998, § 90-1) 
Sec. 101-84. - Same—Components. 
The citizens' participation plan shall consist of three major components: 
(1)  Public hearings and meetings to inform the citizens of community development activities and receive their comments; 
(2)  Public notices regarding meetings and hearings and other activities related to community development; and 
(3)  Ad hoc citizens' advisory committees, as required by law. 
(Code 1979, § 8-6-2; Code 1998, § 90-2) 
Sec. 101-85. - Citizens' advisory committees; members; meetings. 
(a)  Ad hoc citizens' advisory committees shall consist of members as required by law and shall be appointed by the City Council. Suggestions for appointments may be submitted to the City Council by the Mayor, by community organizations, and by individual citizens. At least one-half of the members of the committees shall be representative of that group of citizens most likely to be affected by proposed community development activities. A chairperson of the committees shall be appointed by the City Council. Members of the committees shall be allowed to participate in other affairs of the city while serving on the committees. 
(b)  The committees shall meet as required by law to monitor the projects funded under the community development program and to give advice and suggestions regarding future projects and directions for community development. 
(c)  Subcommittees shall meet as directed by need. 
(d)  Minutes shall be filed for all regular meetings and subcommittee meetings. 
(e)  Members shall serve without compensation, except that they shall be reimbursed by the city for all authorized out of pocket expenses incurred in performing committee duties. 
(Code 1979, § 8-6-3; Code 1998, § 90-3) 
Secs. 101-86—101-113. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - HOUSING AUTHORITY 

Sec. 101-114. - Finding of need. 
The Mayor and Council hereby find that there is a shortage of safe or sanitary dwelling accommodations in the city available to persons of low income at rentals they can afford, and that, therefore, there is a need for a housing authority to function in the city. 
(Code 1979, § 8-5-1; Code 1998, § 90-36) 
State Law reference— Finding of need for housing authority required by state law, O.C.G.A. § 8-3-1 et seq. 
Sec. 101-115. - Created. 
Pursuant to the authority provided in the housing authorities law, the Mayor and Council do hereby create a housing authority which shall be known and designated as the Housing Authority of Norcross, Georgia. 
(Code 1979, § 8-5-2; Code 1998, § 90-37) 
State Law reference— Housing Authorities Law, O.C.G.A. § 8-3-1 et seq. 
Secs. 101-116—101-143. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - ADA COMPLIANCE COMMITTEE AND ADA COORDINATOR 

Sec. 101-144. - Intent. 
It is the intention of the city to adopt a policy against discrimination against Americans with Disabilities in conformity with the rules and regulations as promulgated and set forth in 28 CFR 35 and 29 CFR 1602, 1627 and 1630. 
(Code 1979, § 4-5-1; Code 1998, § 90-71) 
Sec. 101-145. - Definitions. 
There is hereby incorporated into this division by reference the definitions set forth in 28 CFR 35.104. 
(Code 1979, § 4-5-2; Code 1998, § 90-72) 
Sec. 101-146. - ADA Compliance Committee. 
There is hereby established a committee to be called the ADA Compliance Committee to consist of five members to be chosen by the ADA Coordinator who has been chosen according to section 101-147, ADA coordinator. The committee shall be under the direction of the ADA Coordinator. The committee shall serve for two-year terms. The committee shall elect one of its members as chairperson. The committee shall devise rules and procedures for hearing complaints, when needed. The purpose of the committee shall be to conduct hearings and issue opinions in accordance with the grievance procedure of section 101-148, and further, to ensure the City is in compliance with the applicable requirements of 28 CFR 35. 
(Code 1979, § 4-5-3; Code 1998, § 90-73; Ord. No. 12-2010, pt. I, 8-2-2010; Ord. No. 19-2010, pt. I, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 101-147. - ADA Coordinator. 
The ADA Coordinator shall be appointed by the Mayor and Council. It shall be the duty of the ADA Coordinator to meet the requirements of and ensure compliance with 28 CFR 35.107(a). 
(Code 1979, § 4-5-4; Code 1998, § 90-74) 
Sec. 101-148. - Grievance procedure for the disabled. 
There is hereby adopted for the city a formal grievance procedure for the redress of complaints concerning discrimination against the disabled. The procedure promulgated on September 14, 1992, and on file with the City Clerk is incorporated in this article by reference. 
(Code 1979, § 4-5-5; Code 1998, § 90-75) 
Sec. 101-149. - Conflicts. 
All existing parts of this Code in conflict with 28 CFR 35 are expressly repealed. 
(Code 1979, § 4-5-6; Code 1998, § 90-76) 
Secs. 101-150—101-166. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LAND USE PLAN 

Sec. 101-167. - Norcross Future Development Map. 
Pursuant to authority conferred by the city Charter, and to provide for the health, safety, convenience, order, prosperity and general welfare of the present and future inhabitants of the city; to adopt a plan to prevent overcrowding of land and undue concentration of population; to facilitate transportation, and to make adequate provision and provide protection for office space, industry, commerce, residential areas, recreational areas and parks, the historic district, other public requirements and to protect the land, buildings and other structures throughout the city, thereby securing, to the greatest extent possible, economy in government functions and protection of the public welfare, the Mayor and Council hereby adopts The Norcross Future Development Map, prepared by Pond. The Norcross Future Development Map as prepared by Pond is herewith incorporated by reference into this section and any amendments to the Norcross Future Development Map must be by ordinance adopted pursuant to the provisions of this Code. A copy of the Norcross Future Development Map and any additions or deletions thereto shall be maintained at the Community Development Department and be available for inspection by the public. 
(Code 1979, § 8-1-6; Code 1998, § 82-6) 
Secs. 101-168, 101-169. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT 

Sec. 101-170. - Office of Economic Development created. 
There is hereby created an Office of Economic Development for the City of Norcross, which shall be organized and staffed as may be determined by the City Manager. 
The Office of Economic Development shall have the following responsibilities: 
(1)  To develop for the City of Norcross an Economic Development District Element of the City according to the Norcross Comprehensive Plan. 
(2)  Establish an economic vitality plan for the implementation of development or redevelopment initiatives to provide for quality, controlled growth, as well as retention, redevelopment, and rehabilitation of targeted businesses. 
(3)  The Development Authority of Gwinnett County and Redevelopment Agency of Gwinnett County as well as other local state, and federal agencies and businesses shall coordinate with the City of Norcross Office of Economic Development, to encourage new business development, redevelopment, and retention of existing businesses in the incorporated area of the City. 
(4)  The Gwinnett County Chamber of Commerce shall work with the City of Norcross Economic Development Department to encourage new business development, redevelopment, and retention of existing businesses within the corporate City Limits. 
(5)  Offer inducements to targeted businesses in accordance with the economic vitality plan, subject to approval by the City Manager and respected Department Heads. 
(6)  Undertake any other lawful actions approved by the City Manager for purposes of improvement of economic vitality, economic development, redevelopment, or revitalization. 
(Ord. No. 08-2011, 9-12-2011) 
Sec. 101-171. - Local economic development. 
Inducements which may be offered to targeted businesses are as follows: 
(1)  Reduction of fees for development permits. 
(2)  Reduction of development impact fees. 
(3)  Reduction of application fees for rezoning requests, special use permits, variance requests and requests for changes in zoning conditions. 
(4)  Reduction of business occupation taxes. 
(5)  Reduction of water, sewer and power charges including reduction of system development charges for water and sewer services. 
(6)  Acceleration of all aspects of the development review process. 
(7)  Acceleration of public hearing dates for rezoning requests, special use permits, variance requests and request for changes in zoning conditions. 
(8)  Inducements authorized by the Redevelopment Powers Act (O.C.G.A. § 36-44-1 et seq.). 
(9)  Inducements authorized by the Development Authorities Act (O.C.G.A. § 36-62-1 et seq.). 
(10)  In no event shall any inducement result in a payment of City funds to a Targeted Business. 
(Ord. No. 08-2011, 9-12-2011) 
Sec. 101-172. - Authorization. 
The Economic Development Department for the City of Norcross through its Manager and or the City Manager is hereby authorized to sign confidentiality agreements with prospective businesses in the furtherance of their official duties so long as such confidentiality agreements are made subject to the provisions of the Georgia Open Records Act. 
(Ord. No. 08-2011, 9-12-2011) 
Sec. 101-173. - Definitions. 
Targeted business means a preferred business or industry type, as identified by Partnership Gwinnett or a special impact project of such magnitude as may be identified by the City of Norcross. 
(Ord. No. 08-2011, 9-12-2011) 
Chapter 103 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 103-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter and/or the technical codes adopted by reference in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Building Official or Building Inspector means the Director of Community Development Department, or his qualified building inspectors as designated by the city. 
Department means the Community Development Department of the City of Norcross, Georgia. 
Director means the Director of Community Development Department of the City of Norcross, Georgia. 
Trade official means the Building Official, electrical official, gas official, plumbing official, or housing official. 
Sec. 103-2. - Violations and penalties. 
Any person or agent who shall violate a provision of the technical codes, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall erect, construct, alter, install, demolish or move any structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, or has erected, constructed, altered, repaired, moved or demolished a building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, in violation of a detailed statement or drawing submitted and permitted thereunder, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each such person shall be considered guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this Code is committed or continued, and upon conviction of any such violation such person shall be punished within the limits and as provided by state laws. 
(Code 1998, § 86-60; Ord. No. 02-2001, § 86-60, 3-5-2001) 
Secs. 103-3—103-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 103-23. - Building division. 
(a)  Director. The Building Official will be the Director of Community Development or the qualified building inspectors hired and as directed by the city. The qualifications for the Building Official and other code enforcement personnel will be established by the Mayor and Council. 
(b)  Restrictions on employees. An officer or employee connected with the Department, except one whose only connection is as a member of the board established by this Code, shall not be financially interested in the furnishing of labor, material, or appliances for the construction, alteration or maintenance of a building, structure, service, system, or in the making of plans or of specifications thereof, unless he is the owner of such. The officer or employee shall not engage in any other work, which is inconsistent with his duties or conflicts with the interests of the Department. 
(c)  Records. The Building Official/Inspector shall keep, or cause to be kept, a record of the business of the Department. The records of the Department shall be open to public inspection. 
(d)  Liability. Any officer or employee, or member of the Board of Appeals, charged with the enforcement of this chapter, acting for the applicable governing authority in the discharge of his duties, shall not thereby render himself personally liable, and is hereby relieved from all personal liability, for any damage that may occur to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties. Any suit brought against any officer or employee or member because of such act performed by him in the enforcement of any provision of this Code shall be defended by the city until the final termination of the proceedings. 
(e)  Reports. The Building Official shall submit annually a report covering the work of the building department during the preceding year. He may incorporate in said report a summary of the decision of the Board of Appeals during said year. 
(Code 1998, § 86-37; Ord. No. 02-2001, § 86-37, 3-5-2001) 
Sec. 103-24. - Powers and duties of the Building Official. 
The Building Official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of the technical codes. The Building Official is further authorized to render interpretations of the technical codes, which are consistent with its intent and purpose. 
(Code 1998, § 86-39; Ord. No. 02-2001, § 86-39, 3-5-2001) 
Sec. 103-25. - Right of entry. 
(a)  Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this chapter, or whenever the Building Official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition or code violation which makes such building, structure, premises, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the Building Official may enter the building, structure or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the Building Official by these technical codes, provided that if such building or premises is occupied, he shall first present proper credentials and request entry. If such building, structure, or premises is unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of such and request entry. If entry is refused, the Building Official shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
(b)  When the Building Official shall have first obtained a proper inspection warrant or other remedy provided by law to secure entry, no owner or occupant or any other persons having charge, care or control of any building, structure, or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper request is made as herein provided, to promptly permit entry therein by the Building Official for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to this Code. 
(Code 1998, § 86-40; Ord. No. 02-2001, § 86-40, 3-5-2001) 
Sec. 103-26. - Notice. 
Upon notice from the Building Official, work on any building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system that is being done contrary to the provisions of the technical codes or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property or to his agent or to the person doing the work and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. Where an emergency exists, the Building Official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work. 
(Code 1998, § 86-41; Ord. No. 02-2001, § 86-41, 3-5-2001) 
Secs. 103-27—103-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CONSTRUCTION CODES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt technical codes, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(12); minimum state construction codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25; enforcement of minimum state construction codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26. 

Sec. 103-56. - Adopted. 
(a)  The following technical and building codes, the latest edition of each as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, are adopted by reference and shall be enforced in the city: 
(1)  International Building Code (IBC), to include chapter 1, Administration. 
(2)  International Fuel Gas Code (IFGC), to include chapter 1, Administration. 
(3)  International Mechanical Code (IMC), to include chapter 1, Administration. 
(4)  International Plumbing Code (IPC), to include chapter 1, Administration. 
(5)  National Electrical Code (NEC). 
(6)  International Fire Code (IFC). 
(7)  International Energy Conservation Code (IECC), to include chapter 1, Administration. 
(8)  International Residential Code (IRC), to include chapter 1, Administration. 
(9)  International Property Maintenance Code (IPMC). 
(10)  International Existing Building Code (IEBC). 
(11)  Add appendix (G) from the International Residential Code/Swimming Pools, Spas, and Hot Tubs. 
(12)  Add chapter 31 from the International Building Code/Special Construction. 
(13)  Add appendix (H) titled Signs from the International Building Code. 
(b)  The codes provided in subsection (a) of this section means such codes as they exist on January 18, 2008, provided that any such code may hereafter be amended or revised as provided in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-23(a). 
(Code 1979, §§ 4-2-1, 8-2-1—8-2-10; Code 1998, § 86-31; Ord. No. 02-2001, § 86-31, 3-5-2001; Ord. No. 06-2008, 3-3-2008; Ord. No. 18-2008, part 2, 7-7-2008; Ord. No. 09-2010, part I, 5-3-2010) 
Sec. 103-57. - References to officials in adopted technical codes. 
Where reference is made to the duties of certain officials named within the technical codes which are adopted by reference in this chapter, then that designated official of the city, who has duties corresponding to those of the named official in said technical code, shall be deemed to be the responsible official insofar as enforcing the provisions of that technical code are concerned. 
Sec. 103-58. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this section is to provide for the administration and enforcement of the Georgia State Minimum Standard Codes as heretofore adopted. Hereinafter all of the Codes heretofore adopted shall be referred to as the technical codes. 
(Code 1998, § 86-34; Ord. No. 02-2001, § 86-34, 3-5-2001) 
Sec. 103-59. - Code remedial. 
(a)  Generally. These codes are hereby declared to be remedial, and shall be construed to secure the beneficial interests and purposes thereof, which are public safety, health, and general welfare, through structural strength, stability, sanitation, adequate light and ventilation, and safety to life and property from fire and other hazards attributed to the built environment including alteration, repair, removal, demolition, use and occupancy of buildings, structures, or premises, and by regulating the installation and maintenance of all electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, which may be referred to as service systems. This article is intended to provide for the administrative procedure for each of the technical codes adopted by this article. 
(b)  Quality control of materials and workmanship. Quality control of materials and workmanship is not within the purview of this Code except as it relates to the purposes stated herein. 
(c)  Permitting and inspection. The inspection or permitting of any building, system or plan, under the requirements of this Code shall not be construed in any court as a warranty of the physical condition of such building, system or plan or their adequacy. The city or any employee thereof, shall not be liable in tort for damages for any defect or hazardous or illegal condition or inadequacy in such building, system or plan, nor for any failure of any component of such, which may occur subsequent to such inspection or permitting. 
(Code 1998, § 86-35; Ord. No. 02-2001, § 86-35, 3-5-2001) 
Sec. 103-60. - Scope. 
(a)  Applicability. Where, in any specific case, different sections of these codes specify different materials, methods of construction or other requirements, the most restrictive shall govern. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. 
(1)  Building. The provisions of the International Building Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal and demolition, of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures, except in one- and two-family dwellings. 
(2)  Electrical. The provisions of the National Electrical Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall apply to the installation of electrical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances thereto. 
(3)  Gas. The provisions of the International Fuel Gas Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall apply to the installation of consumers' gas piping, gas appliances and related accessories as covered in this Code. These requirements apply to gas piping systems extending from the point of delivery to the inlet connections of appliances and the installation and operation of residential and commercial gas appliances and related accessories, except in one- and two-family dwellings. 
(4)  Mechanical. The provisions of the International Mechanical Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall apply to the installation of mechanical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and/or appurtenances, including ventilating, heating, cooling, air conditioning and refrigeration systems, incinerators, and other energy-related systems, except in one- and two-family dwellings. 
(5)  Plumbing. The provisions of the International Plumbing Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall apply to every plumbing installation, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances, and when connected to a water or sewerage system. 
(6)  Fire prevention. The provisions of the International Fire Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, and maintenance, of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures. 
(7)  Energy. The provisions of the International Energy Conservation Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall regulate the design of building envelopes for adequate thermal resistance and low air leakage and the design and selection of mechanical, electrical, service water heating and illumination systems and equipment that will enable the effective use of energy in new building construction. 
(8)  One- and two-family dwellings. The provisions of the International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, and maintenance, of every one- or two-family dwelling or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures. 
(9)  The International Property Maintenance Code. The provisions of this code provide code enforcement personnel with the necessary tools to have dangerous and unsafe buildings repaired or demolished. 
(b)  Federal and state authority. The provisions of this Code shall not be held to deprive any federal or state agency, or any applicable governing authority having jurisdiction, of any power of which it had on the effective date of the adoption of this Code or of any remedy then existing for the enforcement of its orders, nor shall it deprive any individual or corporation of its legal rights as provided by law. 
(c)  Referenced standards. Standards referenced in the text of technical codes shall be considered an integral part of the codes. If specific portions of a standard are denoted by code text, only those portions of the standard shall be enforced. Where code provisions conflict with a standard, the code provisions shall be enforced. Permissive and advisory provisions in a standard shall not be construed as mandatory. 
(d)  Maintenance. All buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, both existing and new, and all parts thereof, shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. All devices or safeguards, which are required by the technical codes when constructed, altered, or repaired, shall be maintained in good working order. The owner, or his designated agent, shall be responsible for the maintenance of buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems. 
(Code 1998, § 86-36; Ord. No. 02-2001, § 86-36, 3-5-2001) 
Sec. 103-61. - Existing buildings. 
(a)  Generally. Alterations, repairs or rehabilitation work may be made to any existing structure, building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system without requiring the building, structure, plumbing, electrical, mechanical or gas system to comply with all the requirements of the technical codes provided that the alteration, repair or rehabilitation work conforms to the requirements of the technical codes for new construction. The Building Official shall determine the extent to which the existing system shall be made to conform to the requirements of the technical codes for new construction. 
(b)  Change of occupancy. If the occupancy classification of any existing building or structure is changed, the building, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems shall be made to conform to the intent of the technical codes as required by the Building Official. 
(c)  Special historic buildings. The provisions of the technical codes relating to the construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation or moving of buildings or structures shall not be mandatory but such application shall be at the discretion of the Building Official for existing buildings or structures identified and classified by the federal, state or local jurisdiction as historic buildings when such buildings or structures are judged by the Building Official to be safe and in the public interest of health, safety and welfare regarding any proposed construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation or moving of buildings within fire districts. 
(Code 1998, § 86-38; Ord. No. 02-2001, § 86-38, 3-5-2001) 
Sec. 103-62. - Unsafe buildings or systems. 
All buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems which are unsafe, unsanitary, or do not provide adequate egress, or which constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to human life, or which in relation to existing use, constitute a hazard to safety or health, are considered unsafe buildings or service systems. All such unsafe buildings, structures or service systems are hereby declared illegal and shall be abated by repair and rehabilitation or by demolition in accordance with the provisions of the International Property Maintenance Code, as adopted and amended by this Code. 
(Code 1998, § 86-43; Ord. No. 02-2001, § 86-43, 3-5-2001) 
Sec. 103-63. - Requirements not covered by Code. 
Any requirements necessary for the strength, stability or proper operation of an existing or proposed building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, or for the public safety, health and general welfare, not specifically covered by this article or the other technical codes, shall be determined by the Building Official. 
(Code 1998, § 86-44; Ord. No. 02-2001, § 86-44, 3-5-2001) 
Sec. 103-64. - Alternate materials and methods. 
The provisions of the technical codes are not intended to prevent the use of any material or method of construction not specifically prescribed by them, provided any such alternate has been reviewed by the Building Official. The Building Official shall approve any such alternate, provided the Building Official finds that the alternate for the purpose intended is at least the equivalent of that prescribed in the technical codes, in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety. The Building Official shall require that sufficient evidence or proof be submitted to substantiate any claim made regarding the alternate. 
(Code 1998, § 86-45; Ord. No. 02-2001, § 86-45, 3-5-2001) 
Secs. 103-65—103-86. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BUILDING PERMITS 

Sec. 103-87. - Fees and charges. 
Permit and inspection fees and any other charges imposed or due under the various construction codes adopted by this article shall be as provided in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the Office of the Community Development Department. 
(Code 1998, § 86-32; Ord. No. 02-2001, § 86-32, 3-5-2001) 
Sec. 103-88. - Public utilities. 
(a)  No public utility may furnish temporary electrical, water or gas connections, for construction purposes, unless the contractor has been issued a building permit by the Building Official. 
(b)  No public utility may furnish permanent electrical, water or gas connections until the contractor has been issued a certificate of occupancy by the Building Official. 
(c)  No public utility may furnish power to a mobile home site until the owner has been issued either a building permit or a certificate of occupancy by the Building Official. 
(Code 1998, § 86-33) 
Sec. 103-89. - Revocation. 
(a)  Misrepresentation of application. The Building Official may revoke a permit or approval, issued under the provisions of this Code, in case there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to the material fact in the application or plans on which the permit or approval was based. 
(b)  Violation of Code provisions. The Building Official may revoke a permit upon determination by the Building Official that the construction, erection, alteration, repair, moving, demolition, installation or replacement of the building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems for which the permit was issued is in violation of, or not in conformity with, the provisions of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 02-2001, § 86-42, 3-5-2001) 
Sec. 103-90. - Requirement; exceptions. 
(a)  Permit application. Any owner, authorized agent, or contractor who desires to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, or change the occupancy of a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert or replace any electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system, the installation of which is regulated by the technical codes, or to cause any such work to be done, shall first make application to the Building Official and obtain the required permit for the work. 
(b)  Exceptions. Permits shall not be required for the following mechanical work: 
(1)  Any portable heating appliance; 
(2)  Any portable ventilation equipment; 
(3)  Any portable cooling unit; 
(4)  Any steam, hot or chilled water piping within any heating or cooling equipment regulated by this Code; 
(5)  Replacements of any part which does not alter its approval or make it unsafe; 
(6)  Any portable evaporative cooler; 
(7)  Any self-contained refrigeration system containing ten lbs. (4.45 kg) or less of refrigerant and actuated by motors of one horsepower (746W) or less. 
(c)  Work authorized. A building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing permit shall carry with it the right to construct or install the work, provided the same are described and/or depicted as required on the drawings and set forth in the specifications filed with the application for the permit. Where these are not shown on the drawings and covered by the specifications submitted with the application, separate permits shall be required. 
(d)  Minor repairs and routine maintenance. Ordinary minor repairs and routine maintenance may be made with the approval of the Building Official without a permit, provided that such repairs and/or maintenance shall not violate any of the provisions of the technical codes. 
(e)  Information required. Each application for a permit, with the required fee, shall be filed with the Building Official on a form furnished for that purpose, and shall contain a general description of the proposed work and its location. The owner, or his authorized agent shall sign the application. The building permit application shall indicate the proposed occupancy of all parts of the building and of that portion of the site or lot, if any, not covered by the building or structure, and shall contain such other information as may be required by the Building Official. 
(f)  Time limitations on applications. An application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned six months after the date of the filing for the permit, unless before then a permit has been issued. One or more extensions of time for periods of not more than 90 days each may be allowed by the Building Official for the application, provided the extension is requested in writing and justifiable cause is demonstrated. 
(g)  Subcontractors affidavits. The city accepts electrical, plumbing, mechanical and low voltage affidavits from state licensed contractors subordinate to a building permit. The Building Official may require additional information as deemed necessary when accepting an affidavit. 
(Ord. No. 02-2001, § 86-46, 3-5-2001) 
Sec. 103-91. - Drawings and specifications. 
(a)  Requirements. When required by the Building Official, two or more copies of specifications, and of drawings drawn to scale with sufficient clarity and detail to indicate the nature and character of the work, shall accompany the application for a permit. Such drawings and specifications shall contain information, in the form of notes or otherwise, as to the quality of materials, where quality is essential to conformity with the technical codes shall not be cited as a whole or in part, nor shall the term "legal" or its equivalent be used, as a substitute for specific information. All information, drawings, specifications and accompanying data shall bear the name and signature of the person responsible for the design. 
(b)  Additional data. The Building Official may require details, computations, stress diagrams, and other data necessary to describe the construction or installation and the basis of calculations. All drawings, specifications and accompanying data required by the Building Official to be prepared by an architect or engineer shall be affixed with their official seal. 
(c)  Design professional. The design professional shall be an architect or engineer legally registered under the laws of this state regulating the practice of architecture or engineering and shall affix his official seal to said drawings, specifications and accompanying data, for the following: 
(1)  All group A, E, and I occupancies. 
(2)  Buildings and structures three stories high or more in area. 
(3)  Buildings and structures 5,000 square feet (465 square meters) or more in area. 
For all other buildings and structures, the submittal shall bear the certification of the applicant that some specific state law exception permits its preparation by a person not so registered. Exception: One- and two-family dwellings, regardless of size, shall require neither a registered architect nor engineer, nor a certification that an architect or engineer is not required. 
(d)  Structural and fire resistance integrity. Plans for all buildings shall indicate how required structural and fire resistance integrity will be maintained where a penetration of a required fire resistance wall, floor or partition will be made for electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing, signal and communication conduits, pipes and systems and also indicate in sufficient detail how the fire resistance integrity will be maintained where required fire resistant floors intersect the exterior walls. The city relies on the county Fire Marshal's Office for review and inspection of all buildings, except residential buildings, for compliance with life safety and handicap regulations. 
(e)  Site drawings. Drawings shall show the location of the proposed building or structure and of every existing building or structure on the site or lot. The Building Official may require a boundary line survey prepared by a qualified surveyor. 
(f)  Hazardous occupancies. The Building Official may require the following: 
(1)  General site plan. A general site plan drawn at a legible scale which shall include, but not be limited to, the location of all buildings, exterior storage facilities, permanent access ways, evacuation routes, parking lots, internal roads, chemical loading areas, equipment cleaning areas, storm and sanitary sewer accesses, emergency equipment and adjacent property uses. The exterior storage areas shall be identified with the hazard classes and the maximum quantities per hazard class of hazardous materials stored. 
(2)  Building floor plan. A building floor plan drawn to a legible scale, which shall include, but not be limited to, all hazardous materials storage facilities within the building and shall indicate rooms, doorways, corridors, exits, fire-rated assemblies with their hourly rating, location of liquid tight rooms, and evacuation routes. Each hazardous materials storage facility shall be identified on the plan with the hazard classes and quantity range per hazard class or the hazardous materials stored. 
(Ord. No. 02-2001, § 86-47, 3-5-2001) 
Sec. 103-92. - Examination of documents and plan review. 
The Building Official shall accept the registered architect or engineer seal and the county Fire Marshal's approval stamp as evidence that the plans are in accordance with the requirements of the technical codes and all other pertinent laws or ordinances. In some cases, such as food service or on-site sewage disposal, the county health department's approval will also be required. 
(Ord. No. 02-2001, § 86-48, 3-5-2001) 
Sec. 103-93. - Issuance. 
(a)  Action on permits. The Building Official shall act upon an application for a permit without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. If the Building Official is satisfied that the work described in an application for a permit and the contract documents filed therewith conform to the requirements of the technical codes and other pertinent laws and ordinances, he shall issue a permit to the applicant. 
(b)  Refusal to issue permit. If the application for a permit and the accompanying contract documents describing the work do not conform to the requirements of the technical codes or other pertinent laws or ordinances, the Building Official shall not issue a permit, but shall return the contract documents to the applicant with his refusal to issue such permit. Such refusal shall, when requested, be in writing and shall contain the reason for refusal. 
(c)  Special foundation permit. When application for a permit to erect or enlarge a building has been filed and pending issuance of such permit, the Building Official may, at his discretion, issue a special permit for the foundation only. The holder of such a special permit is proceeding at his own risk and without assurance that a permit for the remainder of the work will be granted nor that corrections will not be required in order to meet provisions of the technical codes. 
(Ord. No. 02-2001, § 86-49, 3-5-2001) 
Sec. 103-94. - Contractors responsibilities. 
It shall be the duty of every contractor who shall make contracts for the installation or repairs of building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, sprinkler or plumbing systems, for which a permit is required, to comply with state or local rules and regulations concerning licensing which the applicable governing authority may have adopted. In such case that the state requires a contractor to have obtained a state license before they are permitted to perform work, the contractor shall supply the local government with their license number before receiving a permit for work to be performed. 
(Ord. No. 02-2001, § 86-50, 3-5-2001) 
Sec. 103-95. - Conditions. 
(a)  A permit issued shall be construed to be a license to proceed with the work and not as authority to violate, cancel, alter, or set aside any of the provisions of the technical codes, nor shall issuance of a permit prevent the Building Official from thereafter requiring a correction of errors in plans, construction, or violations of this Code. 
(b)  Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced within six months after its issuance, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of six months after the time the worked is commenced. One or more extensions of time, for periods not more than 90 days each, may be allowed for the permit. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. Extensions shall be in writing by the Building Official. Unless an extension is granted by the Building Official, if no inspection notifications are received by the Building Official within these time periods, the permit shall be deemed abandoned and a new permit application shall be required. 
(Ord. No. 02-2001, § 86-51, 3-5-2001) 
Sec. 103-96. - Fees. 
(a)  Prescribed fees. A permit shall not be issued until the fees prescribed by the City Council have been paid. Nor shall an amendment to a permit be released until the additional fee, if any, due to an increase in the estimated cost of the building, structure, electrical, plumbing, mechanical or gas systems, etc., has been paid. 
(b)  Work commencing before permit issuance. Any person who commences any work on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing, etc., system before obtaining the necessary permits, may be subject to a penalty of 100 percent of the usual permit fee in addition to the required permit fees. 
(c)  Accounting. The Building Official shall keep a permanent and accurate accounting of all permit fees and other money collected, the names of all persons upon whose account the same was paid, along with the date and amount thereof. 
(d)  Schedule of permit and other fees. On all buildings, structures, electrical, plumbing, mechanical, and gas systems or alterations requiring a permit, a fee for each permit shall be paid as required at the time of filing application, in accordance with the fee schedules as set by the City Council. At the Building Official's discretion a reinspection fee may be assessed in accordance with the fee scheduled set by the City Council. 
(e)  Building permit valuations. If, in the opinion of the Building Official, the valuation of building, alteration, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems appears to be underestimated on the application, permit shall be denied, unless the applicant can show detailed estimates to meet the approval of the Building Official. Permit valuations shall include total cost, such as electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing equipment and other systems, including materials and labor. 
(Ord. No. 02-2001, § 86-52, 3-5-2001) 
Sec. 103-97. - Inspections. 
(a)  Existing building inspections. Before issuing a permit the Building Official may examine or cause to be examined any building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems for which an application has been received for a permit to enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, install, or change the occupancy. 
(b)  Manufacturers and fabricators. When deemed necessary by the Building Official he shall make, or cause to be made, an inspection of materials or assemblies at the point of manufacture or fabrication. A record shall be made of every such examination and inspection and of all violations of the technical codes. 
(c)  Inspection service. The Building Official may make, or cause to be made, the inspections required by the code. He may accept reports of qualified Inspectors as specified in state law provided that after investigation he is satisfied as to their qualifications and reliability. 
(d)  Inspections prior to issuance of certificate of occupancy or completion. The Building Official shall inspect or cause to be inspected at various intervals all construction or work for which a permit is required, and a final inspection shall be made of every building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system upon completion, prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy or completion. 
(e)  Posting of permit. Work requiring a permit shall not commence until the permit holder or his agent posts the permit card in a conspicuous place on the premises. The permit shall be protected from the weather and located in such position as to permit the Building Official or representative to conveniently make the required entries thereon. This permit card shall be maintained in such position by the permit holder until the certificate of occupancy or completion is issued by the Building Official. 
(f)  Required inspections. The Building Official upon notification from the permit holder or his agent shall make or cause to be made the following inspections if applicable and such other inspections as necessary, and shall either release that portion of the construction or shall notify the permit holder or his agent of any violations which must be corrected in order to comply with the technical code. 
(1)  Buildings. 
a.  Foundation inspection. To be made after trenches are excavated and forms erected. 
b.  Frame inspection. To be made after the roof, all framing, fire blocking and bracing are in place, all concealing wiring, all pipes, chimneys, ducts and vents are complete. 
c.  Final inspection. To be made after the building is completed and ready for occupancy. 
(2)  Electrical. 
a.  Underground inspection. To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, conduit or cable installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
b.  Rough-in inspection. To be made after the roof, framing, fire blocking and bracing is in place and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
c.  Final inspection. To be made after the building is complete, all required electrical fixtures are in place and properly connected or protected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
(3)  Plumbing. 
a.  Underground inspection. To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, piping installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
b.  Rough-in inspection. To be made after the roof, framing, fire blocking and bracing is in place and all soil, waste and vent piping is complete, and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
c.  Final inspection. To be made after the building is complete, all plumbing fixtures are in place and properly connected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
Note: See Georgia State Minimum Plumbing Code for required tests. 
(4)  Mechanical. 
a.  Underground inspection. To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, underground duct and fuel piping installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
b.  Rough-in inspection. To be made after the roof, framing, fire blocking and bracing are in place and all ducting, and other concealed components are complete, and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
c.  Final inspection. To be made after the building is complete, the mechanical system is in place and properly connected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
(5)  Gas. 
a.  Rough piping inspection. To be made after all new piping authorized by the permit has been installed, and before any such piping has been covered or concealed or any fixtures or gas appliances have been connected. 
b.  Final piping inspection. To be made after all piping authorized by the permit has been installed and after all portions which are to be concealed by plastering or otherwise have been so concealed, and before any fixtures or gas appliances have been connected. This inspection shall include a pressure test. 
c.  Final inspection. To be made on all new gaswork authorized by the permit and such portions of existing system as may be affected by new work or any changes in order to ensure compliance with all the requirements of this code and to ensure that the installation and construction of the gas system is in accordance with reviewed plans. 
(6)  Energy. 
a.  Foundation inspection. To be made before slab concrete is poured in place. To verify that perimeter insulation has been installed correctly on any slab on grade foundations, if required. 
b.  Frame inspection. To be made before exterior wall insulation is concealed by wallboard to check installation of exterior walls insulation and to inspect that all holes and cracks through the structure envelope have been sealed in an appropriate manner as to restrict air passage. 
c.  Final inspection. To be made after the building is completed and ready for occupancy and to verify installation and R-value of ceiling and floor insulation. 
(g)  Written release. Work shall not be done on any part of a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining a written release (sign off) from the Building Official. Such written release shall be given only after an inspection has been made of each successive step in the construction or installation as indicated by each of the foregoing three inspections. 
(h)  Reinforcing steel, structural frames, insulation, plumbing, and mechanical, or electrical systems. Reinforcing steel, structural frames, insulation, plumbing, or work of any part of any building or structure shall not be covered or concealed without first obtaining a release from the Building Official. 
(i)  Plaster fire protection. In all buildings where plaster is used for fire protection purposes, the permit holder or his agent shall notify the Building Official after all lathing and backing is in place. Plaster shall not be applied until the release from the Building Official has been received. 
(Ord. No. 02-2001, § 86-53, 3-5-2001; Ord. No. 06-2001, 5-7-2001) 
State Law reference— Qualified Inspectors, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26.1. 
Secs. 103-98—103-122. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - COMPLETION, OCCUPANCY, AND CERTIFICATES 

Sec. 103-123. - Certificate of occupancy. 
(a)  Building occupancy. A new building shall not be occupied or a change made in the occupancy, nature or use of a building or part of a building until after the Building Official has issued a certificate of occupancy. Said certificate shall not be issued until all required electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing and fire protection systems have been inspected for compliance with the technical codes and other applicable laws and ordinances and released by the Building Official. 
(b)  Issuing certificate of occupancy. Upon satisfactory completion of construction of a building or structure and installation of electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems in accordance with the technical codes, reviewed plans and specifications, and after the final inspection, the Building Official shall issue a certificate of occupancy stating the nature of the occupancy permitted. 
(c)  Occupancy limits. Occupancy limits in other than residential buildings shall be determined by the county Fire Marshal. 
(d)  Temporary/partial occupancy. A temporary/partial certificate of occupancy may be issued for a portion of a building, which may safely be occupied prior to final completion of the building. In most cases the county Fire Marshal's temporary certificate of occupancy will be honored. 
(e)  Existing building certificate of occupancy. A certificate of occupancy for any existing building may be obtained by applying to the Building Official and supplying the information and data necessary to determine compliance with the technical codes for the occupancy intended. Where necessary, in the opinion of the Building Official, two sets of detailed drawings, or a general inspection, or both, may be required. When, upon examination and inspection, it is found that the building conforms to the provisions of the technical codes and other applicable laws and ordinances for such occupancy, a certificate of occupancy shall be issued. 
(Ord. No. 02-2001, § 86-54, 3-5-2001) 
Sec. 103-124. - Certificate of completion. 
Upon satisfactory completion of a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, a certificate of completion may be issued. This certificate is proof that a structure or system is complete and, for certain types of permits, is released for use and may be connected to a utility system. This certificate does not grant authority to occupy or connect a building, such as a shell building, prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 02-2001, § 86-55, 3-5-2001) 
Sec. 103-125. - Service utilities. 
(a)  Connection of service utilities. No person shall make connections from a utility, source of energy, fuel or power to any building or system which is regulated by the technical codes for which a permit is required, until released by the Building Official and/or a certificate of occupancy or completion is issued. 
(b)  Temporary connection. The Building Official may authorize the temporary connection of the building or system to the utility source of energy, fuel or power for the purpose of testing building service systems or for use under a temporary certificate of occupancy. 
(c)  Authority to disconnect service utilities. The Building Official shall have the power to authorize disconnection of utility service to the building, structure of system regulated by the technical codes, in case of emergency where necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to life or property. The Building Official shall notify the serving utility, and whenever possible the owner and occupant of the building, structure or service system, of the decision to disconnect prior to taking such action. If not notified prior to disconnecting, the owner or occupant of the building, structure or service system shall be notified in writing, as soon as practical thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 02-2001, § 86-56, 3-5-2001) 
Sec. 103-126. - Posting floor loads. 
(a)  Occupancy. An existing or new building shall not be occupied for any purpose, which will cause the floors thereof to be loaded beyond their safe capacity. The Building Official may permit occupancy of a building for mercantile, commercial or industrial purposes, by a specific business, when he is satisfied that such capacity will not thereby be exceeded. 
(b)  Storage and factory-industrial occupancies. It shall be the responsibility of the owner, agent, proprietor of occupant of Group S and Group F occupancies, or any occupancy where excessive floor loading is likely to occur, to employ a competent architect or engineer in computing the safe load capacity. All such computations shall be accompanied by an affidavit from the architect or engineer stating the safe allowable floor load on each floor in pounds per square foot uniformly distributed. The computations and affidavit shall be filed as a permanent record of the building department. 
(c)  Signs required. In every building or part of a building used for storage, industrial or hazardous purposes, the safe floor loads shall be marked on plates or approved design which shall be supplied and securely affixed by the owner of the building in a conspicuous place in each story to which they relate. Such plates shall not be removed or defaced and if lost, removed or defaced, shall be replaced by the owner of the building. It shall be the sole responsibility of the building owner to ensure these provisions are met. 
(Ord. No. 02-2001, § 86-57, 3-5-2001) 
Sec. 103-127. - Tests. 
The Building Official may require tests or test reports as proof of compliance. Required tests are to be made at the expense of the owner, or his agent, by an approved testing laboratory or other approved agency. 
(Ord. No. 02-2001, § 86-58, 3-5-2001) 
Secs. 103-128—103-154. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - FLOW-RATE RESTRICTIONS ON PLUMBING FIXTURES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Water efficiency requirements, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-1 et seq.; flow rate restrictions on plumbing fixtures, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-3. 

Sec. 103-155. - Intent. 
It is the intention of this article to comply with O.C.G.A. § 8-2-3. 
(Code 1979, § 8-2-2(f); Code 1998, § 86-66) 
Sec. 103-156. - Standards for fixtures. 
Plumbing fixtures installed in new construction or remodeled or renovated existing construction shall not exceed the following maximum water use rate: 

 
(Code 1979, § 8-2-2(d); Code 1998, § 86-67) 
Sec. 103-157. - Removal of labels. 
The labels on plumbing fixtures which show compliance with this article must remain on the plumbing until the construction has been inspected. 
(Code 1979, § 8-2-2(d); Code 1998, § 86-68) 
Sec. 103-158. - Exceptions. 
(a)  The following uses or applications shall be exempt from the standards established in this article: 
(1)  Showers and faucets installed for safety purposes, such as emergency eye wash stations, etc.; 
(2)  Plumbing fixtures specifically designed for use by the physically handicapped; 
(3)  Fixtures specifically designed to withstand unusual abuse or for installation in correctional institutions which may require more water for proper operation; 
(4)  Instances of building renovation where significant plumbing modifications would be required to accommodate the lower flows or for specialized purposes which cannot be accommodated by existing technology. 
(b)  Permission for the exceptions listed in this section must be obtained from the Community Development Department. 
(Code 1979, § 8-2-2(e); Code 1998, § 86-69) 
Secs. 103-159—103-184. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - MOVING AND DEMOLITION OF BUILDINGS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Ordinances relating to repair, closing and demolition of dwellings unfit for human habitation or buildings or structures that imperil health, safety or morals, O.C.G.A. § 36-61-11; county or municipal ordinances relating to unfit buildings or structures, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9 et seq. 

Sec. 103-185. - Condition precedent to permit. 
Whenever any house, dwelling, apartment or other structure formerly used for human habitation which exceeds 150 square feet, or whenever any commercial building or other structure formerly occupied in the conduct of any trade or business which exceeds 150 square feet, shall be removed from a location within the city to another and different location either within or without the city or there is to be a demolition of the structure, the applicant for the permit to move such structure or demolish such structure shall, before being entitled to the issuance of a permit for removal or demolition, agree in writing that he will, following removal or demolition of the structure, take all possible action, including that specified in section 103-186, to ensure that the premises or location from which the structure is removed or demolished shall be left in a sanitary condition and free from all trash, debris and structures which might become a harboring place for insects, rodents or vermin. 
(Code 1979, § 8-2-21; Code 1998, § 86-101) 
Sec. 103-186. - Duty to restore premises to safe and sanitary condition. 
After the removal of the structure as set forth in this article, the owner of the location or premises on which the structure was located shall be required to take necessary action to ensure that such location or premises shall be left in a safe and sanitary condition and shall be specifically required to do the following: 
(1)  Remove from such location or premises all trash, debris, garbage and other similar material. 
(2)  Fill all holes and depressions caused by the removal of any part of the structure, or caused as a result of compliance with this article, which might become a harboring place for insects, rodents or vermin. 
(3)  Tear down and remove all underpinnings, pilasters, steps, plumbing connections and fixtures above ground level. All water, gas and sewer lines shall be closed off, sealed and made to be gastight and watertight. 
(4)  Fill or cover with a concrete cap all wells. 
(Code 1979, § 8-2-22; Code 1998, § 86-102) 
Sec. 103-187. - Time limits; costs. 
All persons to whom this article is applicable shall comply with the provisions of this article within 30 days following the date of the removal of any structure specified herein. If any such person shall fail to comply with the provisions of this article, the city, its agents, employees, designees or contractors are authorized to enter upon the premises and to perform the work necessary thereon to comply with this article. The work may be performed by city forces or by parties employed by the city and the cost thereof charged against the person failing or refusing to comply. Any person applying for a permit under this article grants to the city an easement on the premises to perform the work. 
(Code 1979, § 8-2-23; Code 1998, § 86-103) 
Sec. 103-188. - Permit to move building; fees; issuance; bond. 
(a)  No person owning or leasing a building or a portion of a building to be moved, shall move or authorize the moving of any house, dwelling, apartment building or other similar structure or any portion thereof from within the city to a point outside the city or from within the city to another point within the city; or from a point outside the city to a point within the city, or from a point outside the city through the city to another point outside the city without first having obtained a permit to do so. No person shall be issued a permit to move or authorize the moving of any house, dwelling, apartment building or other similar structure or any portion thereof in the city or into the city or from the city to a point outside the city or through the city until he has paid a permit fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges. 
(b)  Before moving a structure or any portion of a structure for which a permit has been issued the mover is required to give two days' notice to the Police Department prior to such moving. 
(c)  Where application for a permit to move a structure or a portion thereof as defined in subsection (a) of this section, has been filed and the requisite permit fee paid, where written agreement regarding cleanup of the site has been signed and where all applicable ordinances of the city have been complied with, the Building Inspector shall be authorized to issue a permit to the applicant. 
(d)  No permit to move a structure or any portion thereof from inside the city to a point inside or outside the city shall be issued until the applicant shall post with the City Clerk a cash bond in the amount set forth in the schedule of fees and charges. 
(Code 1979, § 8-2-24; Code 1998, § 86-104) 
Sec. 103-189. - Permit to locate building onto vacant land; application fee; public hearing. 
(a)  Whenever any person desires to move or authorize the moving of a house, apartment, duplex or other similar structure or any building, excluding any house, dwelling, apartment or other structure formerly used for human habitation which is 150 square feet or less, onto any vacant land in the city, he shall file an application for permit therefor with the city and shall pay a fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges in addition to any other required fees or bonds specified in this article. Upon the filing of the application, the Building Inspector shall post upon the land on which the structure is to be moved a sign of not less than four square feet which shall display thereon the fact that the application has been filed to move the structure onto the land; the type of structure proposed; and that a public hearing will be held before the City Council on a day certain not less than 15 nor more than 60 days from the date of filing application, at which hearing all parties interested in such matter would have the right to appear and be heard. Such sign shall be located at the property in close proximity to a public road or thoroughfare and so that the sign can be clearly seen by the public. 
(b)  After a public hearing as required in subsection (a) of this section has been held and provided the applicant has complied with all applicable ordinances and has paid the required additional fee, if the fee is required, the City Council may direct the Building Inspector to issue the permit to move the structure. 
(Code 1979, § 8-2-25; Code 1998, § 86-105) 
Sec. 103-190. - Placement on vacant land without permit; submission of plans. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to move any house or other structure onto vacant land without a permit. No permit to move a house or other building onto vacant land in the city shall be granted, and no house or other structure shall be placed on vacant land in the city, until the person desiring a permit to move a house or other structure shall have submitted all required plans and specifications showing the proposed additions or changes to be made on the structure including foundation plans; plans for paving proposed driveways, if any; types of materials to be used in additions or changes; the proposed location on the plat of land; and any and all pertinent information required for new construction, where applicable. Provisions of this Code and ordinances applicable to applying for permits to move houses or other buildings onto vacant land in the city and in improving houses and other buildings moved onto vacant land in the city shall be followed and all resultant fees paid. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to move any structure as defined in section 103-189 onto any land within the city (whether the move is to be temporary or permanent) unless a permit has been granted therefor as provided in this article. Any violation of this section shall be a continuing violation and each day of violation shall constitute a new offense. 
(Code 1979, § 8-2-26; Code 1998, § 86-106) 
Sec. 103-191. - Demolition of structures. 
(a)  Whenever any person desires to demolish any house, dwelling, apartment or other similar structure formerly used for human habitation or any commercial, industrial, or other structure formerly used in the conduct of any trade or business, he shall, before being entitled to the issuance of a permit, agree in writing that he shall, following the demolition of the structure, take all necessary action including that specified in section 103-186 to ensure that the premises or location where the structure is demolished shall be left in a sanitary condition and free from all trash, debris and structures which might become a harboring place for insects, rodents or vermin. 
(b)  No permit to demolish a structure shall be issued until the applicant shall post with the General Government Administration Department a cash bond in the amount set forth in the schedule of fees and charges. The cash bond is to be returned to the applicant after the permitted structure has been demolished and the applicant has placed the premises or location in the condition as set forth in this article. If the permit holder should fail to comply with this requirement, all or any portion of the cash bond shall be applied by the city to the cost of city forces entering upon the premises or location and placing them in the condition as specified in this article. No permit or bond is required for the demolition of barns, sheds or other accessory buildings where the structure was not used for human habitation or any commercial, industrial, trade or business purpose, or any building not having gas, water, electricity and other utilities connected. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to demolish any house, dwelling or other similar structure formerly used for human habitation or any commercial, industrial or other structure formerly used in the conduct of any trade or business without a proper permit. Any violation of this section shall be a continuing violation and each day of violation shall constitute a new offense. 
(d)  No house, dwelling, or commercial structure designated as historically significant which is located within the district listed on the National Register of Historic Places can be demolished without first having a public hearing before the Mayor and Council. The Council shall vote to approve or deny the request to demolish, and shall use the standards of the adopted architectural and site design standards of the city to evaluate the request. 
(e)  Area denominated as the National Historic District. 
(1)  No person shall demolish any building, structure or part thereof which is located within the area denominated as the National Historic District as shown on the official zoning map without first obtaining a permit from the Community Development Department. 
(2)  Any person wishing to obtain a permit under this subsection to demolish a building, structure or part thereof shall file an application with the Community Development Department on a form approved by the Department, which application shall include the following: 
a.  The common name, actual street address and tax identification number of the building or structure to be demolished; 
b.  The age and type of building or structure to be demolished; 
c.  The square footage or dimensions of the building or structure to be demolished; 
d.  The name, address and telephone number of the owner of the building or structure to be demolished; 
e.  A brief description of the materials, configuration and use of the existing building or structure; 
f.  One or more recent photographs of the building or structure showing at least two elevations; 
g.  The reason for requesting a demolition permit; 
h.  Name and address of the person who would perform the demolition; 
i.  Date on which demolition is to begin; 
j.  A brief description of the proposed reuse, reconstruction or replacement for the existing building; and 
k.  The names and addresses of all property owners abutting the property on which the building, structure or part thereof to be demolished is located, according to an attached copy of a current city assessor's map. 
(3)  The Community Development Department shall delay the issuance of a demolition permit under this subsection for not less than ten business days from the first public hearing date of the application in order to allow sufficient time for submission of viable alternative proposals as discussed in 103-191(e)(6). The Community Development Director may further delay issuance of the demolition permit for up to 180 days from the first public hearing date of the application if in his/her judgment the preparation of a viable proposal is underway. If the enclosed space is 500 square feet or less, no additional, no additional delay to the permitting process shall be imposed. 
(4)  Within seven days of the filing date of the application, the Community Development Department shall publish a notice of intent to demolish in the official legal organ of the county which shall include: 
a.  Notice that an application has been filed for a demolition permit; 
b.  The common name and actual street address of the property where the building, structure or part thereof to be demolished is located; 
c.  The name and address of the owner of the building, structure or part thereof to be demolished; 
d.  The age of the building, structure or part thereof to be demolished; 
e.  Notice that the building, structure or part thereof is located within the area denominated as the National Historic District as shown on the official zoning map; and 
f.  Date, time and place of the public hearing required by subsection (d) of this section. 
(5)  Within seven days of the filing date of the application, the Community Development Department shall mail copies of the notice of intent to demolish by certified mail with return receipt to all property owners abutting the property on which the building, structure or part thereof to be demolished is located. 
(6)  Within seven days of the filing date of the application, the Community Development Department shall post a sign in a conspicuous location on the property on which the building, structure or part thereof to be demolished is located. The sign shall be at least 18 inches x 24 inches and be visible from the nearest public street or other access way adjoining the property. Such sign shall include: 
a.  The nature of the request. 
b.  The case number of the request. 
c.  The date, time, and location of the hearing. 
If there is more than one structure proposed for demolition, one sign shall be posted for each structure. All signs required hereunder shall remain posted on the property, if the permit is issued, until the completion of all demolition activities authorized by the permit. 
(7)  Within 90 days of the filing date of the application, the Mayor and Council shall hold a public hearing to consider said application filed under this subsection, provided that the demolition application has been reviewed by the Architectural Review Board if reuse, reconstruction or replacement for the existing building is proposed. 
(8)  If after a thorough inspection, the Director of Health and/or the Building Official finds that a building, structure or part thereof subject to this subsection poses an immediate threat to public health or safety due to its deteriorated condition and that there is no reasonable alternative to the immediate demolition of the building, structure or part thereof, then the Community Development Department shall issue an emergency demolition permit to the owner of the building, structure or part thereof. 
(9)  During the demolition delay period as defined in subsection 103-191 (e)(3), the owner of the property on which the building, structure or part thereof to be demolished is located shall give due consideration to all possible alternatives to demolition, including preservation, restoration, rehabilitation, relocation or detailed recordation of the affected building, structure or part thereof. In order to avoid or mitigate the anticipated effects of demolition, the owner shall make a good-faith effort to accommodate reasonable requests from any interested parties for information about or access to the building or structure for the purpose of evaluating alternatives to demolition. If no viable alternatives to demolition are submitted within the demolition delay period, the Community Development Department shall issue a demolition permit. 
(10)  No demolition permit under this subsection shall be issued until the payment of all required fees, the filing of the written agreement required by subsection (a) of this section and the posting of the cash bond required by subsection (b) of this section. 
(11)  Any demolition permit issued pursuant to this subsection shall be valid for a period of six months. If the demolition contemplated by said permit has not commenced within said six-month period, then the owner of such building, structure or part thereof shall be required to apply for a new permit and satisfy all notification requirements of this subsection. 
(12)  The fee for a demolition permit under this subsection shall be established by resolution of the City Council. 
(13)  Violation of any provision of this subsection shall subject the violator to all applicable penalties as provided by law and as set forth in sections 1-11 and 1-12. Any violation of this subsection shall be a continuing violation and each day of violation shall constitute a new offense. 
(Code 1979, § 8-2-27; Code 1998, § 86-107; Ord. No. 18-95, § X, 11-6-1995; Ord. No. 07-2007, 1-29-2007; Ord. No. 12-2008, 5-5-2008; Ord. No. 03-2011, 5-2-2011) 
Sec. 103-192. - Transporting structure. 
Any person transporting any house, dwelling, apartment or other structure formerly used for human habitation, or any commercial building or other structure formerly occupied in the conduct of any trade or business across or along the public roads or highways of the city shall be required to establish that it is licensed by the state public service commission or shall furnish proof that it has in effect public liability insurance with minimum coverage of $100,000.00 to protect the property and persons who may be damaged as a result of the moving of the structure. 
(Code 1979, § 8-2-28; Code 1998, § 86-108) 
Sec. 103-193. - Eminent domain proceedings; exemption from fees. 
When an owner of a single-family dwelling or the owner of a two-family dwelling who resides in the dwelling is effectively evicted by eminent domain proceedings or other governmental action, and desires to move his dwelling to another properly zoned location in the city where he will thereafter reside as his home, such owner shall be required to obtain a permit as specified in this article but shall not be required to pay the moving permit fees. 
(Code 1979, § 8-2-29; Code 1998, § 86-109) 
Sec. 103-194. - Penalties. 
Any violation of this article shall be punishable as provided in section 1-11 or as otherwise provided under section 4.13 of the city Charter. 
(Code 1979, § 8-2-30; Code 1998, § 86-110) 
ARTICLE VIII. - VACANT AND FORECLOSED REAL PROPERTY REGISTRATION SYSTEM 

Sec. 103-195. - Title. 
This article shall be known as the "Norcross Vacant and Foreclosed Property Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 02-2013, 3-4-2013) 
Sec. 103-196. - Findings and intent. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is to establish minimum requirements and standards for registration of vacant and/or foreclosed property in order to promote and protect the public health, safety, convenience, order and general welfare of the citizens of the city. 
(b)  The Council finds that: 
(1)  There is a need to establish a registration system for vacant and foreclosed property in order to protect the health, welfare and safety of all citizens, to protect property values for all property owners and to encourage proper upkeep and maintenance of such properties. 
(2)  The lack of adequate maintenance and security of vacant and foreclosed properties have an adverse affect on the property values and quality of life of neighboring properties and are detrimental to the health, welfare and safety of all citizens. 
(3)  Improperly maintained and secured properties can become a hazard to the health and safety all citizens and the owners of neighboring properties. 
(4)  Difficulties often arise in locating the person responsible for the condition of vacant and foreclosed property. This registration system will require owners and agents to provide the city with official information for contacting the party responsible for bringing the property into compliance with applicable provisions of state and local laws and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 02-2013, 3-4-2013) 
Sec. 103-197. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Agent means an individual with a place of business in this state at which he or she is authorized to accept inquires, notices, and service of process on behalf of a vacant or foreclosed real property owner, as that term is defined below. 
City means the City of Norcross, Georgia. 
Department means the City of Norcross Department of Community Development. 
Director means the director of the Norcross Department of Community Development or his designee. 
Foreclosed real property means improved or unimproved real property for which a land disturbance permit has been issued by a county or municipal corporation and is held pursuant to a judicial or nonjudicial foreclosure of a mortgage, deed of trust, security deed, deed to secure debt, or other security instrument securing a debt or obligation owed to a creditor or a deed in lieu of foreclosure in full or partial satisfaction of a debt or obligation owed to a creditor. 
Owner means any person, agent, operator, firm, partnership, corporation, limited liability company, or trust that has a legal or equitable interest in a parcel of real property, and/or the improvements thereon. 
Street address means the street or route address. Such term shall not mean or include a post office box. 
Vacant real property means real property that: 
(1)  Is intended for habitation, has not been lawfully inhabited for at least 60 days, and has no evidence of utility usage within the past 60 days; or 
(2)  Is partially constructed or incomplete, without a valid building permit. 
This term shall not include a building or structure containing multiple units with common ownership that has at least one unit occupied with evidence of utility usage. 
(Ord. No. 02-2013, 3-4-2013) 
Sec. 103-198. - Registration of vacant or foreclosed property. 
(a)  The owner or agent of any vacant real property or foreclosed real property shall maintain an agent for said property in the State of Georgia and shall register the property and the name of the agent with the Director within 30 days of the property becoming vacant or foreclosed, as defined in this article, unless otherwise exempted by this article or state law. 
(b)  Any such owner or agent of foreclosed real property or vacant real property located within the jurisdiction of the city is required to file with the department a registration form that shall be on the form developed by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, or, if no form has been developed by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, on a form provided by the city. Said form shall require submission of only the following information: 
(1)  The real property owner's name, street address, mailing address, phone number, facsimile number, and e-mail address; 
(2)  The agent's name, street address, mailing address, phone number, facsimile number, and e-mail address; 
(3)  The real property's street address and tax parcel number; 
(4)  The transfer date of the instrument conveying the real property to the owner; and 
(4)  At such time as it becomes available, recording information, including deed book and page numbers, of the instrument conveying the real property to the owner. 
(c)  Registration is required for all vacant or foreclosed real property unless otherwise exempted pursuant to this article or Georgia law, but is not required for vacant or foreclosed real property within 90 days of such real property's transfer: 
(1)  Pursuant to a deed under power of sale or deed in lieu of foreclosure; or 
(2)  To the first subsequent transferee after the vacant real property has been acquired by foreclosure under power of sale pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 44-14-160, or acquired pursuant to a deed in lieu of foreclosure. 
(d)  Any owner or agent required to register any vacant or foreclosed real property pursuant to this article or to Georgia law shall also be required to update the information specified in subsection (b) of this section within 30 days after any change in such required information regardless of whether the information provided to the registry was in the deed under power of sale or deed in lieu of foreclosure. 
(e)  Any owner or agent required to register any vacant or foreclosed real property pursuant to this article or to Georgia law shall also be required to update the information specified in subsection (b)(1) of this section within 30 days after any change in such required information regardless of whether the information provided to the registry was in the deed under power of sale or deed in lieu of foreclosure. 
(f)  Vacant properties subject to this article shall remain under the registration requirement of this article as long as they remain vacant. 
(g)  If pursuant to the terms and definitions of this article a property is determined to have multiple owners, each owner, as defined by this article shall be jointly and severally liable for the property and compliance with this article. 
(h)  Any owner or agent of a vacant or foreclosed real property which is required to be registered with the city under this article shall be required to make a payment for administrative fees that reasonably approximate the cost to the city of the establishment, maintenance, operation, and administration of the registry. Such fees shall not exceed $100.00 per registration and shall be established by resolution of Mayor and City Council. 
(i)  The submittals required by this ordinance shall be submitted in paper format until such time as the Director develops a method for electronic submissions. If the Director develops a system for electronic registration under this article, the Director shall determine whether to continue to accept registrations in paper format. 
(j)  Except for the forms created by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, the Director shall create the forms necessary to carry out the provisions of this article. The owner shall be required to utilize the forms created by the Director. 
(Ord. No. 02-2013, 3-4-2013) 
Sec. 103-199. - Removal from registry. 
A vacant or foreclosed real property owner, or the agent of such owner, may apply to remove such vacant or foreclosed real property from the registry at such time as the real property no longer constitutes vacant or foreclosed real property. The city shall grant or deny such application within 30 days, and if no such determination is made within 30 days, the application shall be deemed granted. 
(Ord. No. 02-2013, 3-4-2013) 
Sec. 103-200. - Violation and penalties. 
(a)  An owner or agent required to register a vacant or foreclosed real property under this article will be in violation this article by: 
(1)  Failing to register a vacant or foreclosed real property with the department; 
(2)  Failing to update any changes in registration information provided to the city; or 
(3)  Failing to pay any fees required herein. 
(b)  Should the owner violate this article, the city may issue a citation setting a hearing in municipal court. 
(c)  Any person who is found guilty of violating this article shall be subject to a fine that shall not exceed $1,000.00. If an owner has multiple vacant real properties that are not registered with the city, each property not registered shall be a separate violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 02-2013, 3-4-2013) 
Sec. 103-201. - Appeal procedure. 
(a)  Any owner or agent aggrieved of any determination or decision of the department, or the city, in the administration of this article may appeal to the municipal court of the city. All appeals hereunder must be taken within 30 days of the decision in question by filing with the Clerk of Court of the Municipal Court of the City of Norcross ("Clerk of Court"), a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. 
(b)  Upon receipt of the written appeal, the Clerk of Court shall notify the Director of the appeal and the Director shall, within ten days, transmit all papers constituting the record to the Clerk of Court. The Clerk of Court shall schedule a hearing on the appeal within 60 days following the date the appealing party submits its completed written appeal to the Clerk of Court. 
(c)  The municipal court judge may call for further information to be provided following the hearing, and may continue the hearing for the purpose of receiving such information or for such other proceedings and reasons as the municipal court judge deems appropriate. 
(d)  An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed unless the Director, or his/her designee, certifies to the municipal court, after the notice of appeal has been filed with it, that by reason of the facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his or her opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, the proceedings shall not be stayed except by order of the municipal court judge on notice to the department, and on due cause shown. 
(e)  The municipal court's review shall be limited to determining whether the decision of the director constitutes a manifest abuse of his or her discretion in his or her application and enforcement of this article. 
(f)  The municipal court judge may, in conformity with the provisions of this article, reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or modify the decision, requirement, or determination of the department appealed by the owner or agent and may make such decision, requirement, or determination, as may be appropriate under the circumstances. 
(Ord. No. 02-2013, 3-4-2013) 
Sec. 103-202. - Administration. 
(a)  The foreclosure and vacant real property registry is subject to the Open Records Act of the State of Georgia and the city may make such registry information available online. 
(b)  Registration information shall be deemed prima facie proof of the statements contained therein in any court proceeding or administrative enforcement proceeding in connection with the enforcement of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 02-2013, 3-4-2013) 
Sec. 103-203. - Nuisances and code enforcement. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed to impair, limit, or preempt in any way the power of the city to enforce any applicable codes, as defined in state law, or to define or declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 02-2013, 3-4-2013) 
Sec. 103-204. - Conflicts, severability and effective date. 
(a)  All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this article are hereby repealed. 
(b)  If any section, clause, sentence or phrase of this article is held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, then said holding shall in no way effect the validity of the remaining portions of this article. 
(c)  This article shall become effective immediately upon its adoption by the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 02-2013, 3-4-2013) 
Chapter 105 - DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Land Sales Act, O.C.G.A. § 44-3-1 et seq.; approval by planning commission or governing authority on plat of subdivision required for filing or recording in superior court clerk's office, O.C.G.A. § 15-6-67(d). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 105-1. - Adopted. 
(a)  The Gwinnett County Unified Development Code, Title 1 and Title 3, latest edition, is hereby adopted as a general ordinance of the city to the extent that the development regulations are not inconsistent with City local amendments under section 105-2. A copy of the current county development regulations and any additions, deletions or local amendments thereto shall be maintained in the office of the Community Development Department and be available for inspection by the public. 
(b)  Any request for variance from the development regulations shall be directed to the Mayor and Council. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall continue to have jurisdiction to hear variances arising under chapter 115. 
(Code 1979, § 8-3-1; Code 1998, § 94-1; Ord. No. 15-2010, pt. I, 12-6-2010; Ord. No. 03-2014, pt. I, 9-2-2014; Ord. No. 06-2017 , pt. I, 11-6-2017) 
Sec. 105-2. - Local amendments. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following articles of the development regulations are amended as follows: 
(a)  Section 110-40. Definitions . 
Board of commissioners , read Mayor and Council. 
Comprehensive plan , read City of Norcross Land Use Plan as amended. 
County , read city. 
Department , read Community Development Department. 
Engineering department , read Community Development Department and/or consulting engineer as applicable. 
Erosion control regulations , read city erosion and sediment control ordinance (chapter 109, article II). 
Planning commission , read city Planning and Zoning Board. 
Zoning resolution , read city zoning ordinance, (chapter 115) as amended. 
Add the following definition: 
Long-range road classification map of the comprehensive plan , read official thoroughfare map of the city. 
(b)  Section 310-10.1 Application . 
310-10.1.1 Exemption . All existing one- and two-family residences which are to be adapted to other than residential use are exempted from all site improvements required by this regulation, other than those necessary for fire, handicapped, traffic or pedestrian safety provided that the existing structure is used without any increase in square footage; and provided that parking is limited to no more than a total of five parking spaces; and provided that there are no changes to the existing curb cut except to accommodate the required driveway section. In the event a change in parking space is required under the applicable zoning ordinance, such parking shall be provided in the rear. 
(c)  Section 360-10. Incorporation of Standard Drawings . 
Section 360-10.3 Standard drawings . Add under drawings sheet #106 the following: Retaining walls over two feet high constructed of railroad ties treated with oil based preserving processes (creosote) shall be prohibited except on single-family owner occupied lots. 
(d)  Section 360-70. Access and right-of-way requirements; and street improvement and construction requirements . 
Section 360-70.1(D) The creation of private streets must be heard and approved by Council at a public meeting . The Council shall consider whether the creation of a private street is in the best interest of the citizens of the city, the impact to interconnectivity within the city road network, and the creation of future maintenance issues. Should the Council approve the use of a private street, the street and privately owned utility area shall be constructed to the roadway construction standards of the city of Norcross, as contained herein. All private streets shall be owned in common by a home owners association within a development and shall be recorded as a common area parcel. All private streets shall have a street sign stating "Private Street" or "Private Road" installed in a prominent location prior to the recording of a final plat. 
(e)  Section 1000-70. Underground facilities . Add to the text of Section 1000-70 the following: 
Section 1000-70.5 In residential subdivisions all electrical utilities shall be under ground. 
(f)  Section 900-90. Sidewalks . 
Section 900-90.2 Delete the text of Section 900-90.2 and replace with the following: Sidewalks shall be required in all new developments requiring a development permit excluding minor development permits. Sidewalks shall be a minimum of four feet wide and shall be required on both sides of the right-of-way. 
(g)  Section 810-10 General Requirements . Add to the text of Section 810-10 the following: 
Section 810-10.4 Surface drainage . All drainage in right-of-way or proposed right-of-way shall be piped using reinforced concrete pipe. Also road culverts, even if private roads, shall be reinforced concrete pipe. 
(h)  Chapter 400. Soil Erosion, Sedimentation, and Pollution Control . Chapter 500 is superseded by Chapter 109, Article VIII of the city code. 
(i)  Chapter 500. Riparian Buffers . Chapter 500 is superseded by Chapter 105, Article II of the city code. 
(j)  Chapter 630. Tree Preservation and Replacement Regulations . Chapter 630 is superseded by Chapter 113 of the city code. 
(Code 1979, § 8-3-2; Code 1998, § 94-2; Ord. No. 11-95, 8-7-1995; Ord. No. 08-97, § I, 5-5-1997; Ord. No. 06-2007, 2-5-2007; Ord. No. 03-2014, pt. I, 9-2-2014; Ord. No. 06-2017 , pt. I, 11-6-2017) 
Secs. 105-3—105-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STREAM BUFFER PROTECTION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 105-23. - Title. 
This article shall be known as the "Stream Buffer Protection Ordinance of the City of Norcross." 
(Ord. No. 02-2006, § 1, 2-2-2006) 
Sec. 105-24. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Buffer means within the area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of a stream in its existing or enhanced state of vegetation. 
Chattahoochee Corridor means all land within 2,000 feet of the banks of the Chattahoochee River, including any impoundments thereon, or within the floodplain, whichever is greater, from directly below Buford Dam downstream to the downstream limits of Fulton and Douglas Counties, including the entire bed of the river and any improvements and all islands therein. 
Department means the Community Development Department of the city. 
Director means the Community Development Department Director or the Director's designee. 
Floodplain means those lands subject to flooding, which would have at least a one percent probability of flooding occurrence in any calendar year based on the basin being fully developed as shown on the currently adopted land use plan; e.g., the regulatory flood. 
Flowing stream means any stream that is portrayed on the most current United States Geologic Survey 7.5-minute quadrangle for the affected area. 
Perennial stream means a watercourse having a source, terminus, banks and channel through which water flows on a continuous basis as depicted on the most recent United States Geological Survey 7.5-minute quadrangle map (scale 1:24,000). 
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of the state, interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Protection area or stream protection area means, with respect to a stream, the combined areas of all required buffers and setbacks applicable to such stream. 
Riparian means belonging or related to the bank of a river, stream, lake, pond or impoundment. 
Setback means, with respect to a stream, the area established by section 105-58(2) extending beyond any buffer applicable to the stream. 
Stream means any stream, beginning at: 
(1)  The location where the normal stream flow has wrested the vegetation. The normal stream flow is any flow that consists solely of base flow or consists of both base flow and direct runoff during any period of the year. Base flow results from the groundwater that enters the stream channel through the soil. This includes spring flows into streams. Direct runoff is the water entering stream channels promptly after rainfall or snow melts; 
(2)  A point in the stream channel with a drainage area of 20 acres or more; or 
(3)  Where evidence indicates the presence of a stream in a drainage area of other than 20 acres, the Public Works Department may require field studies to verify the existence of a stream. 
Stream bank means the confining cut of a stream channel. 
Stream channel means the portion of a watercourse that contains the base flow of the stream. 
Utility means a public or private water or sewer piping systems, water or sewer pumping stations, electric power lines, fuel pipelines, telephone lines, roads, driveways, bridges, river/lake access facilities, stormwater systems and railroads or other utilities identified by the City of Norcross. 
Watercourse means any natural or artificial waterway, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently, having a definite channel, bed and bank, and including any area adjacent thereto which is subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Watershed means the land area that drains into a particular stream. 
(Ord. No. 02-2006, § 2, 2-2-2006) 
Sec. 105-25. - Applicability. 
(a)  This article shall apply to all land development activity on property containing a stream protection area as defined in section 105-24. These requirements are in addition to, and do not replace or supersede, any other applicable buffer requirements established under state law and approval or exemption from these requirements do not constitute approval or exemption from buffer requirements established under state law or from other applicable local, state or federal regulations. 
(b)  After the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, this article shall apply to new subdividing and platting activities. 
(Ord. No. 02-2006, art. 3, 2-2-2006) 
Sec. 105-26. - Grandfather provisions. 
This article shall not apply to the following activities: 
(1)  Work consisting of the repair, maintenance or replacement within the same disturbed area of any lawful use of land that is zoned and approved for such use on or before the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(2)  Existing development and ongoing land disturbance activities including but not limited to existing agriculture, silviculture, landscaping, gardening and lawn maintenance, except that new development or land disturbance activities on such properties will be subject to all applicable buffer requirements. 
(3)  Any lawful land development activity that is under construction, has a valid permit, or has submitted a valid and complete application for a permit as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, provided the permit is or can be issued within 90 calendar days of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived and all time frames associated with said permit are observed. 
(4)  Any lawful land development activity that has not been submitted for approval, but that is part of a larger master development plan, such as a house in a subdivision or a building in an office park or other phased development that has a valid preliminary plat permit per subsection (3) of this section, or an approved concept plan, or has submitted a valid and complete application for approval of a concept plan and receives approval within 90-calendar days as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, provided the future permit is or can be issued within two calendar years of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived and all time frames associated with said permit are observed. 
(Ord. No. 02-2006, art. 3, § 3.1, 2-2-2006) 
Sec. 105-27. - Exemptions. 
(a)  The following specific activities are exempt from this article, however any activity within a state waters' buffer must meet state requirements: 
(1)  Activities for the purpose of building one of the following: 
a.  A stream crossing by a driveway, transportation route including but not limited to bike paths and pedestrian trails, or utility line; 
b.  Public water supply intake or public wastewater outfall structures; 
c.  Land development necessary to provide access to a property; 
d.  Public access facilities that must be on the water including boat ramps, docks, foot trails leading directly to the river, fishing platforms and overlooks; 
e.  Unpaved foot trails and paths; 
f.  Activities to restore and enhance stream bank stability, vegetation, water quality and/or aquatic habitat, so long as native vegetation and bioengineering techniques are used; 
g.  Stormwater outfalls to the stream, by pipe or channel, necessary to protect the buffer from erosion caused by high flow velocities due to steep slopes. 
(2)  Public sewer line installation in easements running parallel with the stream where necessary, except that all easements (permanent and construction) and land disturbance within a state waters' buffer must meet state requirements. This includes such impervious cover as is necessary for the operation and maintenance of the utility including, but not limited to, manholes, vents and valve structures. This exemption shall not be construed as allowing the construction of roads, bike paths or other transportation routes in such easements, regardless of paving material, except for access for the uses specifically cited in subsection (1) of this section. 
(3)  Land development activities within a dedicated transportation right-of-way existing at the time that the ordinance from which this article is derived takes effect or approved under the terms of this article. 
(4)  Within an easement of any utility existing at the time the ordinance from which this article is derived takes effect or approved under the terms of this article, land disturbance activities and such impervious cover as is necessary for the operation and maintenance of the utility including, but not limited to, manholes, vents and valve structures. 
(5)  Emergency work necessary to preserve life or property. However, when emergency work is performed under this subsection, the person performing it shall report such work to the Community Development Department on the next business day after commencement of the work. Within ten business days thereafter, the person shall apply for a permit and perform such work within such time period as may be determined by the Community Development Department to be reasonably necessary to correct any impairment such emergency work may have caused to the water conveyance capacity, stability or water quality of the protection area. 
(6)  Forestry and silviculture activities on land that is zoned for forestry, silvicultural or agricultural uses and are not incidental to other land development activity. If such activity results in land disturbance in the buffer that would otherwise be prohibited, then no other land disturbing activity other than normal forest management practices will be allowed on the entire property for three years after the end of the activities that intruded on the buffer. 
(b)  Exemption of these activities does not constitute an exemption for any other activity proposed on a property. 
(Ord. No. 02-2006, art. 3, § 3.2, 2-2-2006) 
Secs. 105-28—105-57. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LAND DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 105-58. - Buffer and setback requirements. 
All land development activity subject to this article shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  An undisturbed buffer shall be maintained for 50 feet, measured horizontally, on both banks (as applicable) of the stream as measured from the top of the stream bank. The land forming the bank is also considered part of the buffer for purposes of this article. 
(2)  An additional setback shall be maintained for 25 feet, measured horizontally, beyond the undisturbed buffer, in which all impervious cover shall be prohibited. Grading, filling and earthmoving shall be minimized within the setback. 
(3)  No septic tanks or septic tank drain fields shall be permitted within the buffer or the setback. 
Any land development activity within a buffer established hereunder or any impervious cover within a setback established hereunder is prohibited unless a variance is granted pursuant to section 105-59. 
(Ord. No. 02-2006, art. 4, § 4.1, 2-2-2006) 
Sec. 105-59. - Variance—Procedures. 
(a)  Variance requests from the requirements of this article shall be submitted on an application form as prescribed by the Community Development Department or the Director's designee, along with such fees as shall be established by the Mayor and Council. The Director of the Community Development Department or the Director's designee shall coordinate the review of each variance request with all other affected city departments and shall forward such comments or recommendations as may be received to the Mayor and Council for action in their normal course of business. The review must include a recommendation from the Public Works Department. 
(b)  This section describes how to apply for a variance from this division; however, any activity within a state waters' buffer must meet state requirements. 
(c)  Variances may be granted in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)  If the project involves the construction of one single-family home for residential use by the owner of the subject property on a parcel that was platted prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, and its shape, topography or other existing physical condition prevents land development consistent with this article, and the Public Works Department finds and determines that the requirements of this article prohibit the otherwise lawful use of the property by the owner, the Mayor and Council may grant a variance from the buffer and setback requirements hereunder, provided such variance requires mitigation measures to offset the effects of any proposed land development on the parcel. The Mayor and Council are authorized to use a consent agenda to fulfill the terms of this subsection. 
(2)  Except as provided above, the Mayor and Council shall grant no variance from any provision of this article without first conducting a public hearing on the application for variance and authorizing the granting of the variance by an affirmative vote of the Mayor and Council. The Community Development Department shall give public notice of each such public hearing in a newspaper of general circulation within the city at least once a week for two consecutive weeks before it is heard. The Community Development Department shall require that the applicant post a sign giving notice of the proposed variance and the public hearing at least 15 days prior to the date of the hearing. The sign shall be of a size and posted in such a location on the property as to be visible from the primary adjacent road right-of-way. 
(3)  No application or reapplication for a variance affecting the same stream segment on a property shall be heard within 12 months from the date of last action by the Mayor and Council unless such 12-month period is waived by the Mayor and Council, and in no case may such application or reapplication be reconsidered in less than six months from the date of last action by the Mayor and Council. 
(4)  Variances will not be considered when, following adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived, actions of any property owner of a given property have created conditions of a hardship on that property. 
(5)  Variances will be considered only in the following cases: 
a.  The applicant provides evidence that impacts to the buffer have been avoided or minimized to the fullest extent practicable; and 
b.  The project involves the construction or repair of a structure that, by its nature, must be located within the buffer. Such structures include dams and detention/retention ponds; 
c.  Paved recreational foot trails and viewing areas, providing that impacts to the buffer are minimal; 
d.  The proposed land disturbing activity within the buffer will receive a permit from the United States Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) under section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendment of 1972, 33 USC 1344, and the Corps of Engineers has received a mitigation plan to be implemented as a condition of such a permit. In addition, land disturbing activities in the buffer that are outside the USACE's jurisdiction must be mitigated; 
e.  The buffer intrusion is mitigated using the procedure established in the city stormwater design manual; or 
f.  A valid and complete application for rezoning of the property is submitted prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived and approval of the rezoning application by the Mayor and Council occurs after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, and the variance request is consistent with the intent of this article factoring into account the property owner's reliance on standards in effect at the time of the rezoning. 
(Ord. No. 02-2006, art. 4, § 4.2, 2-2-2006) 
Sec. 105-60. - Same—Request for information. 
At a minimum, a variance request shall include the following information: 
(1)  A site map that includes locations of all streams, wetlands, floodplain boundaries and other natural features, as determined by field survey, vegetation and other physical characteristics of the property; 
(2)  A description of the shape, size, topography, slope, soils, vegetation and other physical characteristics of the property; 
(3)  A dated site plan that shows the locations of all existing and proposed structures and other impervious cover, the limits of all existing and proposed land disturbance, both inside and outside the buffer and setback. The exact area of the buffer to be affected shall be accurately and clearly indicated; 
(4)  Documentation that impacts to the buffer have been avoided or minimized to the fullest extent practicable; 
(5)  A calculation of the total area and length of the proposed intrusion; 
(6)  A stormwater management site plan, if applicable; 
(7)  Proposed mitigation, if any, for the intrusion. If no mitigation is proposed, the request must include an explanation of why none is being proposed; 
(8)  A description of the project, with details of the buffer disturbance, including estimated length of time for the disturbance and justification for why the disturbance is necessary; 
(9)  Any other reasonable information related to the project that the Public Works Department may deem necessary to effectively evaluate the variance request; 
(10)  A copy of the permit application, supporting documentation, and proposed mitigation plan as submitted to the United States Army Corps of Engineers under section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendment of 1972, 33 USC 1344, if applicable; 
(11)  A copy of the permit application, supporting documentation, and proposed mitigation plan as submitted to the Georgia Environmental Protection Division for a variance from the state waters' buffer; and 
(12)  A buffer mitigation plan in accordance with the procedure outlined in the city stormwater design manual. 
(Ord. No. 02-2006, art. 4, § 4.2.3, 2-2-2006) 
Sec. 105-61. - Factors for issuing variance. 
The following factors will be considered in determining whether to issue a variance: 
(1)  The shape, size, topography, slope, soils, vegetation and other physical characteristics of the property; 
(2)  The locations of all streams on the property, including along property boundaries as determined from field inspection; 
(3)  The location and extent of the proposed buffer or setback intrusion; 
(4)  Whether alternative designs are possible which require less intrusion or no intrusion; 
(5)  The longterm and construction water-quality impacts of the proposed variance; 
(6)  Whether issuance of the variance is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment; 
(7)  The value of mitigation activities as calculated in accordance with the city stormwater design manual. 
(Ord. No. 02-2006, art. 4, § 4.2.4, 2-2-2006) 
Secs. 105-62—105-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SPECIAL BUFFER REGULATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 105-81. - Applicability. 
(a)  In addition to the provisions of this article, the following requirements shall apply. Whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence. 
(b)  The grandfather provisions, exemptions, and variance procedures sections of this article do not apply to this article. Applicable exemptions and variances are given in this division. 
(Ord. No. 02-2006, art. 5, 2-2-2006) 
Sec. 105-82. - Big Haynes Creek Watershed Protection Requirements. 
This section of the article is adopted pursuant to Georgia Department of Natural Resources Rules for Environment Planning Criteria. 
(1)  Stream buffer zone/impervious surface setbacks. Within the designated Big Haynes Creek Watershed Protection Areas the following additional stream protection requirements shall be met where applicable: 
a.  Natural buffer zones and setbacks for impervious surfaces shall be required adjacent to both sides of perennial streams as measured from the stream bank as follows: 

 
*Radial distances as measured upstream of a governmentally owned public drinking water supply intake water supply reservoir. 
b.  Septic tanks and septic tank drain fields shall be prohibited within the required setback area. 
c.  Utilities shall be exempt from the above buffer and setback provisions in accordance with the following conditions if the utilities to be located in the buffer or setback areas cannot feasibly be located outside these areas: 
1.  The utilities shall be located as far from the stream bank as reasonably possible, except that all easements (permanent and construction) and land disturbance should be at least 25 feet from the top of bank. 
2.  The installation and maintenance of the utilities shall be such as to protect the integrity of the buffer and setback areas as best as reasonably possible. 
d.  Roadways, bridges and drainage structures may encroach upon required buffers and setbacks where such structures are necessary to provide access. Such roadways and bridges shall cross streams perpendicularly where reasonably possible. The number of such stream crossings and associated structures shall be minimized to the greatest extent possible. 
e.  Limited minor land disturbances, such as trails and picnic areas, are exempt. 
(2)  Lots of record. All lots or parcels of record as of October 28, 1997, in the Big Haynes Creek Watershed and all lots or parcels which have been submitted by way of preliminary plat and approved by the Community Development Department in accord with the provisions of the 1985 Zoning Resolution of City of Norcross, as of October 28, 1997, within the Big Haynes Creek Watershed that are made unbuildable by the buffer and setback provisions, may still be developed on a case-by-case basis. Requests for development of these lots shall be made to the Director of the Community Development Department as administrative variances. If development is allowed, the maximum possible impervious surface stream buffer width, given the configuration of the lot, shall be maintained. 
(3)  Limitation on variances. Variances from the provisions of this section (Big Haynes Creek Watershed Protection Requirements) are prohibited, except as provided by subsection (2) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 02-2006, art. 5, § 5.1, 2-2-2006) 
Sec. 105-83. - Chattahoochee Corridor. 
(a)  Vegetation shall be left in its natural state, and impervious surfaces shall not be permitted, for a distance of 50 horizontal feet as measured from both banks of the Chattahoochee River and its impoundments, and for a distance of 35 horizontal feet as measured from both banks of all other flowing stream channels within the Chattahoochee Corridor, except for footpaths, designated public access areas, river or stream crossings by transportation facilities, public water supply intake structures, public wastewater treatment plant outfalls and utility line crossings. 
(b)  Subject and in addition to the restrictions set forth in subsection (a) of this section, impervious surfaces and structures shall not be permitted within, on or over any land that is 150 horizontal feet or less from either bank of the Chattahoochee River and its impoundments, except for footpaths, designated public access areas, river or stream crossings by transportation facilities, public water supply intake structures, public wastewater treatment plant outfalls and water supply and sewerage manholes that are designed and built at grade, unless it is determined by the Atlanta Regional Commission, after consideration by a Committee of the Atlanta Regional Commission as authorized by the Atlanta Regional Commission, and based in part upon the affidavit of, and substantial evidence submitted by, a registered professional engineer qualified in water quality and hydrology that the impervious surfaces and structures will be not be harmful to the water and land resources of the Chattahoochee Corridor, will not significantly impede the natural flow of waters and will not result in significant land erosion, stream bank erosion, siltation or water pollution. 
(c)  Not including the impervious surfaces and structures that are excepted above, any impervious surfaces or structures that, in the judgment of the Atlanta Regional Commission, must legally be permitted within, on or over any land that is 150 horizontal feet or less from either bank of the Chattahoochee River and its impoundments on lots of record as of March 16, 1973, for the portion of the Chattahoochee Corridor water intake, which were designated by the local governing authority for a single-family detached residential use, shall meet the following standard: For each one foot incursion into the 150-foot impervious surface buffer, one foot of natural vegetation shall be added to the 50-foot natural vegetation buffer. In the event that the Atlanta Regional Commission determines that legal, physical, biological or hydrologic conditions on the site prevent the addition of all the required natural vegetation, substitute measures satisfactory to the Atlanta Regional Commission shall be taken to provide an equivalent level of land and water resource protection. 
(Ord. No. 02-2006, art. 5, § 5.2, 2-2-2006) 
Secs. 105-84—105-109. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - ADDITIONAL INFORMATION REQUIREMENTS FOR DEVELOPMENT ON BUFFER ZONE PROPERTIES 

Sec. 105-110. - Requirements. 
Any permit applications for property requiring buffers and setbacks hereunder must include the following: 
(1)  A site plan showing: 
a.  The location of all streams on the property; 
b.  Limits of required stream buffers and setbacks on the property; 
c.  Buffer zone topography with contour lines at no greater than two-foot contour intervals; 
d.  Delineation of forested and open areas in the buffer zone; and 
e.  Detailed plans of all proposed land development in the buffer and of all proposed impervious cover within the setback; 
(2)  A description of all proposed land development within the buffer and setback; and 
(3)  Any other documentation that the Public Works Department may reasonably deem necessary for review of the application and to ensure that the buffer zone ordinance is addressed in the approval process. All buffer and setback areas must be recorded on the final plat of the property following plan approval. 
(Ord. No. 02-2006, art. 6, §§ 6.1—6.3, 2-2-2006) 
Secs. 105-111—105-133. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 105-134. - Responsibility. 
Neither the issuance of a development permit nor compliance with the conditions thereof, nor with the provisions of this article shall relieve any person from any responsibility otherwise imposed by law for damage to persons or property; nor shall the issuance of any permit hereunder serve to impose any liability upon the city, its officers or employees, for injury or damage to persons or property. 
(Ord. No. 02-2006, art. 7, 2-2-2006) 
Sec. 105-135. - Inspection. 
(a)  Either the Public Works Department or the Community Development Department may cause inspections of the work in the buffer or setback to be made periodically during the course thereof and shall make a final inspection following completion of the work. The permittee shall assist representatives or either department in making such inspections. Both the Director of the Public Works Department and the Director of the Community Development Department or the Director's designee shall have the authority to conduct such investigations as he may reasonably deem necessary to carry out the duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable time upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigating and inspecting the sites of any land development activities within the protection area. 
(b)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent who requests entry for purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out official duties. 
(Ord. No. 02-2006, art. 8, 2-2-2006) 
Sec. 105-136. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
Any action or inaction that violates the provisions of this article or the requirements of an approved plan or permit shall be subject to the enforcement actions or penalties outlined herein. Any such action or inaction that is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and also may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the enforcement actions or penalties described herein shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
(Ord. No. 02-2006, art. 9, 2-2-2006) 
Sec. 105-137. - Enforcement procedures. 
The following are the enforcement procedures authorized by this article. In the event the owner or responsible person fails to correct the violations after the deadline contained in the notice of violation, both the Director of the Public Works Department and the Director of the Community Development Department or the Director's designee are authorized to take or impose any one or more of the additional actions contained herein: 
(1)  Notices of violation. Enforcement shall begin with the issuance of a written notice of violation to the owner or responsible person by the Director of the Public Works Department or the Director of the Community Development Department or the Director's designee. The notice may be delivered personally or sent by first class mail. The notice of violation shall contain at least the following information: 
a.  The name and address of the owner or responsible person; 
b.  The location or address of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
c.  A description of the nature of the violation; 
d.  A description of the remedial actions or measures necessary to bring an action or inaction into compliance with a permit, approved plan or this article; 
e.  The deadline or completion date of any such remedial actions or measures; 
f.  A statement of the penalties that may be assessed against the owner or responsible person to whom the notice of violation is directed. 
(2)  Stop work orders. The Director of the Public Works Department or the Director of the Community Development Department or the Director's designee is authorized to issue stop work orders to an owner or responsible person. Stop work orders are effective immediately and shall remain in effect until the necessary corrective actions or remedial measures as set forth in the notice of violation have occurred. Stop work orders may be withdrawn or modified by the Director of the Public Works Department or the Director of the Community Development Department or the Director's designee in order to enable an owner or responsible person to take necessary remedial actions or measures to correct the violations. 
(3)  Refusal to issue certificates of occupancy or completion. The Director of the Community Development Department or the Director's designee is authorized to refuse to issue certificates of occupancy or completion for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on a site until the owner or responsible person has taken the remedial actions or measures as set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise corrected the violations described therein. 
(4)  Suspension, revocation, or modification of permit. The Director of the Community Development Department or the Director's designee is authorized to suspend, revoke or modify a permit that was issued authorizing land disturbing activities or development. The Director of the Community Development Department or the Director's designee is authorized to reinstate a suspended, revoked or modified permit after the owner or responsible person has taken the remedial actions or measures stated in the notice of violation or has otherwise corrected the violations described therein. The Director of the Community Development Department or the Director's designee is also authorized to reinstate such permit, which may include conditions as the Director of the Community Development Department or the Director's designee may deem necessary, to enable the owner or responsible person to take the necessary remedial actions or measures to correct the violations. 
(5)  Refusal to approve final subdivision plats. The Director of the Community Development Department or the Director's designee is authorized to refuse to approve final plats until the owner or responsible person has taken the remedial actions or measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise corrected the violations described therein. 
(6)  Issuance of citations or summons to court. Both the Director of the Public Works Department and the Director of the Community Development Department or the Director's designee are authorized to issue a citation or summons to the owner or responsible person requiring such person to appear in a court of competent jurisdiction to answer charges for violations of this article. 
(Ord. No. 02-2006, art. 9, § 9.1, 2-2-2006) 
Sec. 105-138. - Legal penalties and/or remedies. 
(a)  Fine and/or sentence. Any person convicted by a court of competent jurisdiction of violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of violating a duly adopted ordinance of the city and shall be punished either by a fine not less than $100.00 per day and not greater than $1,000.00 per day, or by a sentence of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days in jail, or both a fine and jail or work alternate. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(b)  Other legal remedies. In any case in which a violation of this article has occurred, the city, in addition to other remedies provided by law, may petition for a restraining order, injunction, abatement, or take any other appropriate legal action or proceeding through a court of competent jurisdiction to prevent, restrain, or abate such unlawful use or activity. 
(Ord. No. 02-2006, art. 9, § 9.2, 2-2-2006) 
Sec. 105-139. - Remedies. 
In any case in which any land is, or is proposed to be, used or activities are undertaken in violation of this article or any amendment thereto adopted by the Mayor and Council, the city, in addition to other remedies provided by law, may petition for a restraining order, injunction, abatement, or take any other appropriate legal action or proceeding through a court of competent jurisdiction to prevent, restrain, or abate such unlawful use or activity. 
(Ord. No. 02-2006, art. 9, § 9.3, 2-2-2006) 
Secs. 105-140—105-161. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - ADMINISTRATIVE APPEAL AND JUDICIAL REVIEW 

Sec. 105-162. - Administration. 
This article shall be administered, interpreted, and enforced by both the Director of the Public Works Department and the Director of the Community Development Department or the Director's designee. 
(Ord. No. 02-2006, art. 10, § 10.1, 2-2-2006) 
Sec. 105-163. - Administrative appeal. 
Appeals of the interpretation by either the Director of the Public Works Department or the Director of the Community Development Department or the Director's designee of the requirements of this article shall first be submitted in writing (on a form provided by the Community Development Department) to either Director who shall review the request in a timely manner and receive comments from other affected departments. Such appeal shall be made within 15 days after the decision to be appealed. The appeal thereupon shall be forwarded to the Mayor and Council for action in their normal course of business. 
(Ord. No. 02-2006, art. 10, § 10.2, 2-2-2006) 
Sec. 105-164. - Judicial review. 
Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of either the Director of the Public Works Department or the Director of the Community Development Department or the Director's designee, after exhausting all administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal by writ of certiorari to the superior court of the county. 
(Ord. No. 02-2006, art. 10, § 10.3, 2-2-2006) 
Secs. 105-165—105-181. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - FEES 

Sec. 105-182. - Fees imposed. 
The fees imposed for actions undertaken pursuant to the provisions under this article shall be as follows: 
(1)  Application filing, permit, inspection, and other fees shall be as may be established from time to time by the Mayor and Council. 
(2)  Permit fees, if any, shall be submitted as a prerequisite to issuance of the permit. Nonpayment as a result of submission of a check having insufficient funds on account, or for any other reason, shall cause the permit to be voided and reissuance subject to penalty as may be established by the Mayor and Council. 
(3)  Application fees, if any, shall be submitted with the application and upon acceptance of said submission for review and consideration shall not be refundable. Failure to pay a required application fee shall cause the application to be returned to the applicant without acceptance for review or consideration by the city. 
(4)  Following the approval of development plans, and prior to authorization to begin construction, the developer shall provide for the payment of such fees as may be established from time to time by the Mayor and Council. Such fees shall not be refundable following issuance of a development permit, except upon approval of the Mayor and Council. 
(5)  Prior to approval of a final plat or certificate of occupancy, the developer shall provide to the Public Works Department such fees and performance and/or maintenance bonds as shall be required by this article or established from time to time by the Mayor and Council. 
(Ord. No. 02-2006, art. 11, 2-2-2006) 
Secs. 105-183—105-202. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - AMENDMENT 

Sec. 105-203. - Applicability. 
(a)  This article may be amended from time to time by resolution of the Mayor and Council. Such amendments shall be effective as of the date of adoption, unless otherwise stated in the adopting resolution. 
(b)  Any subdivision or other project for which a valid and complete application for a development permit shall have been received prior to the adoption of an amendment to this article may, at the developer's option, proceed to completion and building permits may be issued as though no amendment had been approved, provided that the development permit is or can be issued within 90 calendar days of said amendment and all timeframes associated with said permit are observed. 
(c)  Any subdivision or other project for which a development permit has been issued prior to the adoption of an amendment to this article may, at the developer's option, proceed to completion and building permits may be issued as though no amendment had been approved. 
(d)  Any subdivision or other project for which only a clearing, clearing and grubbing, or grading permit shall have been issued prior to adoption of an amendment to the ordinance from which this article is derived shall be brought into conformance with the amendment (if applicable) prior to issuance of a development permit. 
(e)  No amendment to this article shall be construed to affect the validity of any building permit lawfully issued prior to the adoption of said amendment. 
(Ord. No. 02-2006, art. 12, § 12.2, 2-2-2006) 
Secs. 105-204—105-299. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TRAFFIC IMPACT STUDIES 

Sec. 105-300. - [Title.] 
The title of this article is "traffic impact studies." 
(Ord. No. 23-2012, pt. 1, 10-1-2012) 
Sec. 105-301. - Purpose and intent. 
Understanding the demands placed on the community's transportation network by development is an important dimension of assessing the overall impacts of development. All development generates traffic, and it may generate enough traffic to create congestion and thus require the community to invest more capital funds into the transportation network in the form of new roads, traffic signals and intersection improvements. Traffic congestion results in a number of problems, including economic costs due to delayed travel times, air pollution and accidents. By requiring traffic impact studies for proposed developments meeting certain thresholds, the city will be better able to determine the transportation demands of development proposals and provide for reduction of adverse impacts on the transportation system. 
(Ord. No. 23-2012, pt. 1, 10-1-2012) 
Sec. 105-302. - Objectives. 
The city finds that requiring a traffic impact study for proposed developments that meet certain thresholds will help to achieve the following objectives: 
(1)  Forecast additional traffic associated with new development, based on accepted practices. 
(2)  Determine the improvements that are necessary to accommodate the new development. 
(3)  Allow the local government to assess the impacts that a proposed development may have and assist the local government in making decisions regarding development proposals. 
(4)  Help to ensure safe and reasonable traffic conditions on streets after the development is complete. 
(5)  Reduce the negative impacts created by developments by helping to ensure that the transportation network can accommodate the development. 
(6)  Protect the substantial public investment in the street system. 
(7)  Provide information relevant to comprehensive planning, transportation planning, transit planning and the provision of programs and facilities for traffic safety, road improvements, transportation demand management, pedestrian access and other transportation system considerations. 
(Ord. No. 23-2012, pt. 1, 10-1-2012) 
Sec. 105-303. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
Discretionary development proposal means any application for a change of land use district, preliminary plat, conditional use permit, development permit, or certificate of appropriateness. For purposes of this article, a determination of applicability shall be made at the first discretionary development proposal encountered. 
Horizon year. Unless otherwise specified or approved by Community Development Department staff, the horizon year shall be 20 years into the future from the year during which a traffic impact study is being prepared. 
Level of service (LOS) means a quantitative and qualitative measure of how well traffic flows on a given street or highway. Level of service relates to such factors as highway width, number of lanes, percentage of trucks, total traffic volume, turning movements, lateral clearances, grades, sight distance, capacity in relation to volume, travel speed and other factors which affect the quality of flow. Level of service is typically summarized by letter grades described as follows: 
(1)  Level "A" is a condition with low traffic volumes, high speeds and free-flow conditions. 
(2)  Level "B" is a condition with light traffic volumes, minor speed restrictions and stable flow. 
(3)  Level "C" is a condition with moderate traffic volumes, where speed and maneuvering are restricted to a limited degree by the amount of traffic. 
(4)  Level "D" is a condition with heavy traffic operating at tolerable speeds, although temporary slowdowns in flow may occur. 
(5)  Level "E" is a condition of very heavy flow and relatively low speeds. Under level "E" the traffic is unstable and short stoppage may occur. 
(6)  Level "F" is a condition of extremely heavy flow, with frequent stoppage and very slow speeds. It is an unstable traffic condition under which traffic often comes to a complete halt. 
Qualified professional. For purposes of conducting traffic impact studies as may be required by this article, a qualified professional shall mean a registered professional engineer with experience in traffic engineering. For purposes of conducting peak hour trip generation studies, a qualified professional shall mean a registered professional engineer with experience in traffic engineering, or another professional approved by Community Development Department staff based on education and experience to conduct such trip generation studies. 
Traffic impact study means an analysis and assessment, conducted by a qualified professional, that assesses the effects that a discretionary development proposal's traffic will have on the transportation network in a community or portion thereof. Traffic impact studies vary in their range of detail and complexity depending on the type, size and location of the proposed development. 
(Ord. No. 23-2012, pt. 1, 10-1-2012) 
Sec. 105-304. - Thresholds of applicability. 
A traffic impact study shall be required for any discretionary development proposal which meets or exceeds the thresholds in the following table. 

 
(Ord. No. 23-2012, pt. 1, 10-1-2012) 
Sec. 105-305. - Exemptions. 
(a)  A traffic impact study is not required if a discretionary development proposal is initiated by the city. 
(b)  A discretionary development proposal may be exempted from the traffic impact study requirement by the Community Development Department Director if a prior traffic impact study for the subject property has been submitted to the city and the proposed development is substantially similar to that for which the prior traffic impact study was conducted. 
(c)  Any development of regional impact that complies with rules of the Georgia Regional Transportation Authority (GRTA) shall be exempt from this article. 
(Ord. No. 23-2012, pt. 1, 10-1-2012) 
Sec. 105-306. - Determination of applicability. 
At the time a discretionary development proposal is filed, or during any pre-application meeting if possible, Community Development Department staff shall determine whether a traffic impact study shall be required according to this article. Community Development Department staff shall calculate the expected trip generation of the proposed development using professionally accepted trip generation rates or other data and compare it to the thresholds specified in this article to determine whether a traffic impact study is required. 
Applicants for discretionary development proposals shall provide sufficient information about the development proposal (e.g., number of dwelling units, square footage of buildings, number of employees, land area of the development, etc.) for Community Development Department staff to apply professionally accepted trip generation rates to the proposed development. Community Development Department staff shall not accept a discretionary development proposal for processing unless it contains the data on the proposed development necessary to apply available trip generation rates. 
(Ord. No. 23-2012, pt. 1, 10-1-2012) 
Sec. 105-307. - Scoping meeting. 
Once it is determined that a traffic impact study is required, a scoping meeting may be held with the developer or his or her consultant and the appropriate representatives of the city. It will be the responsibility of the developer or his or her consultant to initiate this meeting. The purpose of this meeting is to discuss the availability of site-specific information concerning the development, available forecasts of traffic volumes, and to ensure the applicant understands the content requirements for traffic impact studies. 
(Ord. No. 23-2012, pt. 1, 10-1-2012) 
Sec. 105-308. - Required contents of a traffic impact study. 
The traffic impact study shall be prepared following and meeting the standards of the GRTA Development of Regional Impact technical guidelines, dated January 14, 2002, as may be amended from time to time. In addition, the following components shall be included: 
(1)  Alternative transportation. Alternative transportation (sidewalk, bicycle, transit) needed as a result of the study. 
(2)  References. A listing of all technical documents and resources cited or consulted in preparing the traffic impact study. 
(3)  Technical Appendix. Relevant technical information, including but not limited to: copies of raw traffic count data used in the analysis, calculation sheets and/or computer software output for all LOS and V/C calculations in the analysis, and warrant worksheets for signals, turn lanes, signal phasing, etc. used in the analysis. 
(4)  Mitigation Measures and Costs. Listing of all intersections and road segments that are forecasted to be Level of Service "E" and "F" in the horizon year, or if phased, in the years that each phase is planned to be complete, and an identification and description of specific mitigation measures including signal, turn lane, or other warrant analyses as appropriate and necessary to bring these intersections and road segments into compliance with a Level of Service "D" or other city-adopted level of service for said road segment or intersection. 
If roadway improvements are needed, the study shall show a drawing at an engineering scale of one inch equals 20 feet for all recommended lane configurations. 
If signalization is warranted by the traffic signal warrants outlined in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD), a warrant analysis shall also be conducted as a part of the traffic impact study. If a traffic signal is warranted, the warrant package in the study shall show a drawing at an engineering scale of one inch equals 20 feet, detailing the signal design and phasing plans. 
The estimated cost associated with implementing all such mitigation measures shall be provided in the traffic impact study. The traffic impact study may take into account any city/county/state-approved roadway, traffic signalization and other improvements in determining mitigation measures and providing recommendations. 
(Ord. No. 23-2012, pt. 1, 10-1-2012) 
Sec. 105-309. - Additional technical specifications. 
Community Development Department staff is further authorized to promulgate and require the use of additional technical specifications for conducting traffic impact studies, which shall be consistent with analysis methods included in the most recent Highway Capacity Manual, Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, "Trip Generation" published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE), and/or Traffic Access and Impact Studies for Site Development: A Recommended Practice (Washington, DC: Institute of Transportation Engineers, 1991), as may be amended or republished from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 23-2012, pt. 1, 10-1-2012) 
Sec. 105-310. - Costs and fees. 
The city assumes no liability for any costs or time delays (either direct or consequential) associated with the preparation and review of traffic impact studies. There shall be no application review fee for a traffic impact study. 
(Ord. No. 23-2012, pt. 1, 10-1-2012) 
Sec. 105-311. - Submittal and review of study. 
The applicant for the proposed development or the qualified professional shall submit one electronic copy of the traffic impact study and technical appendix, two paper copies of the traffic impact study and one paper copy of the technical appendix to the Community Development Department. Community Development Department staff may submit copies of the report to applicable review agencies which may include the Georgia Department of Transportation, GRTA, an adjacent local jurisdiction and/or metropolitan planning organization or regional development center. Within ten working days of receipt of a traffic impact study, Community Development Department staff shall review all calculations and analyses and determine if they are complete, reasonable, understandable, consistent and fully explained. The conclusions presented in the traffic impact study shall be consistent with and supported by the data, calculations and analyses in the report. Calculations, graphs, tables, data and/or analysis results that are contrary to good common sense or not consistent with and supported by the data will not be accepted. In such events, Community Development Department staff shall return the traffic impact study to the development applicant for correction. 
(Ord. No. 23-2012, pt. 1, 10-1-2012) 
Sec. 105-312. - Recommendations for mitigation of impacts. 
Within ten working days of receipt of a completed traffic impact study, Community Development Department staff shall complete his or her review of the study and submit to the applicant all recommendations for mitigation measures as stated in the traffic impact study and include any interpretations or recommended conditions of approving the discretionary development proposal that will mitigate traffic impacts of the proposed development. 
(Ord. No. 23-2012, pt. 1, 10-1-2012) 
Sec. 105-313. - Determination of project and system improvements. 
Community Development Department staff shall determine which mitigation measures constitute "project" improvements and which mitigation measures constitute "system" improvements within the context of the Georgia Development Impact Fee Act of 1990. 
In the event that a particular improvement is called for in the traffic impact study or recommended by Community Development Department staff, and Community Development Department staff is unable to uniquely attribute the recommendation as a project or system improvement or finds that such improvement has characteristics of both a project improvement and a system improvement, Community Development Department staff shall determine the proportion of the cost of such improvement that can reasonably be attributed to the development as a project improvement, and the portion of such improvement that can reasonably be considered a system improvement. 
(Ord. No. 23-2012, pt. 1, 10-1-2012) 
Sec. 105-314. - Conditions of development approval for project improvements. 
Upon the determination of project improvements needed to mitigate the traffic impacts of the discretionary development proposal as provided in this article, Community Development Department staff shall recommend that the project improvements be completed by the developer as conditions of approval of the discretionary development proposal. 
(Ord. No. 23-2012, pt. 1, 10-1-2012) 
Sec. 105-315. - System improvements. 
When Community Development Department staff recommends improvements as a condition of a discretionary development proposal that Community Development Department staff determines are wholly or partially "system" improvements, the Community Development Department may include such recommendations in the recommended conditions of approval for the discretionary development application. The development applicant and the city in the case of system improvements shall have the following options: 
(1)  The applicant for a discretionary development proposal may voluntarily agree to pay for the cost of providing the system improvements, or a pro-rated share of the cost of said system improvements that are reasonably attributed to the subject development, as determined by the city. 
(2)  In the case of an application for discretionary development proposal before the Mayor and City Council, the city may find that the proposed development will provide substantial adverse impacts on the transportation system. The city may find further that the existing transportation system is insufficient to serve the proposed development and the city is unable to provide adequate transportation facilities within a reasonable amount of time after the impacts of said development would occur. Given such findings, the Mayor and City Council may reduce the development density or intensity to the degree that the impacts of the development proposal do not degrade transportation facilities below adopted level of service standards, require a phasing of the development in a manner that adequate public facilities will be provided publicly or privately, or in cases where such other alternatives do not address the adverse impacts, deny an application for a discretionary development proposal. 
(Ord. No. 23-2012, pt. 1, 10-1-2012) 
Sec. 105-316. - Appeal. 
Any person aggrieved or adversely affected by an administrative decision of the Community Development Department Director pertaining to the application of the provisions of this chapter may, within 30 days of such decision, appeal the decision to the Board of Construction Appeals. Any person aggrieved or adversely affected by a decision of the Board of Construction Appeals pertaining to the application of the provisions of this chapter may, within 30 days of such decision, appeal the decision to the City Council. Any person aggrieved or adversely affected by the decision of the City Council may, within 30 days of such decision, appeal the decision to the superior court of the county. 
(Ord. No. 23-2012, pt. 1, 10-1-2012) 
Chapter 107 - FLOODS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 107-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition which is connected by a firewall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall shall be considered new construction. 
Appeal means a request for a review of the Planning and Zoning Board of Appeals interpretation of any provision of this chapter. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designed AO or AH zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of special flood hazard means the land subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. This includes all floodplain and floodprone areas at or below the base flood elevation (including A, A1-30, A-99, AE, AO, AH, and AR on the FHBM or the FIRM), all floodplain and floodprone areas at or below the future-conditions flood elevation, and all other floodprone areas as referenced in section 107-7. All streams with a drainage area of 100 acres or greater shall have the area of special flood hazard delineated. 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, also known as the 100-year flood. 
Base flood elevation means the highest water surface elevation anticipated at any given point during the base flood. 
Basement means that portion of a building having its floor sub grade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Building means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. 
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, cleaning, grubbing, grading, paving, any other installation of impervious cover, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
Elevated building means a non-basement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
Existing construction means any structure for which the start of construction commenced before October 24, 1974. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before October 24, 1974. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities the construction of streets, and whether final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
FEMA means the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff or surface waters from any source. 
Flood hazard boundary map or FHMB means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as Zone A. 
Flood insurance rate map or FIRM means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study or FIS means the official report by the Federal Insurance Administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
Floodproofing means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway or regulatory floodway means the channel of a stream or other watercourse and the adjacent areas of the floodplain which is necessary to contain and discharge the base flood flow without cumulatively increasing the base flood elevation more than one foot. 
Functionally dependent use means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. 
Future-conditions flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year based on future-conditions hydrology. Also known as the 100-year future-conditions flood. 
Future-conditions flood elevation means the flood standard equal to or higher than the base flood elevation. The future-conditions flood elevation is defined as the highest water surface anticipated at any given point during the future-conditions flood. 
Future-conditions floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding by the future-conditions flood. 
Future-conditions hydrology means the flood discharges associated with projected land-use conditions based on a community's zoning map, comprehensive land-use plans, and/or watershed study projections, and without consideration of projected future construction of flood detention structures or projected future hydraulic modifications within a stream or other waterway, such as bridge and culvert construction, fill, and excavation. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed foundation of a building. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible to states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this chapter. 
Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" includes any structure commonly referred to as a "mobile home" regardless of the date of manufacture. The term "manufactured home" also includes parked trailers, travel trailers and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of this chapter, the term is synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) and/or the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988. 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) , as corrected in 1929, is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
New construction means any structure for which the start of construction commenced after October 24, 1974, and includes any subsequent improvements to the structure. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after October 24, 1974. 
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 means a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
Owner means the legal or beneficial owner of a site, including but not limited to, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of the site. 
Permit means the permit issued by the Community Development Department to the applicant which is required prior to undertaking any development activity. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by light-duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or season use. 
Repetitive loss means flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals, or exceeds 25 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Site means the parcel of land being developed, or the portion thereof on which the development project is located. 
Start of construction means the date the permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. (Note: accessory structures are not exempt from any requirements of this chapter). For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank. 
Subdivision means the division of a tract or parcel of land resulting in one or more new lots or building sites for the purpose, whether immediately or in the future, of sale, other transfer of ownership or land development, and includes divisions of land resulting from or made in connection with the layout or development of a new street or roadway or a change in an existing street or roadway. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any combination of repairs, reconstruction, alteration, or improvements to a building, taking place during a ten-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure prior to the improvement. The market value of the building means: 
(1)  The appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement; or 
(2)  In the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. 
This term includes structures, which have incurred "repetitive loss" or "substantial damage" regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term does not, however, include those improvements of a building required to comply with existing health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions, which have been pre-identified by the Code Enforcement Official, and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project. 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home park or subdivision is where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Variance means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this chapter. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certificates, or other evidence of compliance required in this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Ord. No. 09-2006, art. 2, 9-18-2006) 
Sec. 107-2. - Short title. 
This chapter may also be known as the "Floodplain Management Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 09-2006, 9-18-2006) 
Sec. 107-3. - Findings. 
It is hereby determined that: 
(1)  The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which may result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(2)  Flood hazard areas can serve important stormwater management, water quality, stream bank protection, stream corridor protection, wetland preservation and ecological purposes when permanently protected as undisturbed or minimally disturbed areas. 
(3)  Effective floodplain management and flood hazard protection activities can: 
a.  Protect human life and health; 
b.  Minimize damage to private property; 
c.  Minimize damage to public facilities and infrastructure such as ware and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; and 
d.  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public. 
(4)  Article IX, Section II of the Constitution of the State of Georgia (Ga. Const. art. IX, § II), O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(a), have delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. There, the city does ordain this chapter and establishes this set of floodplain management and flood hazard reduction policies for the purpose of regulating the use of flood hazard areas. It is determined that the regulation of flood hazard areas and the prevention of flood damage are in the public interest and will minimize threats to public health and safety, as well as to private and public property. 
(Ord. No. 09-2006, 9-18-2006) 
Sec. 107-4. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this chapter is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety, environment and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in flood hazard areas, as well as to protect the beneficial uses of floodplain areas for water quality protection, stream bank and stream corridor protection, wetlands preservation and ecological and environmental protection by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to flooding or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
(3)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; 
(4)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; 
(5)  Limit the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters; and, 
(6)  Protect the stormwater management, water quality, stream bank protection, stream corridor protection, wetland preservation and ecological functions of natural floodplain areas. 
(Ord. No. 09-2006, art. 1, § 98.1, 9-18-2006) 
Sec. 107-5. - Applicability. 
This chapter shall be applicable to all areas of special flood hazard with the city. 
(Ord. No. 09-2006, art. 1, § 98.2, 9-18-2006) 
Sec. 107-6. - Designation of administrator. 
The Community Development Director or his designee is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 09-2006, art. 1, § 98.3, 9-18-2006) 
Sec. 107-7. - Basis for area of special flood hazard; flood area maps and studies. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following are adopted by reference: 
(1)  The Flood Insurance Study (FIS), dated September 29, 2006, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto are hereby adopted by reference. 
(2)  Other studies which may be relied upon for the establishment of the base flood elevation or delineation of the 100-year floodplain and floodprone areas include: 
a.  Any flood or flood-related study conducted by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the United States Geological Survey or any other local, state or federal agency applicable to the city; or 
b.  Any base flood study authored by a registered professional engineer in the state which has been prepared by FEMA approved methodology and approved by the Community Development Director. 
(3)  Other studies which may be relied upon for the establishment of the future-conditions flood elevation or delineation of the future-conditions floodplain and floodprone areas include: 
a.  Any flood or flood-related study conducted by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the United States Geological Survey, or any other local, state or federal agency applicable to the city; or 
b.  Any future-conditions flood study authored by a registered professional engineer in the state, which has been prepared by FEMA approved methodology and approved by the Community Development Director. 
(4)  The repository for public inspection of the FIS, accompanying maps and other supporting data is located at the Office of the Community Development Director. 
(Ord. No. 09-2006, art. 1, § 98.4, 9-18-2006) 
Sec. 107-8. - Compatibility with other regulations. 
This chapter is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, statute, easement, covenant, deed restriction or other provision of law. The requirements of this chapter are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, and where any provision of this chapter imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
(Ord. No. 09-2006, art. 1, § 98.5, 9-18-2006) 
Sec. 107-9. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 09-2006, art. 1, § 98.7, 9-18-2006) 
Secs. 107-10—107-36. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PERMIT PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 107-37. - Permit application requirements. 
(a)  No owner or developer shall perform any development activities on a site where an area of special flood hazard is located without first meeting the requirements of this chapter prior to commencing the proposed activity. 
(b)  Unless specifically excluded by this chapter, any landowner or developer desiring a permit for a development activity shall submit to the Community Development Department a permit application on a form provided by the Community Development Department for that purpose. No permit will be approved for any development activities that do not meet the requirements, restrictions and criteria of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 09-2006, art. 3, § 98.3.1, 9-18-2006) 
Sec. 107-38. - Floodplain management plan requirements. 
(a)  An application for a development project with any area of special flood hazard located on the site will be required to include a floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan. This plan shall include the following items: 
(1)  Site plans drawn to scale, which includes but is not limited to: 
a.  Existing and proposed elevations of the area in question and the nature, location and dimensions of existing and/or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, amount and location of excavation material, and storage of materials or equipment; 
b.  For all proposed structures, spot ground elevations at building corners and 20-foot or smaller intervals along the foundation footprint, or one foot contour elevations throughout the building site; 
c.  Proposed locations of water supply, sanitary sewer, and utilities; 
d.  Proposed locations of drainage and stormwater management facilities; 
e.  Proposed grading plan; 
f.  Base flood elevations and future-conditions flood elevations; 
g.  Boundaries of the base flood floodplain and future-conditions floodplain; 
h.  If applicable, the location of the floodway; and 
i.  Certification of the information required in this subsection (a)(1) by a registered professional engineer or surveyor. 
(2)  Building and foundation design detail, including but not limited to: 
a.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) or the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed; 
c.  Certification that any proposed nonresidential floodproofed structure meets the criteria in section 107-93(2); 
d.  For enclosures below the base flood elevation; 
e.  Design plans certified by a registered professional engineer or architect for all proposed structures. 
(3)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development; 
(4)  Hard copies and digital files of computer models, if any, copies of work maps, comparison of pre- and post-development conditions based flood elevations, future-conditions flood elevations, flood protection elevations, special flood hazard areas and regulatory floodway widths, flood profiles and all other computations and other information similar to that presented in the FIS; 
(5)  Copies of all applicable state and federal permits necessary for proposed development; and 
(6)  All appropriate certifications required under this chapter. 
(b)  The approved floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan shall contain certification by the applicant that all development activities will be done according to the plan or previously approved revisions. Any and all development permits and/or use and occupancy certificates or permits may be revoked at any time if the construction and development activities are not in strict accordance with approved plans. 
(Ord. No. 09-2006, art. 3, § 98.3.2, 9-18-2006) 
Sec. 107-39. - Construction stage submittal requirements. 
(a)  For all new construction and substantial improvements on sites with a floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan, the permit holder shall provide to the Community Development Director a certified as-built elevation certificate or floodproofing certificate for nonresidential construction including the lowest floor elevation or floodproofing level immediately after the lowest floor or floodproofing is completed. A final elevation certificate shall be provided after completion of construction including final grading of the site. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized for nonresidential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. 
(b)  Any work undertaken prior to approval of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. The Community Development Director shall review the certification data submitted in accordance with subsection (a) of this section. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make the corrections required hereby shall be cause to issue a stop work order for the project. 
(Ord. No. 09-2006, art. 3, § 98.3.3, 9-18-2006) 
Sec. 107-40. - Duties and responsibilities of the administrator. 
Duties of the Community Development Director shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)  Review all development applications and permits to assure that the requirements of this chapter have been satisfied and to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
(2)  Require that copies of all necessary permits from governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including but not limited to section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1334, be provided and maintained on file; 
(3)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided, then the Community Development Director shall require the applicant to obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source in order to meet the provisions of subsections (4) and (5) of this section; 
(4)  Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean seal level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures; 
(5)  Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any substantially improved structures have been floodproofed; 
(6)  When floodproofing is utilized for a nonresidential structure, the Community Development Director shall obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect; 
(7)  Notify affected adjacent communities and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA); 
(8)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (e.g., where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the Community Development Director shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this chapter. Where floodplain elevations have been defined, the floodplain shall be determined based on flood elevations rather than the area graphically delineated on the floodplain maps; and 
(9)  All records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter shall be maintained in the Office of the Community Development Director and shall be open for public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 09-2006, art. 3, § 98.3.4, 9-18-2006) 
Secs. 107-41—107-68. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STANDARDS FOR DEVELOPMENT 

Sec. 107-69. - Designation of—Floodplain boundaries. 
(a)  Studies "A" zones, as identified in the FIS, shall be used to establish base flood elevations whenever available. 
(b)  For all streams with a drainage area of 100 acres or greater, the future-conditions flood elevations shall be provided by the Community Development Department. If future-conditions elevation data is not available from the Community Development Department, then it shall be determined by a registered professional engineer using a method approved by FEMA and the Community Development Department. 
(Ord. No. 09-2006, art. 4, § 98.4.1, 9-18-2006) 
Sec. 107-70. - Same—Floodway boundaries. 
The width of a floodway shall be determined from the FIS or FEMA approved flood study. For all streams with a drainage area of 100 acres or greater, the regulatory floodway shall be provided by the Community Development Department. If floodway data is not available from the Community Development Department, then it shall be determined by a registered professional engineer using a method approved by FEMA and the Community Development Department. 
(Ord. No. 09-2006, art. 4, § 98.4.2, 9-18-2006) 
Sec. 107-71. - General standards. 
(a)  No development shall be allowed within the future-conditions floodplain that could result in any of the following: 
(1)  Raising the base flood elevation or future-conditions flood elevation equal to or more than 0.01 foot; 
(2)  Reducing the base flood or future-conditions flood storage capacity; 
(3)  Changing the flow characteristics as to the depth and velocity of the waters of the base flood or future-conditions flood as they pass both the upstream and the downstream boundaries of the development area; or 
(4)  Creating hazardous or erosion-producing velocities, or resulting in excessive sedimentation. 
(b)  Any development within the future-conditions floodplain allowed under subsection (a) of this section shall also meet the following conditions: 
(1)  Compensation for storage capacity shall occur between the average ground water table elevation and the base flood elevation for the base flood, and between the average ground water table elevation and the future-condition flood elevation for the future-conditions flood, and lie either within the boundaries of ownership of the property being developed and shall be within the immediate vicinity of the location of the encroachment. Acceptable means of providing required compensation include lowering of natural ground elevations within the floodplain, or lowering of adjoining land areas to create additional floodplain storage. In no case shall any required compensation be provided via bottom storage or by excavating below the elevation of the top of the natural (pre-development) stream channel unless such excavation results from the widening or relocation of the stream channel; 
(2)  Cut areas shall be stabilized and graded to a slope of no less than 2.0 percent; 
(3)  Effective transitions shall be provided such that flow velocities occurring on both upstream and downstream properties are not increased or decreased; 
(4)  Verification of no-rise conditions (0.01 foot or less), flood storage volumes, and flow characteristics shall be provided via a step-backwater analysis meeting and requirements of section 107-72; 
(5)  Public utilities and facilities, such as water, sanitary sewer, gas, and electrical systems, shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration or contamination from floodwaters; and 
(6)  Any significant physical changes to the base flood floodplain shall be submitted as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. The CLOMR submittal shall be subject to approval by the Community Development Department using the community consent forms before forwarding the submittal package to FEMA for final approval. The responsibility for forwarding the CLMOR to FEMA and for obtaining the CLOMR approval shall be the responsibility of the applicant. Within six months of the completion of construction, the applicant shall submit as-built surveys for a final letter of map revision (LOMR). 
(Ord. No. 09-2006, art. 4, § 98.4.3, 9-18-2006) 
Sec. 107-72. - Engineering study requirements for floodplain encroachments. 
An engineering study is required, as appropriate to the proposed developments activities on the site, whenever a development proposes to disturb any land within the future-conditions floodplain, except for a residential single-lot development on streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodways for which the provisions of section 107-95 apply. This study shall be prepared by a currently registered professional engineer in the state and made a part of the application for a permit. This information shall be submitted to and approved by the Community Development Department prior to the approval of any permit which would authorize the disturbance of land located within the future-conditions floodplain. Such study shall include: 
(1)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse or floodplain will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development; 
(2)  Step-backwater analysis, using a FEMA-approved methodology approved by the Community Development Department. Cross sections (which may be supplemented by the applicant) and flow information will be obtained whenever available. Computations will be shown duplicating FIS results and will then be rerun with the proposed modifications to determine the new base flood profiles, and future-conditions flood profiles; 
(3)  Floodplain storage calculations based on cross sections (at least one every 100 feet) showing existing and proposed floodplain conditions to show that base flood floodplain and future-conditions floodplain storage capacity would not be diminished by the development; 
(4)  The study shall include a preliminary plat, grading plan, or site plan, as appropriate, which shall clearly define all future-conditions floodplain encroachments. 
(Ord. No. 09-2006, art. 4, § 98.4.4, 9-18-2006) 
Sec. 107-73. - Floodway encroachments. 
Located within areas of special flood hazard are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, floodways much remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway, except for activities specifically allowed in subsection (2) of this section; 
(2)  Encroachments for bridges, culverts, roadways and utilities within the regulatory floodway may be permitted provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase to the pre-project base flood elevations, floodway elevations, or floodway widths during the base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof; and 
(3)  If the applicant proposes to revise the floodway boundaries, no permit authorizing the encroachment into or an alteration of the floodway shall be issued by the Community Development Department until an affirmative conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) is issued by FEMA and no-rise certification is approved by the Community Development Department. 
(Ord. No. 09-2006, art. 4, § 98.4.5, 9-18-2006) 
Sec. 107-74. - Maintenance requirements. 
The property owner shall be responsible for continuing maintenance as may be needed within an altered or relocated portion of a floodplain on his property so that the flood-carrying or flood storage capacity is not diminished. The Community Development Department may direct the property owner (at no cost to the city) to restore the flood-carrying or flood storage capacity of the floodplain if the owner has not performed maintenance as required by the approved floodplain management plan on file with the Community Development Department. 
(Ord. No. 09-2006, art. 4, § 98.4.6, 9-18-2006) 
Secs. 107-75—107-91. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FLOOD DAMAGE REDUCTION 

Sec. 107-92. - General standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions apply: 
(1)  New construction of principal buildings (residential or nonresidential), including manufactured homes, shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain, unless all requirements of sections 107-71, 107-72 and 107-73 have been met; 
(2)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structures; 
(3)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(4)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(5)  Elevated buildings. All new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished and flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. 
a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
1.  Provide a minimum of tow openings having a total new area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and 
3.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both directions. 
b.  So as not to violate the "lowest floor" criteria of this chapter, the unfinished and flood resistant enclosure shall solely be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; and, 
c.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
(6)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(7)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces; 
(8)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system; 
(9)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters; 
(10)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them, or contamination from them, during flooding; 
(11)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure which is not compliant with the provisions of this chapter, shall be undertaken only if the non-conformity is not furthered, extended or replaced; and 
(12)  If the proposed development is located in multiple flood zones or multiple base flood elevation cross the proposed site, the higher or more restrictive base flood elevation or future-condition elevation and development standards shall take precedence. 
(Ord. No. 09-2006, art. 5, § 98.5.1, 9-18-2006) 
Sec. 107-93. - Building standards for structures and buildings within the future-conditions floodplain. 
The following provisions, in addition to those in section 107-92, shall apply: 
(1)  Residential buildings. 
a.  New construction. New construction of principal buildings, including manufactured homes shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of sections 107-71, 107-72 and 107-73 have been met. If all of the requirements of sections 107-71, 107-72 and 107-73 have been met, all new construction shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to equalize the hydrologic flood forces on exterior walls and to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 107-92(5). 
b.  Substantial improvements. Substantial improvement of any principal structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to equalize the hydrologic flood forces on exterior walls and to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 107-92(5). 
(2)  Nonresidential buildings. 
a.  New construction. New construction of principal buildings, including manufactured homes shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of sections 107-71, 107-72 and 107-73 have been met. New construction that has met all of the requirements of sections 107-71, 107-72 and 107-73 may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to one foot above the base flood elevation, or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions in this subsection (2), and shall provide such certification to the Community Development Director. 
b.  Substantial improvements. Substantial improvement of any principal nonresidential structure located in A1-30, AE, or AH zones, may be authorized by the Community Development Director to be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to one foot above the base flood elevation, or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions in this subsection (2), and shall provide such certification to the Community Development Director. 
(3)  Accessory structures and facilities. Accessory structures and facilities (i.e., barns, sheds, gazebos, detached garages, parking lots, recreational facilities and other similar non-habitable structures and facilities) which are permitted to be located within the limits of the floodplain shall be constructed of flood-resistant materials and designed to pass all floodwater in accordance with section 107-92(5) and be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure. 
(4)  Standards for recreation vehicles. All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
a.  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days and be fully licensed and ready for highway use, (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licenses, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or 
b.  The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for residential buildings, substantial improvements (subsection (1)b of this section), including the anchoring and elevation requirements. 
(5)  Standards for manufactured homes. 
a.  New manufactured homes shall not be allowed to be placed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of sections 107-71, 107-72 and 107-73 have been met. 
b.  Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision shall be elevated so that either: 
1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than three feet above the level of the base flood elevation, or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher; or 
2.  The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) or no less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
c.  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement in accordance with standards of section 107-92(7). 
(Ord. No. 09-2006, art. 5, § 98.5.2, 9-18-2006) 
Sec. 107-94. - Buildings standards for structures and buildings authorized adjacent to the future-conditions floodplain. 
(a)  Residential buildings. For new construction or substantial improvement of any principal residential building or manufactured home, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement and access to the building, shall be at least three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. 
(b)  Nonresidential buildings. For new construction or substantial improvement of any principal nonresidential building, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement and access to the building, shall be at least one foot above the level of the base flood elevation or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. 
(Ord. No. 09-2006, art. 5, § 98.5.3, 9-18-2006) 
Sec. 107-95. - Building standards for residential single-lot developments on streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodway (A zones). 
(a)  For a residential single-lot development not part of a subdivision that has areas of special flood hazard, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A zones) the Community Development Director shall review and reasonably utilize any available scientific or historic flood elevation data, base flood elevation and floodway data, or future-conditions flood elevation data available from a federal, state, local or other source, in order to administer the provisions and standards of this chapter. 
(b)  If data are not available from any of these sources, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to twice the width of the stream or 50 feet from the top of the bank of the stream, whichever is greater. 
(2)  In special flood hazard areas without base flood or future-conditions flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with section 107-92(5). 
(Ord. No. 09-2006, art. 5, § 98.5.4, 9-18-2006) 
Sec. 107-96. - Building standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO zones). 
Areas of special flood hazard may include designed "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. In these areas the following provisions apply: 
(1)  New and substantial improvements of residential and nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to no lower than one foot above the flood depth number in feet specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 107-92(5); 
(2)  New and substantial improvements of a nonresidential structure may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one foot above the highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice; and 
(3)  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(Ord. No. 09-2006, art. 5, § 98.5.5, 9-18-2006) 
Sec. 107-97. - Standards for subdivisions. 
Standards for subdivisions shall be as follows: 
(1)  All subdivision proposals shall identify the special flood hazard area and provide base flood elevation data and future-conditions flood elevation data; 
(2)  All residential lots in a subdivision proposal shall have sufficient buildable area outside of the future-conditions floodplain such that encroachments into the future-conditions floodplain for residential structures will not be required; 
(3)  All subdivision plans will provide the elevations of proposed structures in accordance with section 107-38; 
(4)  All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
(5)  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as water, sanitary sewer, gas, and electrical systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters, and discharges from the systems into floodwaters; and, 
(6)  All subdivision proposals shall include adequate drainage and stormwater management facilities per the requirements of the city to reduce potential exposure to flood hazards. 
(Ord. No. 09-2006, art. 5, § 98.5.6, 9-18-2006) 
Secs. 107-98—107-124. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - VARIANCES 

Sec. 107-125. - Procedures. 
The following variance and appeals procedures shall apply to an applicant who has been denied a permit for a development activity or to an owner or developer who has not applied for a permit because it is clear that the proposed development activity would be inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter. A request for a variance may be submitted by an applicant who has been denied a permit by the Community Development Department or by an owner or developer who has not previously applied for a permit for the reasons stated hereinabove. 
(1)  Requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter shall be submitted to the Community Development Department. All such requests shall be heard and decided in accordance with procedures to be published in writing by the Community Development Department. At a minimum, such procedures shall include notice to all affected parties and the opportunity to be heard. 
(2)  Any person adversely affected by any decision of the Community Development Department shall have the right to appeal such a decision to the Zoning Board of Appeals as established by the city in accordance with procedures to be published in writing by the Zoning Board of Appeals. At a minimum, such procedures shall include notice to all affected parties and the opportunity to be heard. 
(3)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals may appeal such decision to the superior court of the county, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1. 
(4)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure, and the variance issued shall be the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(5)  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this section are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(6)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(7)  In reviewing such requests, the Community Development Department and the Zoning Board of Appeals shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this section and other sections of this chapter. 
(8)  Conditions for variances: 
a.  A variance shall be issued only when there is: 
1.  A finding of good and sufficient cause; 
2.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
3.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety extraordinary public expense, or the creation of a nuisance. 
b.  The provisions of this chapter are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore, any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of a historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
c.  Any person to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
d.  The Community Development Director shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(9)  Any person requesting a variance shall, from the time of the request until the time the request is acted upon, submit such information and documentation as the Community Development Authority and the Zoning Board of Appeals may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as they deem necessary to the consideration of the request. 
(10)  Upon consideration of the factors listed in this section and the purposes of this chapter, the Community Development Department and the Zoning Board of Appeals may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as they deem necessary or appropriate, consistent with the purposes of this chapter. 
(11)  Variances shall not be issued "after the fact." 
(Ord. No. 09-2006, art. 6, 9-18-2006) 
Secs. 107-126—107-148. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - VIOLATIONS, ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES 

Sec. 107-149. - Enforcement. 
Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this chapter or the requirements of an approved stormwater management plan or permit may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this article. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described in this article shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
(Ord. No. 09-2006, art. 7, intro. ¶, 9-18-2006) 
Sec. 107-150. - Notice of violation. 
(a)  If the Community Development Department determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved stormwater management plan or the provisions of this chapter, it shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this chapter without having first secured a permit therefor, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. 
(b)  The notice of violation shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
(2)  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
(3)  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
(4)  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the stormwater management plan or this chapter and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
(5)  A statement of the penalty that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
(6)  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the Community Development Department by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days after the notice of violation (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient). 
(Ord. No. 09-2006, art. 7, § 98.7.1, 9-18-2006) 
Sec. 107-151. - Penalties. 
In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the Community Development Department shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten days (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the Community Development Department may take any one or more of the following actions or impose any one or more of the following penalties: 
(1)  Stop work order. The Community Development Director may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
(2)  Withhold certificate of occupancy. The Community Development Department may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
(3)  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The Community Development Department may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the Community Development Department may deem necessary) to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measure to cure such violations. 
(4)  Civil penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days, or such greater period as the city shall deem appropriate (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient) after the city has taken one or more of the actions described in this section, the city may impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(5)  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this chapter, the city may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in municipal court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 60 days, or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 09-2006, art. 7, § 98.7.2, 9-18-2006) 
Chapter 109 - LAND-DISTURBING ACTIVITIES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 109-1—109-57. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CHATTAHOOCHEE RIVER TRIBUTARY PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Metropolitan River Protection Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 109-58. - Statutory authorization. 
This chapter is adopted pursuant to the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-5-453. 
(Code 1979, § 8-9-2; Code 1998, § 102-141) 
Sec. 109-59. - Findings. 
The Mayor and Council of the city find that: 
(1)  The Chattahoochee River provides multiple public benefits, which includes use of the river as the primary water supply for metropolitan Atlanta. 
(2)  The water quality of the Chattahoochee River depends upon the water quality of the flowing streams tributary to the river. 
(3)  Sediment and other polluting materials and conditions including, but not limited to, pesticides, nutrients such as nitrogen and phosphorus, toxic materials, and elevations in water temperature are harmful to the water quality of the river and its tributaries. 
(4)  The riparian vegetation along these watercourses helps preserve water quality. Dense tree growth helps to prevent stream bank erosion, and streamside vegetation reduces the amount of sediment and other polluting materials that would otherwise wash into streams. Riparian trees, by shading, help maintain cooler water temperatures and thus enhance water quality. 
(Code 1979, § 8-9-3(a); Code 1998, § 102-142) 
Sec. 109-60. - Purposes. 
It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare; to minimize public and private losses due to erosion, siltation, and water pollution; and to maintain stream water quality in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Create vegetative buffer areas adjacent to tributary streams in the drainage area of the Chattahoochee Corridor. 
(2)  Minimize land disturbing activities within such buffer areas by requiring issuance of a permit for such activities. 
(Code 1979, § 8-9-3(b); Code 1998, § 102-143) 
Sec. 109-61. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Chattahoochee River Tributary Protection Area, also referred to as the "protection area," means the stream channel and the land area extending outward 35 horizontal feet from the banks on either side of all flowing streams in the drainage basin of all tributaries of the Chattahoochee River which enter the Chattahoochee River downstream from Buford Dam and upstream from Peachtree Creek, except for such land within the Chattahoochee Corridor, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-5-441. 
Flowing stream means any stream which is designated and shown as a permanent stream on the 7.5-minute quadrangle maps of the U.S. Department of the Interior, U.S. Geological Survey, plus any stream which the Mayor and Council may determine to be, and designate as, a flowing stream. 
Land-disturbing activity means scraping, plowing, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, or filling of land or placement of any structure or impervious surface, dam, obstruction, or deposit. 
Parcel means any plot, lot or acreage shown correctly as a unit on the latest county tax assessment records. 
Person means any individual, partnership, corporation, trust, entity, or authority and shall include their agents or contractors, the state, its political subdivisions and all its departments, boards, bureaus, commissions, or other agencies. 
Watershed means the land area which drains into a particular stream. 
(Code 1979, § 8-9-4; Code 1998, § 102-144) 
Sec. 109-62. - Establishment of tributary protection area. 
The Chattahoochee River Tributary Protection Area within the city is hereby established. The designated protection area shall be shown on the official map of the city. 
(Code 1979, § 8-9-5; Code 1998, § 102-145) 
Sec. 109-63. - Stop work orders. 
Upon notice from the Planning and Zoning Department, work on any project that is being done contrary to the provisions of this article shall be immediately stopped. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, his authorized agent or the person in charge of the activity on the property, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed or the site restored to its original condition or its equivalent. Where an emergency exists, no written notice shall be required. 
(Code 1979, § 8-9-6(11); Code 1998, § 102-146) 
Sec. 109-64. - Penalty for violations. 
Any person violating any provision of this article, permitting conditions or stop work orders and the owner of the land on which the violation occurs shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(Code 1979, § 8-9-6(14); Code 1998, § 102-147) 
Sec. 109-65. - Administrative appeal. 
Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the Planning and Zoning Department, shall be entitled to a hearing before the Mayor and Council within ten days after receipt by the Planning and Zoning Department of written notice of appeal. 
(Code 1979, § 8-9-7(a); Code 1998, § 102-148) 
Sec. 109-66. - Judicial review. 
Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the Planning and Zoning Department, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal de novo to the superior court of the county. 
(Code 1979, § 8-9-7(b); Code 1998, § 102-149) 
Secs. 109-67—109-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 109-91. - Required. 
No person shall engage in any land-disturbing activity in a protection area without first having obtained a written permit from the Planning and Zoning Department of the city. 
(Code 1979, § 8-9-6; Code 1998, § 102-181) 
Sec. 109-92. - Failure to obtain. 
If any person commences any land-disturbing activity requiring a land disturbing permit as prescribed in this division without first obtaining such permit, that person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit, building permit, or other authorization for the conduct of business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city. 
(Code 1979, § 8-9-6(10); Code 1998, § 102-182) 
Sec. 109-93. - Exceptions. 
The provisions of this division shall not apply to: 
(1)  Emergency work necessary to preserve life or property. When emergency work is performed under this section the person performing it shall report the pertinent facts relating to the work to the Planning and Zoning Department on the next business day after commencement of the work. Within ten days thereafter, the person shall apply for a permit and perform such work within such time period as may be determined by the Planning and Zoning Department to be reasonably necessary to correct any impairment such emergency work may have caused to the water conveyance capacity, stability, or water quality of the protection area. 
(2)  Work consisting of the repair or maintenance of any lawful use of land which is zoned and approved for such use on May 14, 1984. 
(Code 1979, § 8-9-6(1); Code 1998, § 102-183) 
Sec. 109-94. - Application. 
A separate application for a permit shall be made to the Department on a form approved by the Department, for each land-disturbing activity, except that only one application need be made for two or more such acts which are to be done on the same parcel. The application shall include a map of the site and such information concerning the proposed action as the Planning and Zoning Department deems necessary to describe the nature and extent of the proposed action and to determine the effect of the proposed action on the protection area. 
(Code 1979, § 8-9-6(2); Code 1998, § 102-184) 
Sec. 109-95. - Issuance. 
No application for a permit shall be approved and no permit shall be issued for any land-disturbing activity within the protection area unless: 
(1)  The land-disturbing activity is for the purpose of constructing one of the following: a stream crossing by a driveway, transportation route, or public utility; a dam and/or impoundment; a detention, retention, or sediment control pond or facility; 
(2)  The land-disturbing activity is within a right-of-way of any public agency; or 
(3)  The Planning and Zoning Department finds and determines that a minimum amount of land disturbance necessary for the beneficial use of the parcel has been proposed. 
(Code 1979, § 8-9-6(3); Code 1998, § 102-185) 
Sec. 109-96. - Conditions. 
In each permit issued under the provisions of this division, the Planning and Zoning Department shall include conditions designed to: 
(1)  Limit erosion, sedimentation, and water pollution within the protection zone to amounts and rates no greater than those occurring before the land-disturbing activity; and 
(2)  Preserve, protect, or replace the maximum feasible amount of natural vegetation. 
(Code 1979, § 8-9-6(4); Code 1998, § 102-186) 
Sec. 109-97. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 03-2009, pt. I, adopted April 6, 2009, deleted § 109-97, which pertained to variance and derived from Code 1979, § 8-9-6(5)' and Code 1998, § 102-187. 
Sec. 109-98. - Responsibility. 
Neither the issuance of a permit under this division nor compliance with the conditions thereof, nor with the provisions of this article shall relieve any person from any responsibility otherwise imposed by law for damage to persons or property; nor shall the issuance of any permit hereunder serve to impose any liability upon the city, its officers or employees, for injury or damage to person or property. A permit issued pursuant to this division does not relieve the permittee of the responsibility of securing and complying with any other permit which may be required by any other city ordinance or state law. 
(Code 1979, § 8-9-6(6); Code 1998, § 102-188) 
Sec. 109-99. - Term, extension, renewal. 
(a)  The permittee under this division shall complete the work authorized by the permit within the time limits specified in the permit, which in no event shall extend more than 12 months from the date of issuance. The permittee shall notify the Department at least 72 hours prior to the commencement of work. 
(b)  Should work not be commenced and completed within the time limits, the permit shall become void; provided, however, that if prior to the date established for commencement of work, the permittee makes written request to the Planning and Zoning Department for an extension of time to commence the work, setting forth the reasons for the required extension, the Department may grant such extension. 
(c)  A permit which has become void may be renewed at the discretion of the Planning and Zoning Department. 
(Code 1979, § 8-9-6(7); Code 1998, § 102-189) 
Sec. 109-100. - Inspection. 
(a)  The Department may cause inspections of the work permitted under this division to be made periodically during the course thereof and shall make a final inspection following completion of the work. The permittee shall assist the Planning and Zoning Department in making such inspection. The city shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out its duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable time upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigating and inspecting the sites of any land disturbing activities within a protection area. 
(b)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent who requests entry for purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(Code 1979, § 8-9-6(8); Code 1998, § 102-190) 
Sec. 109-101. - Performance bond. 
Prior to the issuance of any permit under this division for land disturbing activities within the protection area, the applicant shall submit a performance and maintenance bond which shall ensure that all terms and conditions of the permit are complied with. The bond shall pertain to and recite therein an exact description of the property in question. The length of time for which the bond shall be valid shall be determined by the Planning and Zoning Department, and shall be specified on the face of the bond. The bond shall be in an amount equal to twice the estimated cost for carrying out the land-disturbing activity in compliance with all terms and conditions of the permit. The sum of the bond shall be made payable to the city. The bond shall be provided by a bonding company licensed and registered in the state. 
(Code 1979, § 8-9-6(9); Code 1998, § 102-191) 
Sec. 109-102. - Forfeiture of bond. 
If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land disturbing activities has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of the permit issued under this division, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the permit and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article and, in addition to other penalties, his performance bond shall be subject to forfeiture. 
(Code 1979, § 8-9-6(12); Code 1998, § 102-192) 
Sec. 109-103. - Suspension, revocation or modification. 
The permit under this division may be suspended, revoked or modified by the Planning and Zoning Department upon finding that the holder is in violation of the terms of the permit or any portion of this article. 
(Code 1979, § 8-9-6(13); Code 1998, § 102-193) 
Secs. 109-104—109-134. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - GROUNDWATER RECHARGE AREA PROTECTION 

Sec. 109-135. - Title, findings, definitions and objectives. 
(a)  Title and findings of fact. 
(1)  This article shall be known as the "Groundwater Recharge Area Protection Ordinance of Norcross, Georgia." In order to provide for the health, safety and welfare of the public and a healthy economic climate with the city and surrounding communities, it is essential that the quality of public drinking water be ensured. For this reason, it is necessary to protect the subsurface water resources that the city and surrounding communities rely on as sources of public water. Groundwater resources are contained within aquifers, which are permeable rock strata occupying vast regions of the subsurface. These aquifers are replenished by infiltration of surface water runoff in zones of the surface known as groundwater recharge areas. 
(2)  Groundwater is susceptible to contamination when unrestricted development occurs within significant groundwater recharge areas. It is, therefore, necessary to manage land use within groundwater recharge areas in order to ensure that pollution threats are minimized. 
(3)  According to available data provided by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, the city contains significant groundwater recharge areas. Additionally, according to the Groundwater Pollution Susceptibility Map of Georgia, the city is within an area having a low susceptibility rating (drastic rating less than 141). 
(b)  Definitions. The following definitions are applicable to this article: 
Aquifer means any stratum (rock layer) or zone of rock beneath the surface of the earth capable of containing or producing water from a well. 
Groundwater recharge area means an area of the earth's surface where water infiltrates the ground, thereby replenishing the groundwater supplies within an aquifer. 
Hazardous material/waste means any substance defined as hazardous waste by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-8-60 et seq., as amended. 
Pollution susceptibility means the relative vulnerability of groundwater to pollution from chemical spills, leaching of pollutants from dump sites, animal waste from agricultural operations or pollution generated by other human activities. 
Pollution susceptibility map means the map prepared by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources that shows the relative susceptibility of groundwater to pollution. Pollution susceptibility maps categorize the land areas of the state into areas of high, medium and low groundwater pollution potential. 
Significant groundwater recharge areas means areas mapped by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources in Hydrologic Atlas 18, 1989 edition. Mapping of recharge areas is based on outcrop area, lithology (chemical nature and form of the rock), soil type and thickness, slope, density of lithologic contacts, geologic structure, presence of karst topography (sinkholes, caves and fissures associated with limestone and other carbonate rocks), and potentiometric surfaces. 
(c)  Objectives. The objectives of this article are to: 
(1)  Protect groundwater quality by restricting land uses that generate, use or store dangerous pollutants in recharge areas; 
(2)  Protect groundwater quality by limiting density of development; and 
(3)  Protect groundwater quality by ensuring that any development that occurs within the recharge area shall have no adverse effect on groundwater quality. 
(Code 1998, § 102-205; Ord. No. 09-99, 6-7-1999) 
Sec. 109-136. - Establishment of a groundwater recharge area district. 
A groundwater recharge area district is hereby established which shall correspond to all lands within the jurisdiction of the city that are mapped as significant recharge areas by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources in Hydrologic Atlas 18, 1989 edition, as amended. 
(Code 1998, § 102-206; Ord. No. 09-99, 6-7-1999) 
Sec. 109-137. - Determination of pollution susceptibility. 
Within the state each recharge area is determined to have a pollution susceptibility of high, medium or low based on the Georgia Pollution Susceptibility Map prepared by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. All recharge areas within the city are considered to have a low pollution susceptibility. 
(Code 1998, § 102-207; Ord. No. 09-99, 6-7-1999) 
Sec. 109-138. - Permit requirements and enforcement. 
(a)  Compliance with section 109-143. No building permit or development permit will be approved by the city unless the permit, request or plan is in compliance with the groundwater protection standards listed in section 109-143. 
(b)  Enforcement. The city, its agent, officers and employees shall have the authority to enter upon privately owned land for the purpose of performing their duties under this article and may take or cause to be made such examinations, surveys or sampling as the city deems necessary. 
(1)  The Community Development Department is hereby designated as the primary administrator and enforcement officer for the article. 
(2)  The Community Development Department shall have authority to enforce this article; issue permits hereunder; and address violations or threatened violations hereof by issuance of violation notices, administrative orders and civil and criminal actions. All costs, fees and expenses in connection with such actions may be recovered as damages against the violator. 
(3)  Law enforcement officials or other officials having police power shall have authority to assist the Community Development Department in enforcement. 
(4)  Any person who commits, takes part in or assists in any violation of any provision of this article shall be fined not more than $1,000.00 for each offense. Each violation shall be a separate offense and, in the case of a continuing violation, each day's continuance shall be deemed to be a separate and distinct offense. 
(5)  The Community Development Department shall have the authority to issue cease and desist orders in the event of any violation of this article. Cease and desist orders may be appealed to a court of competent jurisdiction, as identified in section 109-144. 
(6)  When a building or other structure has been constructed in violation of this article, the violator may be required to either remove the structure or make suitable modifications to bring it into compliance. 
(7)  When removal of vegetative cover, excavation or fill has taken place in violation of this article, the violator shall be required to restore the affected land to its original contours and to restore vegetation, as far as practicable. 
(Code 1998, § 102-208; Ord. No. 09-99, 6-7-1999) 
Sec. 109-139. - Permit review and site plan requirement. 
With the exception of certain exempted activities identified in section 109-140, applications for a development permit within the groundwater recharge area district shall include a site plan. The following information is required for all site plans: 
(1)  A map, drawn to a scale of 1:100, or other scale suitable to the city, showing all planned improvements including the width, depth and length of all existing and proposed structures, roads, watercourses and drainageways, water lines, wastewater and stormwater facilities, and utility installations, shall be provided by the applicant. 
(2)  Location, dimensions and area of all impervious surfaces, both existing and proposed on the site. 
(3)  The orientation and distance from the boundaries of the proposed site to the nearest bank of an affected perennial stream or body of water. 
(4)  Elevations of the site and adjacent lands within 200 feet of the site at contour intervals of no greater than five feet. 
(5)  Location and detailed design of any spill and leak collection systems designed for the purpose of containing accidentally released hazardous or toxic materials. 
(6)  Calculations of the amount of cut and fill proposed and cross-sectional drawings showing existing and proposed grades in areas of fill or excavation. Elevations, horizontal scale and vertical scale must be shown on cross sectional drawings. 
(7)  Activities to comply with site plan. All development activities or site work conducted after approval of the site plan shall conform with the specifications of said site plan. Significant changes to the site plan that would alter the amount and/or velocity of stormwater runoff from the site, increase the amount of impervious surface within the development, alter the overall density of development, result in a considerable increase in the amount of excavation, fill or removal of vegetation during construction or otherwise result in an alteration of the overall appearance of the development as proposed, can be amended only with the approval of the Community Development Department. Minor changes, such as the realignment of streets or minor alterations to drainage structures and other infrastructure to meet unexpected conditions, may be exempted from this requirement. 
(Code 1998, § 102-209; Ord. No. 09-99, 6-7-1999) 
Sec. 109-140. - Exemptions to site plan requirements. 
The following activities and developments are exempt from the requirement for detailed site plans: 
(1)  Single-family detached homes constructed within a subdivision of fewer than five parcels. 
(2)  Repairs to a facility that is part of a previously approved and permitted development. 
(3)  Construction of minor structures, such as sheds or additions to single-family residences. 
(Code 1998, § 102-210; Ord. No. 09-99, 6-7-1999) 
Sec. 109-141. - Review procedures. 
The application shall be made to the Community Development Department and will be reviewed within the normal course of business for the city and follow the policies as outlined within the zoning chapter and development regulations, as amended. Appeals to decisions and determinations made by the city shall follow the processes outlined within the zoning chapter. 
(Code 1998, § 102-211; Ord. No. 09-99, 6-7-1999) 
Sec. 109-142. - Duration of permit validity. 
(a)  If construction described in the development permit has not commenced within 12 months from the date of issuance, the permit shall expire. 
(b)  If construction described in the development permit is suspended or abandoned after work has commenced, the permit shall expire within 12 months after the date that work ceased. 
(Code 1998, § 102-212; Ord. No. 09-99, 6-7-1999) 
Sec. 109-143. - Groundwater protection standards. 
The following standards are required by the city for all significant groundwater recharge areas within the city. There may be other rules, regulations and requirements enforced by other entities, such as the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, that must also be followed. 
(1)  For all pollution susceptibility areas, new waste disposal facilities must have synthetic liners and leachate collection systems. 
(2)  Within significant groundwater recharge areas, new agricultural impoundments shall meet the following requirements: A liner shall be provided that is approved by the U.S. Soil Conservation Service (SCS) if the site exceeds 50 acres. As a minimum, the liner shall be constructed of compacted clay having a thickness of one foot and a vertical hydraulic conductivity of less than 5 × 10 7 cm/sec or other criteria established by the SCS. 
(3)  No land disposal of hazardous waste shall be permitted within any significant groundwater recharge area. 
(4)  For all significant groundwater recharge areas, new facilities which handle hazardous materials, of the types listed in section 312 of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (42 USC 6901 et seq.), excluding underground storage tanks and in amount (10,000 pounds or more on any one day) shall perform their operations on impervious surfaces and in conformance with any applicable federal spill prevention requirements and any local fire prevention code requirements. 
(5)  For all significant groundwater recharge areas, new aboveground chemical or petroleum storage tanks larger than 660 gallons must have secondary containment for 110 percent of tank volume or 110 percent of the largest tank in a cluster of tanks. Such tanks used for agricultural purposes are exempt, provided they comply with all federal requirements. 
(6)  Minimum lot sizes and septic systems within significant recharge areas. New homes served by septic tank/drain systems shall conform to minimum lot size requirements as established by the Department of Human Resources (DHR) Manual for On-Site Sewerage Management Systems, as amended, and currently identified as follows: 

 
*Applies to land within the city 

 
*Mobile home minimum lot size is one acre which exceeds the minimum lot size established by the DHR Manual for On-Site Sewerage Management Systems. 
(7)  No construction may proceed on a building or mobile home to be served by a septic tank unless the Gwinnett County Environmental Health Department first approves the proposed septic tank installation as meeting the standards of the DHR Manual and minimum lot size requirements as outlined. 
(8)  Permanent stormwater infiltration basins shall not be constructed in areas having high pollution susceptibility. 
(Code 1998, § 102-213; Ord. No. 09-99, 6-7-1999) 
Sec. 109-144. - Judicial review. 
(a)  Jurisdiction. All final decisions of the city concerning denial, approval or conditional approval of a permit shall be reviewable in the county superior court. 
(b)  Alternative actions. Based on these proceedings and the decision of the court, the Community Development Department may within the time specified by the court, elect to: 
(1)  Institute negotiated purchase or condemnation proceedings to acquire an easement or fee interest in the applicant's land; 
(2)  Approve the permit application with lesser restrictions or conditions (e.g., grant a variance); or 
(3)  Institute other appropriate actions ordered by the court that fall within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Code 1998, § 102-214; Ord. No. 09-99, 6-7-1999) 
Sec. 109-145. - Soil Grouping Matrix. 
Soil Groupings for Use with Minimum Lot Size Tables 

 
(Code 1998, § 102-226; Ord. No. 09-99, 6-7-1999) 
Secs. 109-146—109-171. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - WETLAND PROTECTION 

Sec. 109-172. - District. 
This article shall apply to all lands within wetland areas located within the jurisdiction of the city. The National Wetland Inventory Maps (NWI), prepared by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, as amended, are hereby adopted as the city's generalized wetland map inventory. These maps show the general locations of wetlands and should be consulted by persons contemplating activities in or near wetland areas. Copies of said maps shall be on file in the Office of the Community Development Department. 
(Code 1998, § 102-227; Ord. No. 09-99, 6-7-1999) 
Sec. 109-173. - Definitions of wetlands. 
Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and distribution sufficient to support, and under normal circumstances does support a relevance of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas. 
(Code 1998, § 102-228; Ord. No. 09-99, 6-7-1999) 
Sec. 109-174. - Permitting and use provisions. 
Within the city, no land disturbance or building permits shall be issued on a parcel of land that appears to contain wetlands on the city's generalized wetland map inventory until a determination has been made by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers on whether jurisdictional wetlands exist on the site. If there are jurisdictional wetlands on the site that will be disturbed by the proposed development, the applicant must first obtain a wetlands alteration section 404 permit and/or letter of permission from the Corps of Engineers prior to any permits being issued on the site. 
(Code 1998, § 102-229; Ord. No. 09-99, 6-7-1999) 
Secs. 109-175—109-201. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - CHATTAHOOCHEE RIVER WATER SUPPLY WATERSHED PROTECTION 

Sec. 109-202. - Title, findings and purpose. 
(a)  Title of article. This article shall be known as the "Chattahoochee River Water Supply Watershed Protection Ordinance." 
(b)  Findings of fact. 
(1)  In order to provide for the health, safety and welfare of the public and a healthy economic climate within the city and surrounding communities, it is essential that the quality of public drinking water be ensured. The ability of natural systems to filter stormwater runoff can be threatened by unrestricted development. Land disturbing activities associated with development can increase erosion and sedimentation which threatens the storage capacity of reservoirs. In addition, stormwater runoff, particularly from impervious surfaces, can introduce toxicants, nutrients and sediment into drinking water supplies, making water treatment more complicated and expensive and rendering water resources unusable for recreation. Industrial land uses that involve the manufacture, use, transport and storage of hazardous or toxic waste materials result in the potential risk of contamination of nearby public drinking water supplies. 
(2)  The city has determined that land inside the city lies within the Chattahoochee River Water Supply Watershed. This watershed is greater than 100 square miles in size and is categorized as a large water supply watershed under the provisions of this article. As of the date of adoption of this article, no portion of the city lies within seven miles upstream of a water supply reservoir but a portion of the city lies within seven miles upstream of an active water supply intake. 
(c)  Purpose. The purpose of this article is to establish measures to protect the quality and quantity of the present and future water supply of the city; to minimize the transport of pollutants and sediment to the water supply; and to maintain the yield of the water supply watershed. This article shall apply to the portions of the Chattahoochee River Watershed, which occur within the jurisdiction of the city and are herein identified as water supply watershed. 
(Code 1998, § 102-239; Ord. No. 09-99, 6-7-1999) 
Sec. 109-203. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Buffer means a natural or enhanced vegetated area located adjacent to a reservoir or perennial stream within a water supply watershed. 
Corridor means all land within the buffer areas established adjacent to reservoirs or perennial streams within a water supply watershed. 
Hazardous material/waste means any substance defined as hazardous waste by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-8-60 et seq., as amended. 
Impervious surface means a manmade structure or surface that prevents the infiltration of stormwater into the ground below the structure or surface. Examples of impervious surface include buildings, roads, driveways, parking lots, decks, swimming pools and patios. 
Perennial stream means a stream that flows throughout the year, as indicated by a solid blue line on United States Geological Survey (USGS) seven-minute topographic series maps (scale 1/24,000). 
Setback means the distance that defines the width of a protective buffer, measured from the boundary of the feature of the landscape (e.g., a wetland or streambank) that the buffer is designed to protect. 
Water supply watershed means the drainage area (watershed) of lands upstream of a governmentally owned public drinking water intake or water supply reservoir. 
(Code 1998, § 102-240; Ord. No. 09-99, 6-7-1999) 
Sec. 109-204. - Establishment of a water supply watershed district. 
The Chattahoochee River Water Supply Watershed District is hereby designated and shall comprise the land that drains to the Chattahoochee River from the river's bank to the ridge line of the watershed within the political boundaries of the city. The boundary shall be set at places readily identifiable on the watershed district map. A seven-mile-radius protection area is hereby established for land inside the city that lies within the Chattahoochee River water supply watershed and is within a radius of seven miles upstream of an active water supply intake. The boundary of the seven mile radius protection area shall be set at places readily identifiable on the watershed district map. 
(Code 1998, § 102-241; Ord. No. 09-99, 6-7-1999) 
Sec. 109-205. - Permit required. 
(a)  Permit requirements. Within the water supply watershed district, no land-disturbing activity, construction or other development, other than certain exempted activities identified within, may be conducted without a approval from the city and must be in full compliance with the terms of this article and other zoning and development regulations. All activities that are not permissible as of right or as special permit uses shall be prohibited. 
(b)  Exemptions. The following land use activities are exempted from the permit and site plan requirements of this article: 
(1)  Forestry. Normal agricultural activities involving planting and harvesting of crops are exempted if they conform to best management practices established by the Georgia Department of Agriculture. Silvicultural activities must conform to best management practices established by the Georgia Forestry Commission. 
(2)  Mining activities. All mining activities that are permitted by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources under the Georgia Surface Mining Act, as amended, are exempted. 
(c)  Authority to enter. The city, its agents, officers and employees shall have authority to enter upon privately owned land for the purpose of performing their duties under this article and may take or cause to be made such examinations, surveys or sampling as the city deems necessary. 
(d)  Administrative, enforcement authority. The Community Development Department is hereby designated as the administrator and enforcement authority for this article. 
(e)  Notices, order and actions. The Community Development Department shall have authority to enforce this article; issue permits hereunder; and address violations or threatened violations hereof by issuance of violation notices, administrative orders and civil and criminal actions. All costs, fees and expenses in connection with such actions may be recovered as damages. 
(f)  Officials having police powers. Law enforcement officials or other officials having police powers shall have authority to assist the Community Development Department in enforcement of this article. 
(g)  Violations. Any person who commits, takes part in or assists in any violation of any provision of this article shall be fined not more than $1,000.00 for each offense. Each violation shall be a separate offense and, in the case of a continuing violation, each day's continuance shall be deemed to be a separate and distinct offense. 
(h)  Cease and desist orders. The Community Development Department shall have the authority to issue cease and desist orders in the event of any violation of this article. Cease and desist orders may be appealed to a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(i)  Noncompliance. When a building or other structure has been constructed in violation of this article, the violator shall be required to remove the structure. 
(j)  Restoration of affected land. When removal of vegetative cover, excavation or fill has taken place in violation of this article, the violator shall be required to restore the affected land to its original contours and to restore vegetation, as far as practicable. 
(Code 1998, § 102-242; Ord. No. 09-99, 6-7-1999) 
Sec. 109-206. - Permit review applications. 
Applications for a development permit within the seven-mile-radius protection area shall include a site plan prepared and approved by the Community Development Department in compliance with the zoning and development regulations before any building permits or other development related permits may be issued or any land-disturbing activity may take place. The site plan must include: 
(1)  A site plan drawn to a scale showing all planned improvements including the width, depth and length of all existing and proposed structures, roads, watercourses and drainageways; water, wastewater and stormwater facilities; and utility installations. 
(2)  Location, dimensions and area of all impervious surfaces, both existing and proposed, on the site. 
(3)  The orientation and distance from the boundaries of the proposed site to the nearest bank of an affected perennial stream or water body. 
(4)  Elevations of the site and adjacent lands within 200 feet of the site at contour intervals of no greater than five feet. 
(5)  Location and detailed design of any spill and leak collection systems designed for the purpose of containing accidentally released hazardous or toxic materials. 
(6)  Calculations of the amount of cut and fill proposed and cross sectional drawings showing existing and proposed grades in areas of fill or excavation. Elevations, horizontal scale and vertical scale must be shown on cross-sectional drawings. 
(Code 1998, § 102-243; Ord. No. 09-99, 6-7-1999) 
Sec. 109-207. - Activities to comply with site plan. 
All development activities or site work conducted after approval of the site plan shall conform with the specifications of said site plan. Significant changes to the site plan, that would alter the amount and velocity of stormwater runoff from the site, increase the amount of impervious surface within the development, alter the overall density of development, result in a considerable increase in the amount of excavation, fill or removal of vegetation during construction or otherwise result in an alteration of the overall appearance of the development as proposed can be amended only with the approval of the city. 
(Code 1998, § 102-244; Ord. No. 09-99, 6-7-1999) 
Sec. 109-208. - Exemptions from site plan requirement. 
The following activities and developments are exempt from the requirement for detailed site plans: 
(1)  Single-family detached homes. 
(2)  Repairs to a facility that is part of a previously approved and permitted development. 
(3)  Construction of minor structures, such as sheds or additions to single-family residences. 
(Code 1998, § 102-245; Ord. No. 09-99, 6-7-1999) 
Sec. 109-209. - Preapplication conference. 
A preapplication conference between the applicant and the city can be scheduled at the request of the applicant. The purpose of the meeting is to review local land use restrictions, site plan requirements and the permitting process. 
(Code 1998, § 102-246; Ord. No. 09-99, 6-7-1999) 
Sec. 109-210. - Protection measures and requirements. 
In addition to the limitations on land use prescribed by the zoning ordinances or development regulations, the following limitations shall apply for land within the seven-mile-radius protection area. New facilities which handle hazardous materials, of the types listed in section 312 of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (42 USC 6901 et seq.), excluding underground storage tanks and in amount (10,000 pounds or more on any one day) shall perform their operations on impervious surfaces and in conformance with any applicable federal spill prevention requirements or the requirements of the standard fire prevention code. 
(Code 1998, § 102-247; Ord. No. 09-99, 6-7-1999) 
Sec. 109-211. - Application projects partially complete. 
For any development that has received, before the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, either preliminary plat approval, site plan approval, building permit or other relevant permits provided by the city and for which substantial work has been completed or substantial investment made in reliance upon such a permit, any future work included in said plat or plan may be completed without being subject to the additional regulations imposed in this article. Any significant additions, expansions or phases that deviate significantly from said plat or plan or that have not yet received a permit shall be subject to the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1998, § 102-248; Ord. No. 09-99, 6-7-1999) 
Secs. 109-212—109-232. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - ILLICIT DISCHARGE AND ILLEGAL CONNECTION 

Sec. 109-233. - General provisions. 
(a)  Title. This article shall be known as the "Illicit Discharge and Illegal Connection Ordinance." 
(b)  Authority. The authority for this article is based on home rule provisions of the Ga. Const. art. IX, § 2, ¶ 3(a)(6). 
(c)  Findings. It is hereby determined that: 
(1)  The city separate storm sewer system was designed and installed to manage stormwater so as to prevent localized flooding, damage to property and risk to public safety; 
(2)  The city separate storm sewer system was not designed or installed as a receiving system for nonstormwater discharges; 
(3)  Discharges to the city separate storm sewer system that are not composed entirely of stormwater contribute to increased nonpoint source pollution and degradation of receiving waters; 
(4)  These nonstormwater discharges occur due to spills, dumping and improper connections to the city separate storm sewer system from residential, industrial, commercial or institutional establishments; 
(5)  These nonstormwater discharges not only impact local waterways individually, but geographically dispersed, small volume nonstormwater discharges can have cumulative impacts on receiving waters; 
(6)  The impacts of these nonstormwater discharges adversely affect public health and safety, drinking water supplies, recreation, fish and other aquatic life, property values and other uses of lands and waters; 
(7)  These impacts can be minimized through the regulation of spills, dumping and discharges into the city separate storm sewer system; 
(8)  Localities in the state are required to comply with a number of state and federal laws, regulations and permits which require a locality to address the impacts of nonpoint source pollution caused by nonstormwater discharges to the city separate storm sewer system; 
(9)  The Clean Water Act requires the management and maintenance of the city separate storm sewer system and the management of discharges to that system; 
(10)  Therefore, in order to prohibit such nonstormwater discharges to the city separate storm sewer system, it is determined that the regulation of spills, improper dumping and discharges to the city separate storm sewer system is in the public interest and will prevent threats to public health and safety, and the environment. 
(d)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety, environment and general welfare through the regulation of nonstormwater discharges to the city separate storm sewer system to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal law. This article establishes methods for controlling the introduction of nonstormwater discharges into the city separate storm sewer system in order to comply with requirements of the national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit process. The objectives of this article are to: 
(1)  Comply with all Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR) and Federal Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) stormwater regulations developed pursuant to the Clean Water Act; 
(2)  Prohibit illicit discharges and illegal connections to the city separate storm sewer system; 
(3)  Prevent nonstormwater discharges, generated as a result of spills, inappropriate dumping or disposal, to the city separate storm sewer system; and 
(4)  Establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance, monitoring and enforcement procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this article. 
(e)  Applicability. The provisions of this article shall apply throughout the unincorporated area of the city. The city may enter into agreements with cities within the county, or other municipalities, to carry out the purpose of this article. These agreements may include, but are not limited to, enforcement of provisions, resolution of disputes, and cooperative monitoring and management of the separate storm sewer system and management programs. 
(f)  Compatibility with other regulations. This article is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law. The requirements of this article constitute a minimum standard, should not be deemed to limit or repeal any other local requirements, and are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
(g)  Severability. If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article shall be adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article. 
(h)  Responsibility for administration. 
(1)  The Department shall have the power to administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this article and any procedures, standards and guidelines established under authority of this article. Such power shall include the right to maintain an action or procedure in any court of competent jurisdiction to compel compliance with or restrain any violation of this article. 
(2)  The Department shall be responsible for the conservation, management, maintenance (where applicable), extension and improvement of the city separate storm sewer system, including activities necessary to control stormwater and activities necessary to administer and implement the stormwater management programs incorporated by reference into the NPDES stormwater permit. 
(3)  The Department may develop, and update periodically, a stormwater management design manual for the guidance of persons preparing stormwater management plans, designing or operating stormwater management systems, and designing or operating facilities that may contribute nonstormwater discharges to the city's separate storm sewer system. 
(4)  The Department may: 
a.  Establish or oversee the establishment of standards and guidelines for controlling stormwater; 
b.  Determine the manner in which conveyances should be operated; 
c.  Inspect private systems which discharge to the city separate storm sewer system; 
d.  Advise other departments on issues related to stormwater; 
e.  Protect facilities and premises controlled by the city and prescribe how they are to be used by others; 
f.  Require facilities or activities that create new, increased, or significantly changed stormwater contributions to the city's separate storm sewer system to comply with the terms of this article; and 
g.  Develop programs or procedures to control the discharge of pollutants into the city separate storm sewer system. 
(Ord. No. 13-2006, § 102.1, 11-6-2006) 
Sec. 109-234. - Definitions. 
(a)  For the purposes of this article, unless specifically defined in this section, words or phrases shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this article its most effective application. Words in the singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall include the singular. Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense; the word "shall" connotes mandatory and not discretionary; the word "may" is permissive. 
(b)  Unless otherwise specified, or it is apparent from the context, definitions herein will be the same as those in other city codes. 
(c)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accidental discharge means a discharge prohibited by this article that occurs by chance and without planning or thought prior to occurrence. 
City means City of Norcross and such of its departments, employees and agents as may have duties and responsibilities for administering and enforcing all stormwater management activities and implementation of the provisions of this article. 
City separate storm sewer system means any conveyance or system of conveyances which is: 
(1)  Owned or operated by the city; 
(2)  Not a combined sewer; and 
(3)  Not part of a publicly owned treatment works. 
Clean Water Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 USC 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
Construction activity means activities subject to the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act or NPDES General Construction Permits. These include construction projects resulting in land disturbance. Such activities include but are not limited to clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition. 
Conveyance means an aboveground or underground natural or manmade drainage feature, that provides for the collection and movement of stormwater, and shall include but not be limited to concrete or metal pipes, ditches, depressions, swales, roads with drainage systems, highways, city streets, curbs, gutters, inlets, catchbasins, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, structural stormwater controls, drainage channels, reservoirs, rights-of-way, storm drains, culverts, street gutters, oil/water separators, modular pavements and other similar drainage structures. 
Department means, unless otherwise specified, the city department responsible for stormwater management activities and implementation of the provisions of this article. 
Director means either the Director of the city department responsible for stormwater management activities and implementation of the provisions of this article or any of that person's duly authorized representatives. 
Discharge means the direct or indirect release of water, fluid, materials or other matter to a conveyance or surface that drains to a conveyance. 
Illegal connection means any of the following: 
(1)  Any pipe, open channel, drain or other conduit, whether natural or manmade, which is used exclusively to drain a nonstormwater discharge to the city's separate storm sewer system; 
(2)  Any pipe, open channel, drain or other conduit, whether natural or manmade, that was designed, installed or redirected for the purpose of draining a nonstormwater discharge into the city's separate storm sewer system; or 
(3)  Any pipe, open channel, drain or other conduit, whether natural or manmade, which is connected to the city separate storm sewer system and which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by the city regardless of whether such pipe, open channel, drain or other conduit, whether natural or manmade, was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time the connection was made, or has been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by the city or any other authorized enforcement agency. The term "illegal connection" expressly includes, without limitation, those connections made in the past. 
Illicit discharge means any direct or indirect nonstormwater discharge to the city separate storm sewer system. 
Industrial activity means activities subject to NPDES Industrial Permits as defined in 40 CFR 122.26(b)(14). 
National pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) stormwater discharge permit means a permit issued by the Georgia EPD under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC 1342(b) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis. 
Nonstormwater means any surface flow, runoff, drainage, or discharge that is not composed entirely of stormwater and which may include pollutants, but that excludes: 
(1)  Water from those sources described in section 109-235(2)(a) and (b); and/or 
(2)  Any discharge permitted under NPDES permit or order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the state and the Federal Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the city separate storm sewer system. 
Person means, except to the extent exempted from this article, any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Pollutant means anything that causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; petroleum hydrocarbons; automotive fluids; cooking grease; detergents (biodegradable or otherwise); degreasers; cleaning chemicals; nonhazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; liquid and solid wastes; process wastewater and wash water; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; concrete and cement; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind. 
Pollution means the manmade or man-induced alteration of the chemical, physical, biological, thermal and radiological integrity of water. 
Premises means any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
Procedure means a procedure adopted by the Department, by and through the Director, to implement a regulation or regulations adopted under this article, or to carry out other responsibilities as may be required by this Code or other codes, ordinances or resolutions of the city or other agencies. 
State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface and subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single person. 
Stormwater means any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation, but which also includes: 
(1)  Water from those sources described in section 109-235(2)(a) and (b); and/or 
(2)  Any discharge permitted under NPDES permit or order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the state and the Federal Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the city separate storm sewer system. 
Stormwater management design manual means the most recent version of the stormwater design manual. 
Structural stormwater control means a structural stormwater management facility or device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow. 
Variance means the modification of the minimum stormwater requirements for specific circumstances where strict adherence of the requirements would result in unnecessary hardship and not fulfill the intent of this article. 
(Ord. No. 13-2006, § 102.2, 11-6-2006) 
Sec. 109-235. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  Prohibition of illicit discharges. 
(1)  It shall be a violation of this article for any person to throw, drain, or otherwise discharge, cause, or allow others under his control to throw, drain, or otherwise discharge into the city separate storm sewer system anything other than stormwater. 
(2)  Discharges from the following sources are exempt from the prohibition provision in subsection (a)(1) of this section: 
a.  Water line flushing performed by a government agency, other potable water sources, dechlorinated and unpolluted swimming pool discharges, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream flows, rising groundwater, groundwater infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped groundwater, foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater dewatering systems), crawlspace pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows, and any other water source not containing pollutants; 
b.  Discharges or flows from firefighting, and other discharges specified in writing by the city as being necessary to protect public health and safety. 
(b)  Prohibition of illegal connections. 
(1)  It shall be a violation of this article for any person to construct, connect, use, maintain, or suffer or allow the continued existence of any illegal connection to the city separate storm sewer system. 
(2)  Illegal connections must be disconnected. The Department may require that illegal connections be disconnected and redirected if necessary, to an approved on-site sewage management system or the sanitary sewer system. Such redirected connections must be approved by the agency responsible for administering and operating those systems. 
(3)  The Department may require any underground or aboveground pipe, drain or other conduit, that has not been documented in plans, maps or equivalent, and which may be connected to the city's separate storm sewer system, to be located by the owner or occupant of that property upon receipt of written notice from the Department. Such notice will specify a reasonable time period within which the location of the drain or conveyance is to be completed, that the drain or conveyance be identified as storm sewer, sanitary sewer or other, and that the outfall location or point of connection to the storm sewer system, sanitary sewer system or other discharge point be identified. Results of these investigations are to be documented and provided to the Department. Failure to comply with the terms of the written notice mentioned within this subsection shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 13-2006, § 102.3, 11-6-2006) 
Sec. 109-236. - Industrial or construction activity discharges. 
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the city prior to allowing discharges to the city separate storm sewer system. 
(Ord. No. 13-2006, § 102.4, 11-6-2006) 
Sec. 109-237. - Access and inspection of properties and facilities. 
(a)  Access and inspection. The Director or his designee shall be permitted to enter and inspect premises, properties and facilities at reasonable times as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this article. 
(1)  If a property or facility has security measures in force, which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the owner or operator shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to the Director or his designee. 
(2)  The owner or operator shall allow the Director or his designee ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, investigation, observation, monitoring, measurement, recording, enforcement, sampling and testing, photography and videotaping for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the provisions of this article. The owner or operator shall allow the Director or his designee to examine and copy any records that are required under the conditions of an NPDES permit. The Director or his designee shall duly notify the owner of said property or the representative on site, except in the case of an emergency. 
(3)  The Director or his designee shall have the right to set up on any premises, property or facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the Department to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of discharges. 
(4)  The Director or his designee may require the owner or operator to install monitoring equipment and perform monitoring as necessary, and make the monitoring data available to the Department. This sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the owner or operator at his own expense. All devices used to measure flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy. Measurements, tests and analyses performed shall be completed in accordance with 40 CFR 136, unless the Director approves another method. 
(5)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the premises, property or facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the owner or operator at the written or oral request of the Director or his designee and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the owner or operator. 
(6)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the Director or his designee access to a facility, property or premises shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(7)  If the Director or his designee has been refused access to any part of a premises, property or facility from which stormwater is or would likely be discharged, and the Director or his designee is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this article or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, environment and welfare of the community, then the Department may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(b)  Schedule. The Director or his designee may determine inspection schedules necessary to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 13-2006, § 102.5, 11-6-2006) 
Sec. 109-238. - Notification of accidental discharges and spills. 
(a)  Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility, activity or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility, activity or operation has information of any known or suspected release of nonstormwater from that facility or operation which is resulting or may result in a discharge of that nonstormwater into the city separate storm sewer system, state waters, or waters of the United States, said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release so as to minimize the effects of the discharge. Said person shall notify the Department by phone, facsimile or in person within 24 hours of discovering the discharge. Such notification shall detail the nature, quantity and time of occurrence of the discharge. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the Department within three business days of the phone or in person notice. If the discharge emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years. Said person shall also take immediate steps to ensure no recurrence of the discharge or spill. 
(b)  In the event of such a release of hazardous materials, emergency response agencies and/or other appropriate agencies shall be immediately notified. 
(c)  Failure to provide notification of a release or discharge as provided in this section is a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 13-2006, § 102.6, 11-6-2006) 
Sec. 109-239. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Violations. It shall be a violation of this article for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this article. Any person, who has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this article, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section. Each day of noncompliance is considered a separate offense. The Department may institute appropriate action or proceedings at law or equity for the enforcement of this article. Any court of competent jurisdiction may have the right to issue restraining orders, temporary or permanent injunctions, and other appropriate forms of remedy or relief. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Department from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation, including application for injunctive relief. In the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, the Department has the right but not the duty, to enter upon the subject private property or premises, without giving prior notice, and take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. The Department is authorized to seek costs of the abatement as outlined in subsection (e) of this section. 
(b)  Notice of violation. Whenever the Department finds that a violation of this article has occurred, the Department may order compliance by written notice of violation. 
(1)  The notice of violation shall contain: 
a.  The name and address of the alleged violator; 
b.  The address when available or a description of the building, structure, premises or land upon which the violation is occurring, or has occurred; 
c.  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
d.  A description of the remedial measures necessary to restore compliance with this article and a time schedule for the completion of such remedial action; 
e.  A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
f.  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the Department by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days of service of notice of violation. 
(2)  Such notice of violation may require without limitation: 
a.  The performance of monitoring, analysis, and reporting; 
b.  The elimination of illicit discharges and illegal connections; 
c.  That violations of this article shall cease and desist; 
d.  The abatement of nonstormwater discharges, the remediation of land or the effects of pollution, and the restoration of any affected property to its unaffected condition; 
e.  Payment of costs to cover administrative and abatement costs; 
f.  The implementation of pollution prevention practices; 
g.  The development and provision to the Department of written remediation or action plans; 
h.  The development and provision to the Department of documents showing the location and discharge points of conveyances, pipes, channels, or drains; and 
i.  Any other actions that will lead to the remedy of a condition of violation of this article. 
(c)  Appeal of notice of violation. Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of the Director or his designee. The notice of appeal must be received by the Department within 30 days from the date of the notice of violation. Hearing on the appeal before the Director shall take place within 15 days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of the Director shall be final. 
(d)  Enforcement measures. If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation or, in the event of an appeal, within three days of the decision of the Director upholding the decision of the Director or his designee, then in addition to any other remedies that may be available, representatives of the Department or its contractors may enter upon the subject private premises, property or facility, where they are then authorized to take any and all actions or measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. Such measures or actions shall include but not be limited to repairs, maintenance, containment, cleanup and remediation. It shall be a violation of this article for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises, property or facility to refuse to allow the Department or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above. 
(e)  Costs of abatement of the violation. Within ten working days after abatement of the violation by the Department or its contractors, the owner of the property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The property owner may file a written protest objecting to the assessment or to the amount of the assessment within ten working days of such notice. If the amount due is not paid within 30 days after receipt of the notice, or if an appeal is taken, within 30 days after a decision on said appeal, the charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the city by reason of such violation. 
(f)  Criminal penalties. For violations of this article, the Department may issue a citation to the alleged violator requiring such person to appear in a court of competent jurisdiction to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 60 days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(g)  Violations deemed a public nuisance. In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this article is a threat to public health, safety, welfare, and environment and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief as provided by law. 
(h)  Remedies not exclusive. The remedies listed in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law and the Department may seek cumulative remedies. The Department may recover attorney's fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement of this article, including sampling and monitoring expenses. If the amount due is not paid within 30 days after receipt of a notice requiring payment of such costs, or if an appeal is taken, within 30 days after a decision on said appeal, the charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment. 
(Ord. No. 13-2006, § 102.7, 11-6-2006) 
Sec. 109-240. - Variances. 
(a)  Circumstances. The Director or his designee may grant a variance from the requirements of this article if exceptional circumstances applicable to a site or premises exist such that strict adherence to the provisions of this article will result in unnecessary hardship and will not fulfill the intent of this article. Specifically, such variances may be granted in such individual cases of unnecessary hardship upon a finding by the Director or his designee that: 
(1)  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular site in question; 
(2)  The variance is the minimum necessary, considering the impact on upstream and downstream properties; 
(3)  The application of this article to this particular site would create an unnecessary hardship; 
(4)  Such conditions are peculiar to the particular site involved; 
(5)  Such conditions are not the result of any actions of the site owner; and 
(6)  Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public good nor impair the purposes or intent of this article. 
(b)  Request. A written request for a variance shall be required and shall state the specific variance sought and the reasons, with supporting data, that a variance should be granted. The request shall include all information necessary to evaluate the proposed variance. 
(c)  Review of request. The Director or his designee will conduct a review of the request for a variance within 30 working days of receiving the request. 
(Ord. No. 13-2006, § 102.8, 11-6-2006) 
Secs. 109-241—109-258. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - POST-DEVELOPMENT STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FOR NEW DEVELOPMENT AND REDEVELOPMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 109-259. - Title; determination. 
(a)  This article may also be referred to as the "Post-Development Stormwater Management Ordinance." 
(b)  It is hereby determined that: 
(1)  Land development projects and other land use conversions, and their associated changes to land cover, permanently alter the hydrologic response of local watersheds and increase stormwater runoff rates and volumes, which in turn increase flooding, stream channel erosion, and sediment transport and deposition; 
(2)  Land development projects and other land use conversions also contribute to increased nonpoint source pollution and degradation of receiving waters; 
(3)  The impacts of post-development stormwater runoff quantity and quality can adversely affect public safety, public and private property, drinking water supplies, recreation, fish and other aquatic life, property values and other uses of lands and waters; 
(4)  These adverse impacts can be controlled and minimized through the regulation of stormwater runoff quantity and quality from new development and redevelopment, by the use of both structural facilities as well as nonstructural measures, such as the conservation of open space and greenspace areas. The preservation and protection of natural area and greenspace for stormwater management benefits is encouraged through the use of incentives or credits. The state greenspace program provides a mechanism for the preservation and coordination of those greenspace areas which provide stormwater management quality and quantity benefits; 
(5)  Localities in the state are required to comply with a number of both state and federal laws, regulations and permits which require a locality to address the impacts of post-development stormwater runoff quality and nonpoint source pollution. 
Therefore, the city has established this set of stormwater management policies to provide reasonable guidance for the regulation of post-development stormwater runoff for the purpose of protecting local water resources from degradation. It has determined that it is in the public interest to regulate post-development stormwater runoff discharges in order to control and minimize increases in stormwater runoff rates and volumes, post-construction soil erosion and sedimentation, stream channel erosion, and nonpoint source pollution associated with post-development stormwater runoff. 
(Ord. No. 16-2006, § 102-248, 11-6-2006) 
Sec. 109-260. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this article is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety, environment and general welfare by establishing minimum requirements and procedures to control the adverse effects of increased post-development stormwater runoff and nonpoint source pollution associated with new development and redevelopment. It has been determined that proper management of post-development stormwater runoff will minimize damage to public and private property and infrastructure, safeguard the public health, safety, environment and general welfare of the public, and protect water and aquatic resources. This article seeks to meet that purpose through the following objectives: 
(1)  Establish decision-making processes surrounding land development activities that protect the integrity of the watershed and preserve the health of water resources; 
(2)  Require that new development and redevelopment maintain the pre-development hydrologic response in their post-development state as nearly as practicable in order to reduce flooding, streambank erosion, nonpoint source pollution and increases in stream temperature, and maintain the integrity of stream channels and aquatic habitats; 
(3)  Establish minimum post-development stormwater management standards and design criteria for the regulation and control of stormwater runoff quantity and quality; 
(4)  Establish design and application criteria for the construction and use of structural stormwater control facilities that can be used to meet the minimum post-development stormwater management standards; 
(5)  Encourage the use of nonstructural stormwater management and stormwater better site design practices, such as the preservation of greenspace and other conservation areas, to the maximum extent practicable. Coordinate site design plans, which include greenspace, with the county's greenspace protection plan; 
(6)  Establish provisions for the longterm responsibility for and maintenance of structural stormwater control facilities and nonstructural stormwater management practices to ensure that they continue to function as designed, are maintained, and pose no threat to public safety; and 
(7)  Establish administrative procedures for the submission, review, approval and disapproval of stormwater management plans, and for the inspection of approved active projects, and longterm followup. 
(Ord. No. 16-2006, § 102-249, 11-6-2006) 
Sec. 109-261. - Applicability; exemptions. 
(a)  This article shall be applicable to all land development including, but not limited to, site plan applications, subdivision applications, and grading applications, unless exempt pursuant to subsection (b) of this section. These standards apply to any new development or redevelopment site that meets one or more of the following criteria: 
(1)  New development that involves the creation of 5,000 square feet or more of impervious cover, or that involves other land development activities of one acre or more; 
(2)  Redevelopment that includes the creation, addition or replacement of 5,000 square feet or more of impervious cover, or that involves other land development activity of one acre or more; 
(3)  Any new development or redevelopment, regardless of size, that is defined by the Community Development Director to be a hotspot land use; or 
(4)  Land development activities that are smaller than the minimum applicability criteria set forth in subsections (a)(1) and (2) of this section, if such activities are part of a larger common plan of development, even though multiple, separate and distinct land development activities may take place at different times on different schedules. 
(b)  The following activities are exempt from this article: 
(1)  Individual single-family or duplex residential lots that are not part of a subdivision or phased development project; 
(2)  Additions or modifications to existing single-family or duplex residential structures; 
(3)  Agricultural or silvicultural land management activities within areas zoned for these activities; and 
(4)  Repairs to any stormwater management facility or practice deemed necessary by the Community Development Director. 
(Ord. No. 16-2006, § 102-250, 11-6-2006) 
Sec. 109-262. - Designation of administrator. 
The Community Development Director or his designee is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 16-2006, § 102-251, 11-6-2006) 
Sec. 109-263. - Compatibility with other regulations. 
This article is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law. The requirements of this article are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
(Ord. No. 16-2006, § 102-252, 11-6-2006) 
Sec. 109-264. - Stormwater design manual. 
The Community Development Department will utilize the policy, criteria and information including technical specifications and standards in the latest edition of the state stormwater management manual and any relevant local addenda, for the proper implementation of the requirements of this article. The manual may be updated and expanded periodically, based on improvements in science, engineering, monitoring and local maintenance experience. 
(Ord. No. 16-2006, § 102-254, 11-6-2006) 
Sec. 109-265. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Applicant means a person submitting a post-development stormwater management application and plan for approval. 
Channel means a natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water. 
Conservation easement means an agreement between a landowner and the city or other government agency or land trust that permanently protects open space or greenspace on the owner's land by limiting the amount and type of development that can take place, but continues to leave the remainder of the fee interest in private ownership. 
Detention means the temporary storage of stormwater runoff in a stormwater management facility for the purpose of controlling the peak discharge. 
Detention facility means a detention basin or structure designed for the detention of stormwater runoff and gradual release of stored water at controlled rates. 
Developer means a person who undertakes land development activities. 
Development means a land development or land development project. 
Drainage easement means an easement appurtenant or attached to a tract or parcel of land allowing the owner of adjacent tracts or other persons to discharge stormwater runoff onto the tract or parcel of land subject to the drainage easement. 
Erosion and sedimentation control plan means a plan that is designed to minimize the accelerated erosion and sediment runoff at a site during land disturbance activities. 
Extended detention means the detention of stormwater runoff for an extended period, typically 24 hours or greater. 
Extreme flood protection means measures taken to prevent adverse impacts from large low-frequency storm events with a return frequency of 100 years or more. 
Flooding means a volume of surface water that is too great to be confined within the banks or walls of a conveyance or stream channel and that overflows onto adjacent lands. 
Greenspace or open space means permanently protected areas of the site that are preserved in a natural state. 
Hotspot means an area where the use of the land has the potential to generate highly contaminated runoff, with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those typically found in stormwater. 
Hydrologic Soil Group (HSG) means a Natural Resource Conservation Service classification system in which soils are categorized into four runoff potential groups. The groups range from group A soils, with high permeability and little runoff produced, to group D soils, which have low permeability rates and produce much more runoff. 
Impervious cover means a surface composed of any material that significantly impedes or prevents the natural infiltration of water into soil. Impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, rooftops, buildings, streets and roads, and any concrete or asphalt surface. 
Industrial stormwater permit means a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit issued to an industry or group of industries which regulates the pollutant levels associated with industrial stormwater discharges or specifies on-site pollution control strategies. 
Infiltration means the process of percolating stormwater runoff into the subsoil. 
Inspection and maintenance agreement means a written agreement providing for the longterm inspection and maintenance of stormwater management facilities and practices on a site or with respect to a land development project, which when properly recorded in the deed records constitutes a restriction on the title to a site or other land involved in a land development project. 
Jurisdictional wetland means an area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation. 
Land development means any land change, including, but not limited to, clearing, digging, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, construction, paving, and any other installation of impervious cover. 
Land development activities means those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land development. 
Land development project means a discrete land development undertaking. 
New development means a land development activity on a previously undeveloped site. 
Nonpoint source pollution means a form of water pollution that does not originate from a discrete point such as a sewage treatment plant or industrial discharge, but involves the transport of pollutants such as sediment, fertilizers, pesticides, heavy metals, oil, grease, bacteria, organic materials and other contaminants from land to surface water and groundwater via mechanisms such as precipitation, stormwater runoff, and leaching. Nonpoint source pollution is a by-product of land use practices such as agricultural, silvicultural, mining, construction, subsurface disposal and urban runoff sources. 
Nonstructural stormwater management practice or nonstructural practice means any natural or planted vegetation or other nonstructural component of the stormwater management plan that provides for or enhances stormwater quantity and/or quality control or other stormwater management benefits, and includes, but is not limited to, riparian buffers, open and greenspace areas, overland flow filtration areas, natural depressions, and vegetated channels. 
Offsite facility means a stormwater management facility located outside the boundaries of the site. 
On-site facility means a stormwater management facility located within the boundaries of the site. 
Overbank flood protection means measures taken to prevent an increase in the frequency and magnitude of out-of-bank flooding (i.e., flow events that exceed the capacity of the channel and enter the floodplain), and that are intended to protect downstream properties from flooding for the two-year through 25-year frequency storm events. 
Owner means the legal or beneficial owner of a site, including but not limited to, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of the site. 
Permit means the permit issued by the Community Development Department to the applicant which is required for undertaking any land development activity. 
Person means, except to the extent exempted from this article, any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Post-development refers to the time period, or the conditions that may reasonably be expected or anticipated to exist, after completion of the land development activity on a site as the context may require. 
Pre-development refers to the time period, or the conditions that exist, on a site prior to the commencement of a land development project and at the time that plans for the land development of a site are approved by the plan approving authority. Where phased development or plan approval occurs (preliminary grading, roads and utilities, etc.), the existing conditions at the time prior to the first item being approved or permitted shall establish pre-development conditions. 
Project means a land development project. 
Redevelopment means a land development project on a previously developed site, but excludes ordinary maintenance activities, remodeling of existing buildings, resurfacing of paved areas, and exterior changes or improvements which do not materially increase or concentrate stormwater runoff, or cause additional nonpoint source pollution. 
Regional stormwater management facility or regional facility means stormwater management facilities designed to control stormwater runoff from multiple properties, where the owners or developers of the individual properties may assist in the financing of the facility, and the requirement for on-site controls is either eliminated or reduced. 
Runoff means stormwater runoff. 
Site means the parcel of land being developed, or the portion thereof on which the land development project is located. 
Stormwater better site design means nonstructural site design approaches and techniques that can reduce a site's impact on the watershed and can provide for nonstructural stormwater management. Stormwater better site design includes conserving and protecting natural areas and greenspace, reducing impervious cover and using natural features for stormwater management. 
Stormwater management means the collection, conveyance, storage, treatment and disposal of stormwater runoff in a manner intended to prevent increased flood damage, streambank channel erosion, habitat degradation and water quality degradation, and to enhance and promote the public health, safety and general welfare. 
Stormwater management facility means any infrastructure that controls or conveys stormwater runoff. 
Stormwater management measure means any stormwater management facility or nonstructural stormwater practice. 
Stormwater management plan means a document describing how existing runoff characteristics will be affected by a land development project and containing measures for complying with the provisions of this article. 
Stormwater management system means the entire set of structural and nonstructural stormwater management facilities and practices that are used to capture, convey and control the quantity and quality of the stormwater runoff from a site. 
Stormwater retrofit means a stormwater management practice designed for a currently developed site that previously had either no stormwater management practice in place or a practice inadequate to meet the stormwater management requirements of the site. 
Stormwater runoff means the flow of surface water resulting from precipitation. 
Structural stormwater control means a structural stormwater management facility or device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow of such runoff. 
Subdivision means the division of a tract or parcel of land resulting in one or more new lots or building sites for the purpose, whether immediately or in the future, of sale, other transfer of ownership or land development, and includes divisions of land resulting from or made in connection with the layout or development of a new street or roadway or a change in an existing street or roadway. 
(Ord. No. 16-2006, art. 2, 11-6-2006) 
Secs. 109-266—109-293. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 109-294. - Permit application requirements. 
(a)  No owner or developer shall perform any land development activities without first meeting the requirements of this article prior to commencing the proposed activity. 
(b)  Unless specifically exempted by this article, any owner or developer proposing a land development activity shall submit to the Community Development Department a permit application on a form provided by the Community Development Department for that purpose. 
(c)  Unless otherwise exempted by this article, a permit application shall be accompanied by the following items in order to be considered: 
(1)  Stormwater concept plan and consultation meeting certification in accordance with section 109-295; 
(2)  Stormwater management plan in accordance with section 109-296; 
(3)  Inspection and maintenance agreement in accordance with section 109-297, if applicable; 
(4)  Performance bond in accordance with city development regulations, if applicable; and 
(5)  Permit application and plan review fees in accordance with section 109-299. 
(Ord. No. 16-2006, § 102-255, 11-6-2006) 
Sec. 109-295. - Stormwater concept plan and consultation meeting. 
(a)  Before any stormwater management permit application is submitted, it is recommended that the landowner or developer meet with the Community Development Department for a consultation meeting on a concept plan for the post-development stormwater management system to be utilized in the proposed land development project. This consultation meeting should take place at the time of the preliminary plan of subdivision or other early step in the development process. The purpose of this meeting is to discuss the post-development stormwater management measures necessary for the proposed project, as well as to discuss and assess constraints, opportunities and potential ideas for stormwater management designs before the formal site design engineering is commenced. 
(b)  To accomplish this goal the following information should be included in the concept plan which should be submitted in advance of the meeting: 
(1)  Existing conditions/proposed site plans. Existing conditions and proposed site layout sketch plans, which illustrate at a minimum: existing and proposed topography; perennial and intermittent streams; mapping of predominant soils from soil surveys, when available; boundaries of existing predominant vegetation and proposed limits of clearing and grading; and location of existing and proposed roads, buildings, parking areas and other impervious surfaces. 
(2)  Natural resources inventory. A written or graphic inventory of the natural resources at the site and surrounding area as it exists prior to the commencement of the project. This description should include a discussion of soil conditions, forest cover, topography, wetlands, and other native vegetative areas on the site, as well as the location and boundaries of other natural feature protection and conservation areas such as wetlands, lakes, ponds, floodplains, stream buffers and other setbacks, e.g., drinking water well setbacks, septic setbacks, etc. Particular attention should be paid to environmentally sensitive features that provide particular opportunities or constraints for development. 
(3)  Stormwater management system concept plan. A written or graphic concept plan of the proposed post-development stormwater management system including: preliminary selection and location of proposed structural stormwater controls; location of existing and proposed conveyance systems such as grass channels, swales, and storm drains; flow paths; location of floodplain/floodway limits; relationship of site to upstream and downstream properties and drainages; and preliminary location of proposed stream channel modifications, such as bridge or culvert crossings. 
Local watershed plans, the county greenspace projection plan, if applicable, and any relevant resource protection plans will be consulted in the discussion of the concept plan. 
(Ord. No. 16-2006, § 102-256, 11-6-2006) 
Sec. 109-296. - Stormwater management plan requirements. 
(a)  The stormwater management plan shall detail how post-development stormwater runoff will be controlled or managed and how the proposed project will meet the requirements of this article, including the performance criteria set forth in division 3 of this article. 
(b)  This plan shall be in accordance with the criteria established in this section and must be submitted with the stamp and signature of a professional engineer (PE) licensed in the State, who must verify that the design of all stormwater management facilities and practices meets the submittal requirements outlined in the submittal checklist(s) found in the stormwater design manual be prepared under the direct supervisory control of either a registered professional engineer or a registered landscape architect licensed in the State. Sections C, D, E and F shall be prepared under the direct supervisory control of a registered professional engineer, who shall seal and sign the work. Portions of the overall plan may be prepared and stamped by a registered land surveyor licensed in the State as appropriate, such as boundary surveys, contour maps, erosion and sedimentation control plans. 
(c)  The stormwater management plan must ensure that the requirements and criteria in this article are being complied with and that opportunities are being taken to minimize adverse post-development stormwater runoff impacts from the development. The plan shall consist of maps, narrative, and supporting design calculations (hydrologic and hydraulic) for the proposed stormwater management system. The plan shall include all of the information required in the Stormwater Management Site Plan checklist found in the stormwater design manual. This includes: 
(1)  Common address and legal description of site. 
(2)  Vicinity map. 
(3)  Existing conditions hydrologic analysis. The existing condition hydrologic analysis for stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and velocities, which shall include: a topographic map of existing site conditions with the drainage basin boundaries indicated; acreage, soil types and land cover of areas for each sub-basin affected by the project; all perennial and intermittent streams and other surface water features; all existing stormwater conveyances and structural control facilities; direction of flow and exits from the site; analysis of runoff provided by offsite areas upstream of the project site; and methodologies, assumptions, site parameters and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology. For redevelopment sites, predevelopment conditions shall be modeled using the established guidelines for the portion of the site undergoing land development activities. 
(4)  Post-development hydrologic analysis. The post-development hydrologic analysis for stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and velocities, which shall include: a topographic map of developed site conditions with the post-development drainage basin boundaries indicated; total area of post-development impervious surfaces and other land cover areas for each sub-basin affected by the project; calculations for determining the runoff volumes that need to be addressed for each sub-basin for the development project to meet the post-development stormwater management performance criteria in division 3 of this article; location and boundaries of proposed natural feature protection and conservation areas; documentation and calculations for any applicable site design credits that are being utilized; methodologies, assumptions, site parameters and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology. If the land development activity on a redevelopment site constitutes more than 50 percent of the site area for the entire site, then the performance criteria in division 3 of this article must be met for the stormwater runoff from the entire site. 
(5)  Stormwater management system. The description, scaled drawings and design calculations for the proposed post-development stormwater management system, which shall include: a map and/or drawing or sketch of the stormwater management facilities, including the location of nonstructural site design features and the placement of existing and proposed structural stormwater controls, including design water surface elevations, storage volumes available from zero to maximum head, location of inlet and outlets, location of bypass and discharge systems, and all orifice/restrictor sizes; a narrative describing how the selected structural stormwater controls will be appropriate and effective; cross section and profile drawings and design details for each of the structural stormwater controls in the system, including supporting calculations to show that the facility is designed according to the applicable design criteria; a hydrologic and hydraulic analysis of the stormwater management system for all applicable design storms (including stage-storage or outlet rating curves, and inflow and outflow hydrographs); documentation and supporting calculations to show that the stormwater management system adequately meets the post-development stormwater management performance criteria in division 3 of this article; drawings, design calculations, elevations and hydraulic grade lines for all existing and proposed stormwater conveyance elements including stormwater drains, pipes, culverts, catchbasins, channels, swales and areas of overland flow; and where applicable, a narrative describing how the stormwater management system corresponds with any watershed protection plans and/or local greenspace protection plan. 
(6)  Post-development downstream analysis. A downstream peak flow analysis which includes the assumptions, results and supporting calculations to show safe passage of post-development design flows downstream. The analysis of downstream conditions in the report shall address each and every point or area along the project site's boundaries at which runoff will exit the property. The analysis shall focus on the portion of the drainage channel or watercourse immediately downstream from the project. This area shall extend downstream from the project to a point in the drainage basin where the project area is ten percent of the total basin area. In calculating runoff volumes and discharge rates, consideration may need to be given to any planned future upstream land use changes. The analysis shall be in accordance with the stormwater design manual. 
(7)  Construction-phase erosion and sedimentation control plan. An erosion and sedimentation control plan in accordance with the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act or NPDES permit for construction activities. The plan shall also include information on the sequence/phasing of construction and temporary stabilization measures and temporary structures that will be converted into permanent stormwater controls. 
(8)  Landscaping and open space plan. A detailed landscaping and vegetation plan describing the woody and herbaceous vegetation that will be used within and adjacent to stormwater management facilities and practices. The landscaping plan must also include: the arrangement of planted areas, natural and greenspace areas and other landscaped features on the site plan; information necessary to construct the landscaping elements shown on the plan drawings; descriptions and standards for the methods, materials and vegetation that are to be used in the construction; density of plantings; descriptions of the stabilization and management techniques used to establish vegetation; and a description of who will be responsible for ongoing maintenance of vegetation for the stormwater management facility and what practices will be employed to ensure that adequate vegetative cover is preserved. 
(9)  Operations and maintenance plan. A detailed description of ongoing operations and maintenance procedures for stormwater management facilities and practices to ensure their continued function as designed and constructed or preserved. These plans will identify the parts or components of a stormwater management facility or practice that need to be regularly or periodically inspected and maintained, and the equipment and skills or training necessary. The plan shall include an inspection and maintenance schedule, maintenance tasks, responsible parties for maintenance, funding, access and safety issues. Provisions for the periodic review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the maintenance program and the need for revisions or additional maintenance procedures shall be included in the plan. 
(10)  Maintenance access easements. The applicant must ensure access from public rights-of-way to stormwater management facilities and practices requiring regular maintenance at the site for the purpose of inspection and repair by securing all the maintenance access easements needed on a permanent basis. Such access shall be sufficient for all necessary equipment for maintenance activities. Upon final inspection and approval, a plat or document indicating that such easements exist shall be recorded and shall remain in effect even with the transfer of title of the property. 
(11)  Inspection and maintenance agreements. Unless an on-site stormwater management facility or practice is dedicated to and accepted by the Community Development Department, as provided in section 109-297, the applicant must execute an easement and an inspection and maintenance agreement binding on all subsequent owners of land served by an on-site stormwater management facility or practice in accordance section with 109-297. 
(12)  Evidence of acquisition of applicable local and nonlocal permits. The applicant shall certify and provide documentation to the Community Development Department that all other applicable environmental permits have been acquired for the site prior to approval of the stormwater management plan. 
(Ord. No. 16-2006, § 102-257, 11-6-2006; Ord. No. 04-2009, pt. I, 4-6-2009) 
Sec. 109-297. - Stormwater management inspection and maintenance agreements. 
(a)  Prior to the issuance of any permit for a land development activity requiring a stormwater management facility or practice hereunder and for which the Community Development Department requires ongoing maintenance, the applicant or owner of the site must, unless an on-site stormwater management facility or practice is dedicated to and accepted by the Community Development Department, execute an inspection and maintenance agreement, and/or a conservation easement, if applicable, that shall be binding on all subsequent owners of the site. 
(b)  The inspection and maintenance agreement, if applicable, must be approved by the Community Development Department prior to plan approval, and recorded in the deed records upon final plat approval. 
(c)  The inspection and maintenance agreement shall identify by name or official title the person responsible for carrying out the inspection and maintenance. Responsibility for the operation and maintenance of the stormwater management facility or practice, unless assumed by a governmental agency, shall remain with the property owner and shall pass to any successor owner. If portions of the land are sold or otherwise transferred, legally binding arrangements shall be made to pass the inspection and maintenance responsibility to the appropriate successors in title. These arrangements shall designate for each portion of the site, the person to be permanently responsible for its inspection and maintenance. 
(d)  As part of the inspection and maintenance agreement, a schedule shall be developed for when and how often routine inspection and maintenance will occur to ensure proper function of the stormwater management facility or practice. The agreement shall also include plans for annual inspections to ensure proper performance of the facility between scheduled maintenance and shall also include remedies for the default thereof. 
(e)  In addition to enforcing the terms of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the Community Development Department may also enforce all of the provisions for ongoing inspection and maintenance in division 5 of this article. 
(f)  The Community Development Department, in lieu of an inspection and maintenance agreement, may accept dedication of any existing or future stormwater management facility for maintenance, provided such facility meets all the requirements of this article and includes adequate and perpetual access and sufficient area, by easement or otherwise, for inspection and regular maintenance. 
(Ord. No. 16-2006, § 102-258, 11-6-2006) 
Sec. 109-298. - Application procedure. 
(a)  Applications for land development permits shall be filed with the Community Development Department. 
(b)  Permit applications shall include the items set forth in section 109-294 (two copies of the stormwater management plan and the inspection maintenance agreement, if applicable, shall be included). 
(c)  The Community Development Department shall inform the applicant whether the application, stormwater management plan and inspection and maintenance agreement are approved or disapproved. 
(d)  If either the permit application, stormwater management plan or inspection and maintenance agreement are disapproved, the Community Development Director shall notify the applicant of such fact in writing. The applicant may then revise any item not meeting the requirements hereof and resubmit the same, in which event subsection (c) of this section and this subsection shall apply to such resubmittal. 
(e)  Upon a finding by the Community Development Department that the permit application, stormwater management plan and inspection and maintenance agreement, if applicable, meet the requirements of this article, the Community Development Department may issue a permit for the land development project, provided all other legal requirements for the issuance of such permit have been met. 
(f)  Notwithstanding the issuance of the permit, in conducting the land development project, the applicant or other responsible person shall be subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  The applicant shall comply with all applicable requirements of the approved plan and this article and shall certify that all land clearing, construction, land development and drainage will be done according to the approved plan; 
(2)  The land development project shall be conducted only within the area specified in the approved plan; 
(3)  The Community Development Director shall be allowed to conduct periodic inspections of the project; 
(4)  No changes may be made to an approved plan without review and written approval by the Community Development Director; and 
(5)  Upon completion of the project, the applicant or other responsible person shall submit the engineer's report and certificate and as-built plans required by section 109-357. 
(Ord. No. 16-2006, § 102-259, 11-6-2006) 
Sec. 109-299. - Application review fees. 
The fee for review of any stormwater management application shall be based on the fee structure established by the Community Development Department and shall be made prior to the issuance of any building permit for the development. 
(Ord. No. 16-2006, § 102-260, 11-6-2006) 
Sec. 109-300. - Modifications for offsite facilities. 
(a)  The stormwater management plan for each land development project shall provide for stormwater management measures located on the site of the project, unless provisions are made to manage stormwater by an offsite or regional facility. The offsite or regional facility must be located on property legally dedicated for the purpose, must be designed and adequately sized to provide a level of stormwater quantity and quality control that is equal to or greater than that which would be afforded by on-site practices and there must be a legally obligated entity responsible for longterm operation and maintenance of the offsite or regional stormwater facility. In addition, on-site measures shall be implemented, where necessary, to protect upstream and downstream properties and drainage channels from the site to the offsite facility. 
(b)  A stormwater management plan must be submitted to the Community Development Department which shows the adequacy of the offsite or regional facility. 
(c)  To be eligible for a modification, the applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Community Development Department that the use of an offsite or regional facility will not result in the following impacts to upstream or downstream areas: 
(1)  Increased threat of flood damage to public health, life, and property; 
(2)  Deterioration of existing culverts, bridges, dams, and other structures; 
(3)  Accelerated streambank or streambed erosion or siltation; 
(4)  Degradation of in-stream biological functions or habitat; or 
(5)  Water quality impairment in violation of state water quality standards and/or violation of any state or federal regulations. 
(Ord. No. 16-2006, § 102-261, 11-6-2006) 
Secs. 109-301—109-318. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PERFORMANCE CRITERIA 

Sec. 109-319. - Water quality. 
All stormwater runoff generated from a site shall be adequately treated before discharge. It will be presumed that a stormwater management system complies with this requirement if: 
(1)  It is sized to treat the prescribed water quality treatment volume from the site, as defined in the state stormwater management manual; 
(2)  Appropriate structural stormwater controls or nonstructural practices are selected, designed, constructed or preserved, and maintained according to the specific criteria in the state stormwater management manual; and 
(3)  Runoff from hotspot land uses and activities identified by the Community Development Department are adequately treated and addressed through the use of appropriate structural stormwater controls, nonstructural practices and pollution prevention practices. 
(Ord. No. 16-2006, § 102-262, 11-6-2006) 
Sec. 109-320. - Stream channel protection. 
Protection of stream channels from bank and bed erosion and degradation shall be provided by using all of the following three approaches: 
(1)  Preservation, restoration and/or reforestation (with native vegetation) of the applicable stream buffer; 
(2)  Twenty-four-hour extended detention storage of the one-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event; 
(3)  Erosion prevention measures such as energy dissipation and velocity control. 
(Ord. No. 16-2006, § 102-263, 11-6-2006) 
Sec. 109-321. - Overbank flooding protection. 
Downstream overbank flood and property protection shall be provided by controlling (attenuating) the post-development peak discharge rate to the pre-development rate for the 25-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event. If control of the one-year, 24-hour storm under section 109-320(2) is exempted, then peak discharge rate attenuation of the two-year through the 25-year return frequency storm event must be provided. 
(Ord. No. 16-2006, § 102-264, 11-6-2006) 
Sec. 109-322. - Extreme flooding protection. 
Extreme flood and public safety protection shall be provided by controlling and safely conveying the 100-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event such that flooding is not exacerbated. 
(Ord. No. 16-2006, § 102-265, 11-6-2006) 
Sec. 109-323. - Structural stormwater controls. 
(a)  All structural stormwater management facilities shall be selected and designed using the appropriate criteria from the state stormwater management manual. All structural stormwater controls must be designed appropriately to meet their intended function. For other structural stormwater controls not included in the state stormwater management manual, or for which pollutant removal rates have not been provided, the effectiveness and pollutant removal of the structural control must be documented through prior studies, literature reviews, or other means and receive approval from the Community Development Department before being included in the design of a stormwater management system. In addition, if hydrologic or topographic conditions, or land use activities warrant greater control than that provided by the minimum control requirements, the Community Development Department may impose additional requirements deemed necessary to protect upstream and downstream properties and aquatic resources from damage due to increased volume, frequency, and rate of stormwater runoff or increased nonpoint source pollution loads created on the site in question. 
(b)  Applicants shall consult the state stormwater management manual for guidance on the factors that determine site design feasibility when selecting and locating a structural stormwater control. 
(Ord. No. 16-2006, § 102-266, 11-6-2006) 
Sec. 109-324. - Stormwater credits for nonstructural measures. 
The use of one or more site design measures by the applicant may allow for a reduction in the water quality treatment volume required under section 109-319(1). The applicant may, if approved by the Community Development Department, take credit for the use of stormwater better site design practices and reduce the water quality volume requirement. For each potential credit, there is a minimum set of criteria and requirements which identify the conditions or circumstances under which the credit may be applied. The site design practices that qualify for this credit and the criteria and procedures for applying and calculating the credits are included in the state stormwater management manual. 
(Ord. No. 16-2006, § 102-267, 11-6-2006) 
Sec. 109-325. - Drainage system guidelines. 
Stormwater conveyance facilities, which may include but are not limited to culverts, stormwater drainage pipes, catchbasins, drop inlets, junction boxes, headwalls, gutter, swales, channels, ditches, and energy dissipaters shall be provided when necessary for the protection of public rights-of-way and private properties adjoining project sites and/or public rights-of-way. Stormwater conveyance facilities that are designed to carry runoff from more than one parcel, existing or proposed, shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Methods to calculate stormwater flows shall be in accordance with the stormwater design manual; 
(2)  All culverts, pipe systems and open channel flow systems shall be sized in accordance with the stormwater management plan using the methods included in the stormwater design manual; and 
(3)  Design and construction of stormwater conveyance facilities shall be in accordance with the criteria and specifications found in the stormwater design manual. 
(Ord. No. 16-2006, § 102-268, 11-6-2006) 
Sec. 109-326. - Dam design guidelines. 
Any land-disturbing activity that involves a site which proposes a dam shall comply with the Georgia Safe Dams Act (O.C.G.A. § 12-5-370 et seq.) and rules for dam safety, as applicable. 
(Ord. No. 16-2006, § 102-269, 11-6-2006) 
Secs. 109-327—109-355. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - CONSTRUCTION INSPECTIONS 

Sec. 109-356. - Inspections to ensure plan compliance during construction. 
(a)  Periodic inspections of the stormwater management system construction shall be conducted by the staff of the Community Development Department or conducted and certified by a professional engineer who has been approved by the Community Development Department. Construction inspections shall utilize the approved stormwater management plan for establishing compliance. 
(b)  All inspections shall be documented with written reports that contain the following information: 
(1)  The date and location of the inspection; 
(2)  Whether construction is in compliance with the approved stormwater management plan; 
(3)  Variations from the approved construction specifications; and 
(4)  Any other variations or violations of the conditions of the approved stormwater management plan. 
If any violations are found, the applicant shall be notified in writing of the nature of the violation and the required corrective actions. 
(Ord. No. 16-2006, § 102-270, 11-6-2006) 
Sec. 109-357. - Final inspection and as-built plans. 
Upon completion of a project, and before a certificate of occupancy shall be granted, the applicant is responsible for certifying that the completed project is in accordance with the approved stormwater management plan. All applicants are required to submit actual as-built plans for any stormwater management facilities or practices after final construction is completed. The plan must show the final design specifications for all stormwater management facilities and practices and must be certified by a professional engineer. A final inspection by the Community Development Department is required before the release of any performance securities can occur. 
(Ord. No. 16-2006, § 102-271, 11-6-2006) 
Secs. 109-358—109-387. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - ONGOING INSPECTION AND MAINTENANCE OF STORMWATER FACILITIES AND PRACTICES 

Sec. 109-388. - Longterm maintenance inspection of stormwater facilities and practices. 
(a)  Stormwater management facilities and practices included in a stormwater management plan which are subject to an inspection and maintenance agreement must undergo ongoing inspections to document maintenance and repair needs and ensure compliance with the requirements of the agreement, the plan and this article. 
(b)  A stormwater management facility or practice shall be inspected on a periodic basis by the responsible person in accordance with the approved inspection and maintenance agreement. In the event that the stormwater management facility has not been maintained and/or becomes a danger to public safety or public health, the Community Development Department shall notify the person responsible for carrying out the maintenance plan by registered or certified mail to the person specified in the inspection and maintenance agreement. The notice shall specify the measures needed to comply with the agreement and the plan and shall specify the time within which such measures shall be completed. If the responsible person fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the Community Development Department may correct the violation as provided in section 109-391. 
(c)  Inspection programs by the Community Development Department may be established on any reasonable basis including, but not limited to: routine inspections; random inspections; inspections based upon complaints or other notice of possible violations; and joint inspections with other agencies inspecting under environmental or safety laws. Inspections may include, but are not limited to: reviewing maintenance and repair records; sampling discharges, surface water, groundwater, and material or water in stormwater management facilities; and evaluating the condition of stormwater management facilities and practices. 
(Ord. No. 16-2006, § 102-272, 11-6-2006) 
Sec. 109-389. - Right of entry for inspection. 
The terms of the inspection and maintenance agreement shall provide for the Community Development Department to enter the property at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner for the purpose of inspection. This includes the right to enter a property when it has a reasonable basis to believe that a violation of this article is occurring or has occurred and to enter when necessary for abatement of a public nuisance or correction of a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 16-2006, § 102-273, 11-6-2006) 
Sec. 109-390. - Records of maintenance activities. 
Parties responsible for the operation and maintenance of a stormwater management facility shall provide records of all maintenance and repairs to the Community Development Department. 
(Ord. No. 16-2006, § 102-274, 11-6-2006) 
Sec. 109-391. - Failure to maintain. 
If a responsible person fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the Community Development Department, after 30 days' written notice (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient), may correct a violation of the design standards or maintenance requirements by performing the necessary work to place the facility or practice in proper working condition. The Community Development Department may assess the owner of the facility for the cost of repair work which shall be a lien on the property, and may be placed on the ad valorem tax bill for such property and collected in the ordinary manner for such taxes. 
(Ord. No. 16-2006, § 102-275, 11-6-2006) 
Secs. 109-392—109-410. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - VIOLATIONS, ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES 

Sec. 109-411. - Enforcement. 
Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this article or the requirements of an approved stormwater management plan or permit may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this division. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described in this division shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
(Ord. No. 16-2006, art. 7, 11-6-2006) 
Sec. 109-412. - Notice of violation. 
(a)  If the Community Development Department determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved stormwater management plan or the provisions of this article, it shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this article without having first secured a permit therefore, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. 
(b)  The notice of violation shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
(2)  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
(3)  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
(4)  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the stormwater management plan or this article and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
(5)  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
(6)  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the Community Development Department by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days after the notice of violation (except, in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient). 
(Ord. No. 16-2006, § 102-276, 11-6-2006) 
Sec. 109-413. - Penalties. 
In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the Community Development Department shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten days (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the Community Development Department may take any one or more of the following actions or impose any one or more of the following penalties. 
(1)  Stop work order. The Community Development Department may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violation. 
(2)  Withhold certificate of occupancy. The Community Development Department may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
(3)  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The Community Development Department may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the land development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated upon such conditions as the Community Development Department may deem necessary to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
(4)  Civil penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days, or such greater period as the Community Development Department shall deem appropriate (except, in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient) after the Community Development Department has taken one or more of the actions described above, the Community Development Department may impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(5)  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this article, the Community Development Department may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in the municipal court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 60 days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 16-2006, § 102-277, 11-6-2006) 
Secs. 109-414—109-430. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - SOIL EROSION, SEDIMENTATION AND POLLUTION CONTROL[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 11-2010, pt. I, adopted July 7, 2010, amended art. VIII in its entirety and enacted similar provisions as set out herein. The former art. VIII derived from Ord. No. 15-2006, §§ 102-112—102-131, 102-133, and 102-134, adopted Nov. 6, 2006. 
State Law reference— Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, O.C.G.A. §12-7-1 et seq.; local land disturbing activity ordinances, O.C.G.A. §12-7-4. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 109-431. - Short title. 
This chapter [article] shall be known as the "City of Norcross Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Ordinance" and may be used herein as "this chapter [article]." 
(Ord. No. 11-2010, pt. I, 7-7-2010) 
Sec. 109-432. - Purpose and intent. 
The real potential exists for excessive quantities of soil to erode from areas that are undergoing land disturbance such as housing developments, industrial sites, and roads. The resulting sediment could clog storm sewers and road ditches, add mud to streams and silt lakes, rivers, and reservoirs. Excessive sediment limits the use of water for most beneficial purposes. Sediment choked streams are unsightly and their reduced channel capacity can result in flooding and associated damages, including the threat to the public health and safety. Therefore, it is the purpose of this article to effectively contain soil erosion and sedimentation on the parcels where land is being disturbed by requiring provisions for water disposal and the protection of soil surfaces prior to, during, and after the land disturbance in order to promote the safety, public health, convenience, and general welfare of the citizens of city. 
(Ord. No. 11-2010, pt. I, 7-7-2010) 
Sec. 109-433. - Rules applying to text. 
For the purpose of this article certain rules of construction apply to the text as follows: 
(1)  Words used in the present tense include the future tense; and the singular includes the plural, unless the context clearly indicates contrary. 
(2)  The word "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary. 
(3)  The word "may" is permissive. 
(4)  Except as specifically defined herein, all words used in this article have their common dictionary definition. 
(Ord. No. 11-2010, pt. I, 7-7-2010) 
Sec. 109-434. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article unless otherwise specifically stated: 
Best management practices (BMPs) means sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" published by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
Board means the board of natural resources. 
Buffer means the area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
Certified personnel means a person who has successfully completed the appropriated certification course approved by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission. 
Commission means the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission. 
CPESC means certified professional in erosion and sediment control with current certification by EnviroCert, Inc., which is also referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc. 
Cut means a portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed, or will be removed, by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to the excavated surface. Also known as "excavation". 
Department means the Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR). 
Design professional means a professional licensed by the state of Georgia in the field of engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying; or a person that is a certified professional in erosion and sediment control (CPESC) with a current certification by EnviroCert, Inc. Design Professionals shall practice in a manner that complies with applicable Georgia law governing professional licensure. 
Director means the director of the environmental protection division or an authorized representative. 
District means the Gwinnett County Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Division means the environmental protection division (EPD) of the department of natural resources. 
Drainage structure means a device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for storm water management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
Erosion means the process by which the land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Erosion and sediment control plan means a plan required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, O.C.G.A. chapter 12-7, that includes, as a minimum protections at least as stringent as the state general permit, best management practices, and requirements in section 109-471. 
Fill means a portion of land surface or area to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground or an excavation. 
Final stabilization means all soil-disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that has been certified by EPD for waste disposal, 100 percent of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of 70 percent or greater, or landscaped according to the plan (uniformly covered with landscaping materials in planned landscape areas), or equivalent permanent stabilization measures as defined in the manual (excluding a crop of annual vegetation and seeding of target crop perennials appropriate for the region). Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction. 
Finished grade means the final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design approved by the Department. 
Grading means altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Ground elevation means the original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Land-disturbing activity means any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, clearing and grubbing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in subsection 109-452(5). 
Larger common plan of development or sale means a contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this section, the term "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
Local issuing authority (LIA) means the governing authority of any county or municipality which is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a), in this article, the City Community Development Department. 
Mayor and Council means the Mayor and Council of the City of Norcross, Georgia. 
Metropolitan River Protection Act means a state law referenced as O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq., which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
Natural ground surface means the ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
Nephelometric turbidity units (NTUs) means numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed or suspended particles are present. 
NOI means a notice of intent form provided by EPD for coverage under the state general permit. 
NOT means a notice of termination form provided by EPD to terminate coverage under the state general permit. 
Operator means the party that has: 
(1)  Operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or 
(2)  Day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with storm water pollution prevention plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the storm water pollution prevention plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
Outfall means the location where stormwater in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance leaves a facility or site or, if there is a receiving water on site, becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water. 
Permit means the authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this ordinance. 
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, corporation, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of the state, interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Phase or phased means subparts or segments of construction projects where the subpart or segment is constructed and stabilized prior to completing construction activities on the entire construction site. 
Project means the entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
Properly designed means designed in accordance with the design requirements and specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" (manual) published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted and amendments to the manual as approved by the commission up until the date of NOI submittal. 
Roadway drainage structure means a device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled way consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Sediment means solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water, ice or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation means the process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
Soil and water conservation district approved plan means an erosion and sedimentation control plan approved in writing the Gwinnett County Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Stabilization means the process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
State general permit means the National Pollution Discharge Elimination System general permit for storm water runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 USC 1251 et seq., and O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f). 
State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural and artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership or corporation. 
Structural erosion, sedimentation and pollution control practices means practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control measures are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures, and sediment traps, etc. Such measures are found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Trout streams means all streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the Game and Fish Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act (O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq.). Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures means: 
(1)  Measures for the stabilization of erosive or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with but not limited to the following: 
a.  Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing longterm vegetative cover; 
b.  Temporary seeding producing short term vegetative cover; or 
c.  Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
(2)  Such measures are found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Watercourse means any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Wetlands means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
(Ord. No. 11-2010, pt. I, 7-7-2010; Ord. No. 02-2012, pt. I, 1-3-2012; Ord. No. 08-2016 , § I, 9-6-2016; Ord. No. 14-2018 , § I, 10-1-2018) 
Sec. 109-435. - Adoption. 
This article shall become effective immediately upon adoption by the Mayor and Council and shall be incorporated into the Code of Ordinances, City of Norcross, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 11-2010, pt. I, 7-7-2010) 
Sec. 109-436. - Liability. 
(a)  Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this article nor the compliance with the provisions of this article shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the city for damage to any person or property. 
(b)  The fact that a land-disturbing activity for which a land-disturbing permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of, nor create a presumption of, a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the land-disturbing permit. 
(c)  No provision of this article shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved there under or pollute any waters of the state as defined thereby. 
(d)  Nothing contained in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. shall prevent any local issuing authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain stream buffer requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in Sections 109-470 and 109-471. 
(Ord. No. 11-2010, pt. I, 7-7-2010) 
Sec. 109-437. - Conflicting regulations. 
All regulations or parts of regulations of the Code of Ordinances, in conflict with this article shall be and the same are hereby repealed in their portions so in conflict; provided, however, that it is not the intent of this article to repeal or affect any law of the state, or any code or ordinance of the City adopted as a requirement of state law, in which case the most restrictive shall control. 
(Ord. No. 11-2010, pt. I, 7-7-2010) 
Sec. 109-438. - Validity. 
If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase, or provision of this article shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, such decisions shall not affect the remaining portions of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 11-2010, pt. I, 7-7-2010) 
Secs. 109-439—109-451. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - EXEMPTIONS 

Sec. 109-452. - Exempt land-disturbing activities. 
This article shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
(1)  Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72, "The Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968;" 
(2)  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; 
(3)  Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
(4)  The construction of single-family residences when such construction disturbs less than one acre and is not part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre and not otherwise exempted under this section; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 and this section. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this section, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to article 2 of chapter 5 of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer zone, no land-disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, but the director of EPD may grant variances to no less than 25 feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least 25 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b) and the buffer zones provided by this section shall be enforced by the local issuing authority; 
(5)  Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, "Definitions", to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including but not limited to cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including but not limited to chicken, hens, and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; and farm buildings and farm ponds; 
(6)  Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land-disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in subsections 109-471(15) and (16), no other land-disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three years after completion of such forestry practices; 
(7)  Any project carried out under the active technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service of the United States Department of Agriculture. This excludes those land-disturbing activities undertaken by a person who has requested technical advice only rather than active participation from the Natural Resources Conservation Service; 
(8)  Any project involving 5,000 square feet or less of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre or within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this section, the term "state waters" excludes channels and drainage ways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves 5,000 square feet or less of disturbed area and which is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainage way, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located. The provisions of this section shall not apply to those projects specifically exempted by subsections (1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7), (9), or (10) of this section; 
(9)  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the Georgia Department of Transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, the Georgia Tollway Authority, or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of the Georgia Department of Transportation or the Georgia Tollway Authority which disturb one or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7.1; except where the Georgia Department of Transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the State Road and Tollway Authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the local issuing authority, the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; 
(10)  Any land disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and 
(11)  Any public water system reservoir. 
(Ord. No. 11-2010, pt. I, 7-7-2010; Ord. No. 02-2012, pt. I, 1-3-2012; Ord. No. 08-2016 , § I, 9-6-2016) 
Secs. 109-453—109-468. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS FOR EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL USING BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES 

Sec. 109-469. - General provisions. 
Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land-disturbing activities if requirements of the ordinance and the NPDES General Permit are not met. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities that are not exempted by this article shall contain provisions for the application of soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices shall conform to the requirements of sections 109-470 and 109-471. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion, sedimentation and pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity in accordance with requirements of this ordinance and the NPDES General Permit. 
(Ord. No. 11-2010, pt. I, 7-7-2010) 
Sec. 109-470. - Minimum requirements/best management practices (BMPs). 
(a)  Best management practices as set forth in this section and section 109-471 shall be required for all land-disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with subsection (b) or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of stormwater issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act". As used in this section, the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b). 
(b)  A discharge of stormwater runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by the local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units (NTUs) for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten nephelometric turbidity units (NTUs) for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines as may be issued by the director. This section shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single-family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five acres. 
(c)  Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by city or of any state general permit issued by the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such failure occurs. 
(d)  The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land-disturbing activities occur. 
(e)  The LIA may set more stringent buffer requirements than stated in subsections 109-471(15) and (16), in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(c). 
(Ord. No. 11-2010, pt. I, 7-7-2010) 
Sec. 109-471. - Additional minimum requirements. 
The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. for the purpose of governing land-disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit; and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation which are consistent with, and no less stringent than the state general permit, and those practices contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted, shall be observed by all land disturbers and plan preparers, as well as the following: 
(1)  Stripping of vegetation, regrading, and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; 
(2)  Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum; 
(3)  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practical erosion potential; 
(4)  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected, and supplemented; 
(5)  The disturbed areas and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
(6)  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; 
(7)  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development. The disturbed area shall be stabilized with temporary vegetation or mulch if land-disturbing activity temporarily ceases for more than 14 calendar days; 
(8)  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control measures shall be installed as soon as practicable. The disturbed area shall be stabilized with permanent vegetation if land-disturbing activity ceases for more than 30 calendar days; 
(9)  To the extent necessary, sediment in run-off water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this section, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; 
(10)  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping surface of fills; 
(11)  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property; 
(12)  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
(13)  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings shall be kept to a minimum; 
(14)  Land-disturbing activity plans for erosion and sedimentation control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in subsection 109-470(b); 
(15)  Except as provided in subsection (16), there is established a 25-foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, or where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented; or along any ephemeral stream. As used in this provision, the term "ephemeral stream" means a stream that under normal circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; that has the channel located above the groundwater table year round; for which groundwater is not a source of water; and for which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow. Unless exempted as along an ephemeral stream, the buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to part 6 of article 5 of chapter 5 of the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act" shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director as provided in this section. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and it shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the construction site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: 
1.  Stream crossings for water lines; or 
2.  Stream crossings for sewer lines. 
(16)  There is established a 50-foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" pursuant to article 2 of chapter 5 of title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of 25 gallons per minute or less shall have a 25-foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the board, so long as any such pipe must stop short of the downstream landowner's property, and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land-disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and it shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the construction site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed: provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: 
1.  Stream crossings for water lines; or 
2.  Stream crossings for sewer lines. 
(Ord. No. 11-2010, pt. I, 7-7-2010) 
Sec. 109-472. - Proof or presumption of violation by injury. 
The fact that land-disturbing activity for which a land-disturbing permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of, nor create a presumption of, a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of a land-disturbing permit. 
(Ord. No. 11-2010, pt. I, 7-7-2010) 
Secs. 109-473—109-488. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PERMIT APPLICATION AND PLAN REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 109-489. - General. 
The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall review the general development plans and detailed plans. The local issuing authority shall review the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall review the zoning resolution, storm water management regulations, subdivision regulations, flood damage prevention regulations, this article, and any other ordinances, rules, regulations or permits, which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. However, the owner and/or operator are the only parties who may obtain a permit. 
(Ord. No. 11-2010, pt. I, 7-7-2010) 
Sec. 109-490. - Permit requirements. 
(a)  Land-disturbing permit required. No person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of the City without first obtaining a permit from the City Community Development Department to perform such activity and providing a copy of notice of intent submitted to EPD if applicable. 
(b)  Application submittal. The application for a permit shall be submitted to the City Community Development Department and must include the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in section 109-491. Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans, together with supporting data, must demonstrate affirmatively that the land-disturbing activity proposed will be carried out in such a manner that the provisions of sections 109-470 and 109-471 of this ordinance will be met. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by four copies of the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan in accordance with EPD rule 391-3-7-.10. 
(c)  Fees. 
(1)  A land-disturbing permit fee, in an amount as established by a separate resolution by the Mayor and Council, shall be charged for each acre or fraction thereof in the project area. 
(2)  In addition to the land-disturbing permit fee, fees shall be assessed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5.23(a)(5), provided that such fees shall not exceed $80.00 per acre of land-disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land-disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. In a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a), half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the Georgia EPD; except that any and all fees due from an entity that is required to give notice pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17(9) or O.C.G.A. § 12-7-18(10) shall be submitted in full to the Georgia EPD regardless of the existence of a local issuing authority in the jurisdiction. 
(d)  Review by the District. Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the Local Issuing Authority shall refer the application and plan to the District for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. The District shall approve or disapprove a plan within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the District to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the District review shall be forwarded to the Local Issuing Authority. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the District, and any variances required by subsections 109-471(15) and 109-471(16) have been obtained, all fees have been paid, and bonding, if required as per subsection 109-490(j), have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the Local Issuing Authority and the District have entered into an agreement which allows the Local Issuing Authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the District. The Local Issuing Authority with plan review authority shall approve or disapprove a revised plan submittal within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the local issuing Authority with plan review authority to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the revised plan submittal. 
(e)  Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than 45 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary and all applicable fees have been paid prior to permit issuance. The permit shall include conditions under which the activity may be undertaken. 
(f)  Any land-disturbing activities by a local issuing authority shall be subject to the same requirements of this article, and any other ordinances relating to land development, as are applied to private persons and the division shall enforce such requirements upon the local issuing authority. 
(g)  [Phased development.] If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
(h)  Permit suspension, revocation, or modification. The land-disturbing permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the local issuing authority, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or the holder's successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or the holder's successor in title is in violation of this article. A holder of a land-disturbing permit shall notify any successor in title to the holder as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
(i)  If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this article section, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three years prior to the date of filing the application under consideration, the local issuing authority may deny the permit application, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7 (f)(1). 
(j)  The local issuing authority may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land-disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this section or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(Ord. No. 11-2010, pt. I, 7-7-2010; Ord. No. 02-2012, pt. I, 1-3-2012) 
Sec. 109-491. - Plan requirements. 
(a)  Plans shall meet minimum requirements. Plans shall be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in sections 109-470 and 109-471, or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" is hereby incorporated by reference into this article. The plan for the land-disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and storm water management facilities, local ordinances or regulations and state laws. Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature and seal of the certified design professional. Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspections or any land disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on his or her level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission and in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(b)  Data required for plan . Data required for site plan shall include all the information required from the appropriate erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan review checklist established by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
(c)  Property owner responsibility for maintenance. Maintenance of all soil erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices, whether temporary or permanent, shall be at all times the responsibility of the property owner. 
(Ord. No. 11-2010, pt. I, 7-7-2010) 
Secs. 109-492—109-507. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - ADMINISTRATION AND INSPECTIONS 

Sec. 109-508. - Administration. 
This article shall be administered, interpreted, and enforced by the director of the City Community Development Department. All other ordinances or regulations referenced herein shall be administered by the directors of the departments of the City responsible for such codes and regulations as may be established by the Mayor and Council. 
(Ord. No. 11-2010, pt. I, 7-7-2010) 
Sec. 109-509. - Inspection. 
(a)  The Community Development Department will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which land-disturbing permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures and practices required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also the local issuing authority shall regulate primary, secondary and tertiary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Tertiary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance where the tertiary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, with additional on-site recommendations of the department, or with the provisions of this article, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time period specified, the person shall be deemed to be in violation of this article. 
(b)  The local issuing authority must amend its ordinances to the extent appropriate within 12 months of any amendments to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975. 
(c)  The City Community Development Department shall have the power to conduct such investigations as reasonably deemed necessary to carry out the duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land-disturbing activities. 
(d)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the local issuing authority, the commission, the district, or division who requests entry for the purpose of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(e)  The district or the commission or both shall semi-annually review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). The district or the commission or both may provide technical assistance to any county or municipality for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the county's or municipality's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control program. The district or the commission shall notify the division and request investigation by the division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. 
(f)  The division may periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8 (a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of a governing authority's ordinance and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the governing authority. If such review indicates that the governing authority of any county or municipality certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(e), the division shall notify the governing authority of the county or municipality in writing. The governing authority of any county or municipality so notified shall have 90 days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as a local issuing authority. If the county or municipality does not take necessary corrective action within 90 days after notification by the division, the division shall revoke the certification of the county or municipality as a local issuing authority. 
(Ord. No. 11-2010, pt. I, 7-7-2010) 
Secs. 109-510—109-525. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - EDUCATION AND CERTIFICATION 

Sec. 109-526. - Required. 
(a)  Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(b)  For each site on which land-disturbing activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary, secondary, or tertiary permittee, as defined in the state general permit, shall have as a minimum one person who is in responsible charge of erosion and sedimentation control activities on behalf of said entity or person and meets the applicable education or training certification requirements developed by the commission present on site whenever land-disturbing activities are conducted on that site. A project site shall herein be defined as any land-disturbance site or multiple sites within a larger common plan of development or sale permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the state general permit. 
(c)  Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit but otherwise requiring certified personnel on site may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of this article. 
(d)  If a state general permittee who has operational control of land-disturbing activities for a site has met the certification requirements of O.C.G.A. 12-7-19(b)(1), then any person or entity involved in land-disturbing activity at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee shall meet those educational requirements specified in O.C.G.A § 12-7-19(b)(4) and shall not be required to meet any educational requirements that exceed those specified in said paragraph. 
(Ord. No. 11-2010, pt. I, 7-7-2010) 
Secs. 109-527—109-543. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - ADMINISTRATIVE AND JUDICIAL APPEAL 

Sec. 109-544. - Administrative appeal. 
(a)  An appeal from the requirements of this article or of the decision or interpretation of the director shall be submitted by the property owner on an application form as prescribed by the department, along with such fees as may be established from time to time by the Mayor and Council. 
(b)  The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the local issuing authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sediment control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of this article; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the Mayor and Council to be scheduled in their normal course of business after receipt by the local issuing authority of written notice of appeal. 
(c)  The property owner shall state clearly why the requirements of this article cannot be met or why the interpretation or decision of the Director is in error. 
(d)  The director shall transmit a copy of the appeal application to all affected county departments, including the Soil and Water Conservation District, soliciting their respective recommendations and coordinate the recommendations of each respondent. The other responses together with the director's recommendation shall be forwarded to the Mayor and Council, with the exception of appeals from buffer variance request decisions, for final action in their normal course of business. Buffer variance appeals shall be decided upon by the Soil and Water Conservation District in their normal course of business whose decision shall be final. An appeal in conflict with the provisions of the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act (O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.), shall not be considered or approved by the Mayor and Council. 
(e)  After final action by the Mayor and Council, the Director shall transmit a copy of said action to the City Soil and Water Conservation District and to the property owner. 
(Ord. No. 11-2010, pt. I, 7-7-2010) 
Sec. 109-545. - Judicial appeal. 
Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of the Director, after exhausting his administrative appeals, shall have the right to appeal de novo to the Superior Court of Gwinnett County. 
(Ord. No. 11-2010, pt. I, 7-7-2010) 
Secs. 109-546—109-561. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - PENALTIES 

Sec. 109-562. - Failure to obtain a land-disturbing permit. 
If any person commences any land-disturbing activity in which a land-disturbing permit is required by this article without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of their business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. 
(Ord. No. 11-2010, pt. I, 7-7-2010) 
Sec. 109-563. - Stop work orders. 
The following procedures shall apply to the issuance of stop work orders: 
(1)  For the first and second violations of the provisions of this article, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five calendar days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five calendar days, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a stop work order requiring that land-disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land-disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the Director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop work order in lieu of a written warning; 
(2)  For a third and each subsequent violation, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop work order; 
(3)  All stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; and 
(4)  When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and/or maintained, a stop work order shall be issued by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee. All such stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop work orders shall apply to all land-disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. 
(Ord. No. 11-2010, pt. I, 7-7-2010) 
Sec. 109-564. - Bond forfeiture. 
If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this ordinance and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of subsection 109-490(j). The local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(Ord. No. 11-2010, pt. I, 7-7-2010) 
Sec. 109-565. - Monetary penalties. 
Any person who violates any provision of this article, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this article or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director issued as provided in this article, shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article, notwithstanding any provisions in any City charter to the contrary, municipal courts shall be authorized to impose penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of county ordinances, any magistrate court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of this article, under county ordinances approved pursuant to state law under this article shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation or may impose a sentence of imprisonment not to exceed 60 days in jail or both. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
(1)  The court shall have the power and authority to order the violation corrected in compliance with the requirements of this article and the court may require payment of restitution or impose other punishment allowed by law. 
(2)  In any case in which any land is, or is proposed to be, used or activities are undertaken in violation of this article, the county, in addition to other remedies provided by law, may petition for a restraining order, injunction, abatement, or take any other appropriate legal action or proceeding through a court of competent jurisdiction to prevent, restrain, or abate such unlawful use or activity. 
(Ord. No. 11-2010, pt. I, 7-7-2010) 
Sec. 109-566. - Issuance of certificates. 
Certificates of development conformance (CDC), certificates of occupancy (CO) or certificates of completion (CC) shall not be issued for any building unless all erosion control measures as shown on the approved plans shall have been completed in accordance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 11-2010, pt. I, 7-7-2010) 
Chapter 111 - TEMPORARY SHELTERS 

Sec. 111-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Temporary shelter means a nonprofit, institutional-residential use, generally utilized to remediate crisis or duress, which provides supervised, nonpermanent room, board and other related services to an undetermined number of residents for a period of time presumed to be temporary in nature, and for a maximum of six months. Supervision will be conducted by a manager or other adult person who is/are responsible for specified duties associated with the use. Related services include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Feeding and food preparation, provided food is prepared in a central kitchen and not in individual rooms or suites; 
(2)  Clothing; counseling; job training; mentoring; health and medical education and awareness programs; legal assistance; social services; child care. 
Temporary shelter uses will not be otherwise regulated by local government ordinances referencing the housing of unrelated individuals. 
(Ord. No. 11-2007, § 107-1, 4-1-2007) 
Sec. 111-2. - Management. 
(a)  Each shelter shall have management which assumes full legal responsibility for the overall conduct of the shelter. 
(b)  The ownership of the shelter shall be fully disclosed in its application for permit. In the case of corporate partnership and other bodies created by statute, the corporation officers and all others owning ten percent or more of the corporate stock or ownership shall be disclosed in the application for permit. 
(c)  The management shall be responsible for compliance with all applicable laws and regulations pertaining to the shelter. 
(d)  The management shall certify in its application the name of the person to whom the responsibility for the management of the shelter is delegated, including the carrying out of the rules and policies adopted by the governing body. This person shall be known as the manager and have his legal authority defined in writing. 
(e)  The manager and each responsible person or employee must submit to a background criminal investigation. 
(f)  The city shall be notified when there are changes in ownership, management, and operational objective. 
(Ord. No. 11-2007, § 107-2, 4-1-2007) 
Sec. 111-3. - Administration. 
(a)  Each shelter shall develop a written statement of policies and procedures outlining the responsibilities of the management and of guests. The statement shall include procedures for handling acts which are not consistent with the policies of the shelter. 
(b)  Each shelter shall have a written statement regarding fees, if any, and services which are provided, designating those which are included in the basic fee schedule and those which are available on a reimbursement or additional fee schedule. 
(c)  Each shelter shall provide sleeping accommodations and food service facilities to all guests of the shelter. 
(d)  Each shelter shall meet the following standards: 
(1)  The manager and all designated responsible persons shall be at least 25 years of age and shall have certification of training in basic first aid at a minimum of every five years. All staff participating in guest care shall be in good health and by training and experience be capable of meeting the demands of the position; 
(2)  The manager of a shelter shall designate in writing a responsible person to carry out his responsibilities and duties in his absence; 
(3)  There shall be a written procedure for handling emergencies, available to all staff, which has been included with and approved by the city as a part of the application for a permit. 
(e)  The operator agrees that it will carry and maintain, at its sole cost, general commercial liability insurance (or reasonable equivalent thereto) which shall provide coverage for operator against claims for personal injury, bodily injury or death, property damage or any other claim. Such insurance coverage shall have policy limits of no less than $1,000,000.00 for each occurrence. The operator shall cause to be delivered to the city satisfactory evidence of such insurance coverage prior to obtaining a certificate of occupancy and initial occupation certificate, and such evidence shall be delivered to the city yearly thereafter upon each subsequent application for an occupation certificate. 
(Ord. No. 11-2007, § 107-3, 4-1-2007) 
Sec. 111-4. - Admissions. 
(a)  A complete and current schedule of all fees, if any, and services shall be available and a copy shall be provided to each applicant and guest. 
(b)  Applicants requiring continuous medical or nursing services shall not be admitted or retained. 
(c)  Persons admitted to a shelter may include those with impaired capacity of self care only if they are not bedfast or they do not require medical or nursing care and treatment on a continuing basis or they do not require skilled observations of symptoms and reactions or accurate recording of actions by licensed nursing personnel for the purpose of reporting to their physician. 
(d)  Medical or nursing services required on a periodic basis, or for short-term illness, shall not be provided as a service of the shelter. 
(e)  Managers may require a personal interview and/or a preadmission evaluation of applicant's health from an outside resource. 
(f)  An admission agreement, in writing, shall be entered into between the shelter and the guest. Such agreement shall include provisions for manager's continuous assessment of each guest's needs and referral to appropriate resources and for transfer or discharge, if the guest's condition changes. The guest shall be given a signed copy of the agreement and a copy signed by both parties (guest and management) shall be retained in the guest files maintained by the manager of the shelter. 
(g)  A guest may not be required to perform services for the shelter except as provided for in the admission agreement. A guest and manager may agree that a guest will perform certain activities or services in the shelter. Such agreement shall be set forth in the admission agreement. 
(h)  Each guest prior to the execution of the admission agreement shall have an opportunity to read the agreement. In the event that a guest is unable to read the agreement due to illiteracy or infirmity, the manager shall take special steps to ensure communication of its contents to the guest, e.g., manager's reading of the agreement to a vision-impaired or illiterate applicant. 
(i)  Each guest shall be provided a copy of the Guest's Bill of Rights, as set forth in section 111-8, at the time of admission to the shelter. 
(j)  The admission agreement shall include a statement of understanding concerning the shelter's policies and procedures. 
(Ord. No. 11-2007, § 107-4, 4-1-2007) 
Sec. 111-5. - Guest files. 
(a)  An individual guest file shall be maintained by the manager for each guest in the shelter. Personal information shall be treated as confidential and shall not be disclosed except to the guest, the management, the licensing agency, and others for whom written authorization is given by the guest. 
(b)  The guest file shall include, at a minimum, the following information: 
(1)  Identifying information including name, social security number, veteran status and number, martial status, age, sex and previous address; 
(2)  Name, address, and telephone number of next of kin, if known; 
(3)  Name, address, and telephone number of any person or agency providing additional services to the guest on a regular basis; and 
(4)  Date of admission. 
(Ord. No. 11-2007, § 107-5, 4-1-2007) 
Sec. 111-6. - Discharge of guests. 
(a)  Each admission agreement shall include a written procedure for handling discharge. 
(b)  In the event a guest develops a communicable disease or physical or mental condition requiring continuous medical or nursing care, the manager of the shelter shall advise the guest. Immediate arrangements will be made to discharge such guest and transport him to an appropriate medical facility for evaluation. 
(c)  Guests whose needs can no longer be met by the shelter shall be discharged, based on the established agreement entered into at time of admission. 
(Ord. No. 11-2007, § 107-6, 4-1-2007) 
Sec. 111-7. - Death of guest. 
Should a guest expire, the manager or other responsible person shall immediately notify the proper authorities. 
(Ord. No. 11-2007, § 107-7, 4-1-2007) 
Sec. 111-8. - Guest's Bill of Rights. 
The written policies and procedures of the management shall include provisions for protecting the personal and civil rights of each guest and the management shall provide a copy of these provisions to each guest. At a minimum, these provisions shall guarantee the following right: 
Guest's Bill of Rights 
Right to be fully informed as evidenced by guest's written acknowledgment made prior to or at the time of admission as well as during his stay of: 
1.  The Guest's Bill of Rights; 
2.  All procedures and policies governing resident conduct and responsibilities; 
3.  The services available in the shelter; and 
4.  The current schedule of all fees, if any, for such services; 
5.  Right to manage his personal financial affairs, including the right to keep and spend his own money. If the guest requests assistance from the shelter in managing his personal financial affairs, the request must be in writing and the shelter must submit a written accounting to the guest at least quarterly. A copy of this report shall be maintained in the guest's files maintained by the manager; 
6.  Right to be free from mental and physical abuse, humiliation, withholding of monetary allowances, physical restraints including isolation, or any other corporal or unusual punishment, including interference with the daily functions of living, such as eating or sleeping; 
7.  Right to confidential treatment of personal information in his guest files as provided in these rules and regulations; 
8.  Right to be treated with consideration, respect, and full recognition of his dignity and individuality; 
9.  Right to be accorded privacy for storage space of personal belongings; to have free access to day rooms, dining and other group living or common areas at reasonable hours and to come and go from the shelter unless such access is unreasonable or infringes upon the rights of other guests; 
10.  Right to be accorded privacy and freedom for the use of bathroom facilities; 
11.  Right to wear his own clothes, to keep and use his own personal possessions including toilet articles, as space permits, unless to do so would infringe upon the rights of other guests; 
12.  Right to send and receive unopened mail; 
13.  Right to associate and communicate privately with persons of his/her choice; 
14.  Right to have visitors at mutually agreed upon hours. Once the hours have been agreed upon no prior notice is necessary; 
15.  Right to receive or reject medical care, dental care, or other services, except as required by law to control communicable disease; 
16.  Right to not be required to perform services for the shelter, except that the guest and manager may agree for the guest to perform certain activities or services in the shelter. 
Note— This Bill of Rights or portions thereof may be waived as provided for under Waiver of Rules (see Waiver of Rules). 
(Ord. No. 11-2007, § 107-8, 4-1-2007) 
Sec. 111-9. - Illness, accidents or abuse. 
(a)  In the case of an accident or sudden adverse change in a guest's condition, a shelter shall immediately obtain needed care and notify the city. A record of such incidents shall be maintained in the guest's files. 
(b)  An occurrence of a reportable communicable disease as defined by the laws of the state or the rules implementing such law shall be reported immediately to the county health department. 
(c)  Immediate investigation of the cause of an on-site accident or incident involving a guest, employee or visitor shall be initiated by the manager of the shelter and appropriate report made to the city with a copy of the report being maintained in the guest's files. 
(d)  In the case of suspected child abuse, the manager shall notify the Department of Family and Children's Services. 
(Ord. No. 11-2007, § 107-9, 4-1-2007) 
Sec. 111-10. - Building standards. 
(a)  A shelter shall be constructed, arranged and maintained so as to provide adequately for the health, safety, and well-being of occupants. 
(1)  Furnishing and housekeeping standards shall be such that a shelter presents a clean and orderly appearance. 
(2)  Dining, bath, sitting, living and recreation rooms, during winter months, shall be maintained by an adequate central heating system or its safe equivalent at a temperature range of 70 to 75 degrees Fahrenheit or such other ranges which are consistent with individual health needs or may be imposed by an appropriate state or federal agency. 
(3)  A shelter shall provide laundering facilities on the premises for guests' personal laundry. 
(4)  A shelter shall be equipped to provide an adequate amount of hot water for guests' use. 
(5)  Bathrooms and toilet facilities without windows shall have forced ventilation to the outside in accordance with the state minimum standard codes. Bathroom windows used for ventilation shall open easily. 
(6)  Floors, walls and ceilings shall be kept clean and in good repair. 
(b)  A shelter shall provide separate and distinct living, kitchen and sleeping areas. All areas shall be well-lighted, heated and ventilated. 
(c)  A comfortable dining area which is adequate in size for the number of guests being served shall be provided. 
(d)  A belowgrade room to be used as a bedroom shall have adequate natural light and ventilation and be provided with two useful means of egress. Control of dampness shall be ensured. 
(e)  At least one functional toilet, lavatory, and bathing or showering facility shall be provided for each eight guests staying in a shelter. At least one toilet and lavatory shall be provided on each floor having guests' bedrooms. 
(f)  Temporary shelters may convert recreation rooms, social areas, or other similar areas into sleeping areas. Traffic to and from any room may be through a guest's sleeping area. 
(g)  Occupancy requirements for temporary shelters shall be a minimum of 200 square feet of gross floor area per guest. The maximum guest occupancy allowed for any facility is 30. 
(h)  When located within a multi-tenant building, a minimum of a two-hour, fire-rated construction shall be provided as separation between other tenants. 
(i)  Sleeping areas or bedrooms for guests shall be separated from halls, corridors, and other rooms by floor to ceiling walls which contain no openings, except doors. 
(j)  Doorways of sleeping areas or bedrooms occupied by guests shall be equipped with side-hinged permanently mounted doors equipped with positively latching hardware which will ensure opening of the door by a single motion. For bedrooms which have locks on doors, both the occupant and manager must be provided with keys to ensure easy entry and exit. Shelters must furnish a lockable cabinet or storage container for personal belongings. 
(k)  Guests of the opposite sex shall not be assigned to the same bedroom or sleeping area, unless they are husband and wife or members of the same immediate family. 
(l)  Guests having impaired mobility shall not sleep in, or be assigned bedrooms on floors which do not have a grade-level exit to the outside; provided, however, that abovegrade exits with easily negotiable ramps may be used. 
(m)  Each bedroom or sleeping area shall have at least one window, and shall be well ventilated and maintained at a comfortable temperature. Bedroom furnishings shall include an adequate closet or wardrobe, lighting sufficient for reading and other guest activities. 
(n)  Buildings shall meet the current Georgia Handicap Accessibility Code, ANSI 117.1, and the county fire prevention ordinance. 
(o)  The height, area, and design of buildings shall be in compliance with the state minimum standard codes. 
(p)  Complete site and building plans shall be submitted and reviewed by the county fire services, the Community Development Department, and any other applicable agencies before the issuance of a building permit. These plans shall bear the seal of a registered designer when required by state law. 
(Ord. No. 11-2007, § 107-10, 4-1-2007) 
Sec. 111-11. - Bedding, linen and miscellaneous. 
(a)  A shelter shall provide beds with clean a protected mattress and pillow. 
(b)  A shelter shall provide bedding which includes two sheets, a pillow case, and a minimum of one blanket. A shelter shall provide clean towels and wash cloths. Bed linen shall be changed at least weekly, or as needed. A shelter shall maintain an adequate linen supply. 
(c)  A shelter shall provide soap, lightbulbs, and toilet tissue. 
(Ord. No. 11-2007, § 107-11, 4-1-2007) 
Sec. 111-12. - Safety. 
For purposes of safety, a shelter shall be equipped with and provide for the following: 
(1)  Stairways with three or more risers shall have sturdy and securely fastened handrails on both sides; 34 inches above the leading edge of the tread. 
(2)  Scatter or throw rugs on hard finished floors shall have a nonskid backing. If used, floor wax shall not present a hazard to occupants. 
(3)  Handrails and nonskid surfacing or strips shall be installed in showers and bath areas. 
(4)  Residential cooking appliances shall be suitably installed in accordance with approved safety practices (county fire ordinance). Commercial-type cooking appliances shall meet the requirements of NFPA-96. Where metal hoods or canopies are provided, they shall be equipped with filters which shall be maintained in an efficient condition and kept clean at all times. 
(5)  Fire screens shall be provided for open flames and approved protection devices shall be used for properly-vented space heaters, stoves, and fireplaces. 
(6)  An insect, rodent or pest control program shall be maintained as necessary and conducted in a manner which continually protects the health of guests. Poisons, caustics, and other dangerous materials shall be stored and safeguarded in nonfood preparation and storage areas. 
(7)  Openable windows shall be screened. 
When a guest is discharged, the room and its contents shall be thoroughly cleaned. Blankets and spreads shall be sanitized. 
(Ord. No. 11-2007, § 107-12, 4-1-2007) 
Sec. 111-13. - Meals. 
(a)  If meals are provided by the management, then a minimum of two regular meals shall be provided daily. Not more than 14 hours shall elapse between the substantial evening and morning meal. 
(b)  Shelters which regularly house more than 16 persons shall possess a valid food service permit issued under provisions of the state health code, chapter 88-10, pertaining to food service establishments, and rules and regulations applicable thereto. 
(Ord. No. 11-2007, § 107-13, 4-1-2007) 
Sec. 111-14. - Permit applications. 
All temporary shelters shall meet the following requirements for permit applications. 
(1)  The management of each shelter shall submit to the city an application for a permit to operate under these rules and regulations. No shelter shall be operated in the city without such a permit which is current under these rules and regulations. 
(2)  Each application shall be accompanied by a copy of the policies for operating the shelter and shall include: 
a.  Statement of purposes, objectives, and goals. 
b.  Description of services to be provided. 
(3)  With each application the manager shall include: 
a.  Description of staff and job description of volunteers by which services will be accomplished; 
b.  Floor sketch showing interior arrangement of shelter areas and room description including use, number of beds and dimensions of interior floorspace. 
(4)  Proof of ownership shall accompany the application: 
a.  Nonprofit association shall submit legal proof of the organization, the name and address of each trustee and the office held, if any, including a copy of statement with tax exempt number, substantiating approval by the U.S. Internal Revenue Service of nonprofit status. 
b.  All others shall submit a statement attesting to the name and address of each person owning part of the facility. 
(Ord. No. 11-2007, § 107-14, 4-1-2007) 
Sec. 111-15. - Permits. 
(a)  The management of each shelter shall apply for and obtain a valid permit from the city prior to beginning operation. To be eligible for a permit the shelter must be in substantial compliance with these rules and regulations and provisions of law which apply to the locations, construction, and maintenance of shelters and the services and safety provided to residents/guests therein. 
(b)  Prior to the issuance of a permit and at the request of the city, the management shall furnish to the city evidence of satisfactory compliance with all applicable county, state, and federal laws or regulations. This shall include a certificate of occupancy from the Community Development Department and the county fire services department. 
(c)  If required, the management of each shelter shall apply for and obtain a valid Special Use Permit (SUP) from the city prior to beginning operation. 
(d)  The permits shall be readily available for inspection upon request of interested persons. 
(e)  Permits are not transferable from one shelter to another, nor are they valid when the shelter is moved from one location to another. 
(f)  A permit shall be returned to the city, when the shelter ceases to operate, or is moved to another location, or the ownership changes, or the management is significantly changed, or the permit is suspended, or revoked. 
(g)  A permit shall be required for each shelter located on different premises where more than one shelter is operated under the same management. 
(h)  The permit shall state the maximum number of residents/guests to receive service at that location. 
(i)  All advertising of a shelter shall include the official name and permit number as shown on the face of the permit issued by the city. 
(Ord. No. 11-2007, § 107-15, 4-1-2007) 
Sec. 111-16. - Inspections. 
(a)  The shelter and its records shall be available at reasonable hours for observation and examination by properly identified representatives of the city, and for annual inspections both on an announced and unannounced basis. Inspections may be made on a more frequent basis, if needed. 
(b)  Upon request, the city shall provide technical advice and consultation to any interested resident, guest, or shelter manager with respect to requirements for compliance with these regulations. 
(c)  The manager or an authorized representative shall notify the city of the anticipated opening date of a newly-constructed shelter in order that a pre-opening survey of the shelter may be conducted to determine compliance with these rules and regulations. 
(d)  The manager or a representative shall accompany the city representative on tours of inspection. 
(Ord. No. 11-2007, § 107-16, 4-1-2007) 
Sec. 111-17. - Enforcement. 
(a)  A shelter which fails to comply with these rules and regulations shall be subject to revocation of its permit and/or other sanctions provided by law. 
(b)  Upon final determination that a shelter does not comply with these rules and regulations, the city will: 
(1)  Inform all residents/guests in writing of the standards not being met; 
(2)  Have the power to revoke the permit; and 
(3)  Provide all residents with a list of approved facilities and agencies which will help them to relocate. 
(Ord. No. 11-2007, § 107-17, 4-1-2007) 
Chapter 113 - TREE PRESERVATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Part 1 of Ord. No. 21-2012, adopted Aug. 6, 2012, amended ch. 113 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former ch. 113, §§ 113-1—113-19, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 20-2003, adopted Dec. 1, 2003; Ord. No. 10-2005, §§ 105-1—105-19, adopted Dec. 5, 2005; and Ord. No. 09-2009, adopted June 1, 2009. 

Sec. 113-1. - Title. 
The provisions of this chapter shall be known as the "Tree Preservation Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 21-2012, pt. 1, 8-6-2012) 
Sec. 113-2. - Purpose. 
It is the policy of the city that there shall be no net loss of canopy coverage as defined in this chapter within the boundaries of the city, including property owned by the city. The purpose of this chapter is to establish the standards necessary to ensure that this policy will be realized and that the city will continue to enjoy the benefits provided by its urban forest. The provisions of this chapter are enacted to: 
(1)  Establish and maintain the maximum amount of tree canopy on public and private lands in the city by prohibiting the destruction or removal of trees except in accordance with the standards set forth in this article; 
(2)  Maintain trees in the city in a healthy condition through professionally accepted arboricultural practices; 
(3)  Establish and revise as necessary the standards for the planting and maintenance of trees so as to improve the economic base of the city by improving property values, to enhance the visual quality of the city and its neighborhoods and to improve public health by lessening air pollution and the incidence of flooding; 
(4)  Minimize hazards and damage to streets and sidewalks and lessen public rights-of-way maintenance costs; 
(5)  Establish standards for the replacement of trees removed or destroyed by the site development and/or building process; 
(6)  Encourage the use of creative development through the use of the Design Concept Development (DCD) district to save trees and green spaces. 
(Ord. No. 21-2012, pt. 1, 8-6-2012) 
Sec. 113-3. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Arboricultural prescription means any type of site or tree instruction developed by an arborist certified by the International Society of Arboriculture or State Registered Forester that is aimed at preserving trees. It is required for trees with 20 percent or greater CRZ/SRP impact. Silvicultural prescription and arboricultural prescription have the same meaning. 
Boundary tree means a tree six inches DBH or larger located on a property adjacent to a permitting property whose critical root zone or canopy extends into that permitting property. 
Caliper means the diameter of the trunk of a replacement tree (new nursery stock) measured six inches above the ground line for trees of four-inch caliper or smaller, and measured 12 inches above the ground line for trees larger than four inches in caliper. 
Canopy coverage means an area of healthy tree cover, measured in square feet of projection of the healthy tree canopy onto the ground. 
Certified arborist means an arborist certified by the International Society of Arboriculture as possessing the minimum level of competency required to practice arboriculture. 
City Arborist means the Community Development Director or his/her designee responsible for administering the provisions of this chapter. 
Critical Root Zone ("CRZ") means a circular area surrounding a tree whose radius is equivalent to one foot for every inch in DBH. 

Damaged tree means a tree that has 25 percent or more of the critical root zone disturbed. 
Destroyed tree means a tree which has damage to any of its parts causing the tree's survival beyond three growing seasons to be unlikely as determined by the City Arborist. 
Destruction includes, but is not limited to, excessive topping out, girdling, limbing, chopping or otherwise cutting a tree to the extent that its demise is imminent. Any actions resulting in the death of a tree. 
Diameter at breast height (DBH) means the diameter of a tree trunk measured in inches at a height of 4.5 feet above the ground line for individual trunks, and at the narrowest point below the fork for trees forked below 4.5 feet. 
Dripline means a vertical line extending downward from the outermost tips of a tree's branches, creating a more or less circular projection on the ground. 
Land disturbing activity means any activity that disturbs the soil, removes woody vegetation, or results in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state including, but not limited to, excavating, filling, grading, grubbing, root or stump removal, trenching, or transporting of land, but not including agricultural practices. Any activity requiring a development permit. 
Large tree means a tree expected to grow to a minimum height of 40 feet at maturity under urban conditions. 
Medium tree means a tree expected to grow to a maximum height of 25 to 40 feet at maturity under urban conditions. 
Protected tree means any tree six inches DBH or larger that is healthy and structurally sound and has been conserved or planted to meet the tree ordinance requirements. 
Small tree means a tree expected to grow to a maximum height of 25 feet at maturity under urban conditions. 
Specimen tree means any tree, excluding loblolly pines, which qualifies for special consideration for conservation due to its size, type, condition, location or historical significance. The following two criteria are used by the Community Development Director to identify specimen trees. Both the size and condition criteria must be met for a tree to qualify. 
(1)  Size criteria. 
a.  Overstory tree: 28-inch diameter or larger. 
b.  Understory tree: 12-inch diameter or larger. 
(2)  Condition criteria. Life expectancy of greater than 15 years. Relatively sound and solid trunk with no excessive decay. No more than one major and several minor dead limbs. No major insect or pathological problem. 
Structural root plate (SRP) means the zone of rapid root taper that provides the tree stability against wind throw. The radius of the root plate is proportional to the diameter (DBH) of a tree, using standard root plate measurements/calculations. 
Structural Root Plate Table 

 
Tree disturbance means any land activity that has the potential to change the characteristics of soil, vegetation, growing space or environment within a tree protection zone OR any activity that has the potential to damage a tree's roots trunk or crown. Tree impact means any disturbance that proposes or has the potential to affect 25 percent or more of the tree protection zone. 
Tree protection zone (TPZ) means the area encompassing the entirety of a protected tree, including the soil to a depth of three feet within the CRZ and the tree's trunk and crown. 
(Ord. No. 21-2012, pt. 1, 8-6-2012; Ord. No. 12-2018 , § I, 10-1-2018) 
Sec. 113-4. - Applicability/exemptions. 
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to any land disturbing activity on real property within the corporate limits of the city and to any removal or destruction of a tree with a DBH of six inches or greater regardless of whether it is associated with land disturbing activity. The following activities shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter. 
(1)  Activities performed by a federal, state, county, municipal or other governmental agency during the course of their daily work shall be exempt from this article. However, best management practices for tree care shall be incorporated into the activities. 
(2)  When the Community Development Director finds that any tree presents a danger or hazard to the health, safety and welfare of the public, such tree may be removed immediately by the owner or the owner's agent upon written authorization by the Community Development Director. 
(3)  During a period of any emergency, such as a tornado, ice storm, flood or any other act of nature, the requirements of this chapter may be waived by the Community Development Director. 
(4)  The removal of trees within burial plots. 
(Ord. No. 21-2012, pt. 1, 8-6-2012) 
Sec. 113-5. - Tree Preservation Board. 
(a)  Purpose. A Tree Preservation Board (hereinafter referred to as the "Board") is hereby established to assist the Community Development Department in interpreting and enforcing the provisions of this chapter and to advise the Mayor and City Council on matters pertaining to the preservation of trees and conservation of tree canopy cover within the city. 
(b)  Members. The Tree Preservation Board shall consist of five members. The members shall be residents or property owners of the city, except that up to two members may be nonresidents or nonproperty owners with professional expertise in arboriculture or horticulture or the land development/construction field. The members shall be appointed by the Mayor and City Council. 
(c)  Term of office. Each member of the Tree Preservation Board shall serve for three years. 
(d)  Meetings. The Tree Preservation Board shall meet not less frequently than quarterly and shall establish rules and regulations for its operations consistent with the provisions of this chapter. 
(e)  Administrative guidelines. The Tree Preservation Board shall have the power to adopt and promulgate such further administrative guidelines and standards as may be necessary or desirable to carry out the provisions of this chapter. The maintenance of the city's community tree species list shall be the responsibility of the board. Current copies of the community tree species list and other such administrative guidelines, standards, or regulations shall be maintained at the city Community Development Department and shall be made available to the public for inspection and copying during normal business hours. 
(f)  Appeals. The Tree Preservation Board shall have the power to hear appeals of any person aggrieved or adversely affected by an administrative decision made by the Community Development Director in the course of administering this chapter. 
(g)  Variances. The Tree Preservation Board shall have the power to grant variances to this chapter based on a hardship not created by the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 21-2012, pt. 1, 8-6-2012) 
Sec. 113-6. - Permits. 
No person, corporation or association shall remove or destroy any tree either on public or private property with a DBH of six inches or greater without having first obtained a tree removal permit from the Community Development Department. A tree plan approved as a part of an approved development permit shall constitute a tree removal permit. 
(Ord. No. 21-2012, pt. 1, 8-6-2012) 
Sec. 113-7. - Application. 
(a)  An application for a tree removal permit when land disturbing activity is involved shall include three copies of a tree conservation and landscape plan which shall be completed and signed by a registered forester, a certified or degreed arborist, or a registered landscape architect whose credentials shall be made available to the Community Development Director. 
(b)  The tree conservation and landscape plan shall include, at a minimum, the following information: 
(1)  Project name; 
(2)  Project description; 
(3)  Project location and tax parcel number; 
(4)  Name, address, and telephone number of property owner; 
(5)  Name, address, and telephone number of developer; 
(6)  Name, address, and telephone number of the person responsible for preparing the soil and tree conservation plan, and the seal, signature, and statement of professional qualifications of such person; 
(7)  Size of project area in acres or square feet; 
(8)  Size of the buildable area in acres or square feet; 
(9)  Total landscaped area required in percent and square foot area; 
(10)  Total canopy cover required in percent and square foot area; 
(11)  Summary table of tree canopy coverage for conserved trees by individual tree or tree groups, and for planted trees by species, mature size and canopy category; 
(12)  Delineation of required buffers, landscaped areas, open space, and recreation areas; 
(13)  Location and size of proposed structures or additions to existing structures, paved areas, and all other site improvements; 
(14)  Construction entrance and exit; 
(15)  Delineation of tree conservation areas; 
(16)  Species, DBH, and location of trees to be conserved (include both trunk location and extent of tree protection zone). Trees in excess of required canopy coverage are not required to be located, however all specimen trees shall be located on the survey; 
(17)  For existing developments, location, species, and size of any tree previously conserved or planted to achieve required tree canopy cover, including trunk location, DBH, and location and dimensions of tree protection zones; 
(18)  Location of all existing and proposed overhead and underground utilities; 
(19)  Type and location of tree protection fencing and other tree protection structures required; 
(20)  Type and location of tree protection area signs; 
(21)  Species, caliper, and location of trees to be planted; 
(22)  Tree protection statement for all conserved trees: "Tree protection measures will be maintained at all times. Additional tree protection measures will be installed if deemed necessary by on-site inspection"; 
(23)  Tree maintenance statement for all planted trees: "The owner will maintain trees throughout their life using best management practice. Maintenance after planting will include watering, mulching, and pruning. The owner shall replace any planted tree which dies prior to issuance of the final certificate of occupancy for the project or during the first three years, whichever occurs last"; 
(24)  Species, DBH, and location of trees growing on the adjacent public street right-of-way or public property. 
(c)  A permit to remove or destroy a specimen tree not associated with land disturbing activity shall be accompanied by photographs, a site drawing and a written statement of the condition of the tree and/or the threat it poses by the owner of the property and a registered forester, a certified or degreed arborist or a registered landscape architect whose credentials shall be made available to the Community Development Director. In cases where such permit is requested on R100, R75, R65, or RMD property, said request shall be exempt from subsection 113-10(a). If in the determination of the Community Development Director the specimen tree is obviously dead or immediately hazardous then the requirements in this subsection may be waived by the Community Development Director. 
(d)  A permit to remove trees with a DBH of six inches or greater that are not specimen trees or not associated with land disturbing activity shall be accompanied by a site drawing and a statement from the property owner of the condition of the tree and/or the threat it poses. Photographs and other supporting information may be required by the Director. In cases where such permit is requested on R100, R75, R65, or RMD property, said request shall be exempt from subsection 113-10(a). 
(Ord. No. 21-2012, pt. 1, 8-6-2012) 
Sec. 113-8. - Authority to grant tree removal permits. 
The Community Development Department shall have the authority to grant tree removal permits. 
(Ord. No. 21-2012, pt. 1, 8-6-2012) 
Sec. 113-9. - Time for consideration of a tree removal permit application. 
All applications for tree removal permits shall be acted on within 60 days of the receipt of a complete application and permit fee, if any. The tree removal permit fee shall be established by the Mayor and Council. If the city fails to act on the application within 60 days, the application shall be deemed approved. 
(Ord. No. 21-2012, pt. 1, 8-6-2012) 
Sec. 113-10. - Canopy cover. 
(a)  Minimum tree canopy cover required. A minimum amount of healthy tree canopy cover, measured in square feet of projection of the canopy onto the ground, shall be conserved and/or established within the net area of each parcel. The required amount of tree canopy cover shall be maintained throughout the life of the development. Tree canopy cover requirements shall be: 70 percent for residential zones, 40 percent for commercial zones, 40 percent for office zones, 30 percent for industrial zones. Trees in poor or declining condition, as determined by the Community Development Director, shall not be credited toward the required tree canopy coverage. 
(b)  Parking areas. Within parking areas at least one overstory tree shall be planted or conserved within the interior of the parking lot for each seven parking spaces. In no case shall a parking space be greater than 40 feet from a tree. Trees planted or conserved to meet this requirement shall be counted toward the overall tree canopy cover requirement. 
(c)  Buffers, open areas, and recreation areas. Where buffers, open areas, and recreation areas are required, the required canopy cover percentage shall apply to the net area. 
(d)  Canopy cover calculations. In order to encourage the preservation of specimen trees and the incorporation of these trees into the design of projects, specimen trees shall be credited the diameter of the dripline times 2.5 toward canopy coverage. Other existing trees shall be credited the diameter of the dripline times 1.5 toward canopy coverage. In order to qualify for this credit 80 percent of the dripline or critical root zone, whichever is greater, must be protected by a tree save fence. 
(1)  Existing conifers may be used in calculating the canopy cover, however only trees from the tree species list may be used in replanting. Conifers may be used for screening in required buffers where allowed by the zoning chapter. 
(2)  New trees must be a minimum of two inches caliper and the canopy provided shall be calculated as listed below: 
a.  Large trees: 1,600 square feet. 
b.  Medium trees: 900 square feet. 
c.  Small trees: 400 square feet. 
(3)  When calculating the number of trees required, any fraction below one-half shall be rounded down to the next lower whole number, and any fraction equal to or greater than one-half shall be rounded up to the next highest whole number. 
(4)  For existing trees, overlapping canopies may be calculated individually. This recognizes the benefits of trees to the environment other than shade. 
(Ord. No. 21-2012, pt. 1, 8-6-2012; Ord. No. 12-2018 , § I, 10-1-2018) 
Sec. 113-11. - Community tree species list. 
(a)  The city shall maintain a list of tree species approved for conservation and planting within the city as well as those not recommended. The list shall be known as the city's community tree species list, hereinafter referred to as the tree species list. The tree species list includes the canopy cover category of each species, the mature size category of each species, notations on which species may be planted beneath utility lines, and other species characteristics. 
(1)  Canopy cover category. Each species included in the tree species list shall be assigned a canopy cover category of overstory or understory. 
(2)  Mature size category. Each species included in the tree species list shall be assigned a mature size category of large, medium, or small. The mature size limits of each category are as follows: 
a.  Large tree: average mature height of 40 feet or greater; 
b.  Medium tree: average mature height of 25 to 40 feet; 
c.  Small tree: average mature height of 15 to 25 feet. 
(b)  The list is maintained by the Tree Preservation Board and may change without notice to incorporate results of research and experience with individual species, and is available from the city Community Development Department. 
(Ord. No. 21-2012, pt. 1, 8-6-2012) 
Sec. 113-12. - Permeable surfaces. 
Minimum permeable surface area requirements are as follows. 
(1)  For conserved trees in residential zones no more than 20 percent of the dripline can be encroached upon provided the remaining area is mulched. 
(2)  For planted trees in all zones the amount of permeable surface area required shall be based upon the mature tree size category as follows: 
a.  Large trees: 640 square feet; 
b.  Medium trees: 360 square feet; 
c.  Small trees: 160 square feet. 
(3)  For planted trees the dripline shall be mulched. 
(4)  Parking lot trees located in islands shall be allowed to double the canopy coverage formula contain in this section and shall be allowed to reduce the square footage of permeable area required by this section to 64 square feet. 
(5)  The same permeable surface area cannot be counted for more than one tree except as approved by the Community Development Director. 
(Ord. No. 21-2012, pt. 1, 8-6-2012) 
Sec. 113-13. - Street trees. 
A minimum of one overstory tree for every 40 linear feet of road frontage is required on both sides of any new street. The minimum caliper shall be two inches. 
(Ord. No. 21-2012, pt. 1, 8-6-2012) 
Sec. 113-14. - Tree protection. 
(a)  Conserved trees. All conserved trees shall be actively protected during the development process and passively protected throughout the life of the development. The entire tree, including the crown, trunk, and roots, and the critical root zone, shall be protected. 
(b)  Minimum tree protection measures. Active tree protection shall consist of, at a minimum, establishing a tree protection zone around each tree or grouping of trees by the installation of fencing at the outer edge of the dripline or Critical root zone, whichever is greater. Minimum tree protection measures for boundary trees, existing on adjacent properties, whose critical root zones extend onto the project site is mandatory. 
(1)  Tree protection fencing and tree protection area signs shall be installed after the issuance of a disturbance Permit and prior to any land disturbance activity or building activity. 
a.  Tree protection fencing shall be four feet high, made of orange high-visibility polypropylene, and erected with sturdy wooden or metal posts around the tree protection zone. A heritage tree, or a significant species tree, as determined by the City Arborist, may require increased protection. Methods and extent of increased protection will be as directed by the City Arborist. 
b.  Signs shall be fabricated out of a sturdy material, shall be waterproof, and contain the following legible text in English and Spanish: "TREE PROTECTION AREA, ENTRY PROHIBITED." The signs shall be a minimum of 8.5 × 11 inches, shall be placed on a sturdy post a minimum of 30 inches off the ground, and shall be spaced a maximum of 50 feet apart. 
c.  Tree protection fencing and signage shall remain in good condition throughout the development and construction processes, and shall only be removed after the final plat approval or a certificate of occupancy has been issued. 
(2)  Tree protection fencing and tree protection area signs shall be installed after the issuance of a permit and prior to any land disturbance activity or building activity. 
a.  Tree protection fencing shall be at least four feet high and shall be installed with either sturdy wooden or metal fence posts around the tree protection zone. 
b.  Official "Tree Save Area—Stay Out" signs acquired from the city shall be posted every 50 linear feet along all trees save fences. 
c.  Tree protection fencing shall remain in good condition throughout the development and construction processes, and shall only be removed after final plat approval or a certificate of occupancy has been issued. 
(3)  Encroachment into the tree protection area shall result in the loss of credit for canopy coverage. 
(4)  The critical root zone within the tree protection area shall be mulched with a minimum of three inches and not more than five inches of organic mulch such as pine straw, wood chips, tree leaves, or compost, for a minimum of three years, or prior to issuance of the final certificate of occupancy for the project, whichever occurs last. 
(5)  The Community Development Director may require the installation of additional tree protection measures to insure survivability of conserved trees. 
(c)  Prohibited activities. Within the tree protection areas, without proper authorization or permit the following activities shall be prohibited: 
(1)  Vehicle traffic or parking; 
(2)  Materials or equipment storage; 
(3)  Soil disturbance; 
(4)  Soil excavation; 
(5)  Removal of topsoil; 
(6)  Trenching; 
(7)  Soil fill; 
(8)  Change in soil pH; 
(9)  Change in soil drainage; 
(10)  Equipment washouts or disposal (including concrete); 
(11)  Fires; 
(12)  Chemical or trash disposal; 
(13)  Other activities harmful to the trees as determined by the Community Development Director; 
(14)  Encroachment into tree save area; and 
(15)  Destruction or removal of trees. 
(d)  Planted trees. All planted trees shall be actively protected during the development process and passively protected throughout the life of the development. The entire tree, including the crown, trunk, and roots, and the critical root zone, shall be protected. 
(e)  Existing trees in construction zones. All trees that are outside the formal tree protection zone(s) as outlined in the Tree Protection and Replacement Plan and are equal to or greater than 12 inches DBH, and are in areas where construction will occur inside the crown of the tree shall be required to have an enhanced protection program. In order to maximize the ability of the selected trees to survive construction the proposed program will include the following steps: 
(1)  The tree will be surveyed and located with the species and DBH noted and approximate crown diameter shown. 
(2)  Prior to the beginning of construction activities the trees shall be inspected by an Arborist to determine their overall condition and ability to withstand construction activity around them. 
(3)  Should the Arborist determine that with a proper protection plan the tree would survive the construction activity the Arborist shall prepare a care plan for the tree. The plan may involve elements such as crown pruning, fertilization, irrigation, root pruning or other activities. 
(4)  The Contractor will be required to implement the Arborist's protection plan and to maintain the necessary activities to protect the tree until such time as the site construction is completed and accepted for maintenance by the property owner. The Arborist shall submit bi-weekly reports to the Contractor and the Department of Community Development and Planning during the construction process. 
(5)  The owner of the property shall receive a 20-percent bonus credit for canopy coverage for all trees that are under the enhanced protection program. 
(6)  No land disturbing activity or construction activity, including, but not limited to, grading, digging, soil disturbance or other activity within the critical root zone of any boundary tree, is permitted that will deprive the boundary tree of continued viability as determined by a certified arborist. 
The following parameters shall be followed when determining boundary tree viability interference: 
a.  CRZ/TPZ 19 percent or less impact and protected by tree protection, no arboricultural prescription required. 
b.  CRZ/TPZ 20 percent — 33 percent impact but protected by tree protection (no structural root plate impact) provide arboricultural prescription with a plan for review by the city. 
c.  CRZ/TPZ 20 percent — 33 percent impact and structural root plate has impact/not protected. 
The builder/developer/construction site property owner must submit a boundary tree agreement signed by the tree owner/co-owner and notarized giving permission for the tree that has construction impact to be treated or removed (see Community Development Department for the city boundary tree agreement). The minimum time length of the boundary tree agreement shall be three years. The receipt for the paid arboricultural prescription and signed agreement will need to be submitted with the plans for review. 
a.  The builder/developer/construction site owner must make at least three attempts to contact the owner of the boundary tree to enact a boundary tree agreement. The first two attempts may be in person or via telephone. The third attempt must be in the form of a written letter sent certified, return receipt requested to the property owner's address of record in the Gwinnett County Tax Database. If there is no response to any of the attempts, the builder/developer/construction site owner shall provide evidence to the city of the attempts at contact in addition to the arboriculture prescription for the affected tree. 
b.  If no boundary tree agreement is reached, the affected tree shall not be removed but shall be protected during development based on this chapter and in accordance with the arboriculture prescription. 
c.  A boundary tree bond or escrow account may be required based on the arboricultural prescription depending on the impact to a boundary tree covered under a boundary tree agreement. 
d.  A boundary tree bond or escrow account shall be required where a boundary tree agreement cannot be reached. 
e.  A boundary tree bond or escrow shall be 125 percent of the cost of removal and replacement of the tree(s) affected and will be held for three years by the city. The property owner of the affected tree(s) may apply to the city for the escrow funds to remove and replace the tree(s) during the three year escrow period. If the boundary tree(s) is/are deemed healthy at the end of the three year period by an Arborist, the developer may apply to the City for a refund of the original amount of escrow. 
f.  The site/landscape plans cannot be approved without signed boundary tree agreement(s) or proof of attempts to contact the boundary tree owner in an attempt to reach a boundary tree agreement in addition to an arboriculture prescription where needed. 
No more than 25 percent of a boundary tree's mature crown or 1/3 of a young tree's canopy shall be removed in one season. 
Pruning of conserved trees should only be done by an ISA (International Society of Arboriculture) certified arborist. 
(Ord. No. 21-2012, pt. 1, 8-6-2012; Ord. No. 2015, § I, 2-12-2015; Ord. No. 12-2018 , § I, 2018) 
Sec. 113-15. - Seasonal planting. 
Final plat approval or a certificate of occupancy may be issued prior to the establishment of trees planned to meet the tree canopy cover requirements, if the Community Development Director determines that the season is inappropriate for planting. In such cases the trees shall be planted by the last day of February following the date of issuance of the certificate of occupancy or final plat approval. If they have not been planted by the last day of February following the issuance of the certificate of occupancy or final plat approval, the permit holder shall be considered to be in violation of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 21-2012, pt. 1, 8-6-2012) 
Sec. 113-16. - Site inspections. 
(a)  Authority. The Community Development Director or his designee has the authority to perform site inspections and enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Visits to site for discussions regarding regulations. Prior to the issuance of a tree removal permit or right-of-way encroachment permit, a visit shall be made to the proposed site by the Community Development Director or his designee and the applicant for the purpose of discussing the provisions of this chapter. 
(1)  After a permit is issued and tree protection measures have been installed, and prior to any land disturbance, another site inspection shall be made by the Community Development Director or his designee. 
(2)  Another site inspection shall occur prior to the issuance of final plat approval or a certificate of occupancy. All provisions of this chapter shall be met before final plat approval or a certificate of occupancy can be issued. 
(3)  Other site inspections may take place without notice at any time prior to or after the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or final plat approval to ensure continuing compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  Access by authorized representatives. No person, corporation or association shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the Community Development Director who requests entry for the purposes of inspection and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper, or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(Ord. No. 21-2012, pt. 1, 8-6-2012) 
Sec. 113-17. - Tree maintenance. 
The owner shall be responsible for maintaining the health of all conserved and new trees. The owner shall replace any new tree that dies within three years, or prior to issuance of the final certificate of occupancy for the project, whichever occurs last. 
(Ord. No. 21-2012, pt. 1, 8-6-2012) 
Sec. 113-18. - Penalties. 
(a)  Failure to obtain permit. If any person commences any land disturbing activity, tree destruction, tree cutting, tree removal or building activity requiring a tree removal permit without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be deemed to be in violation of the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Violations. The owner of any property wherein a violation exists, and any builder, contractor, or agent who may have assisted in the commission of any such violation, may be chargeable with separate offenses for each such violation. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter other than as hereinabove provided shall, upon conviction, be punished as prescribed in subsection (e) of this section. Each day during which such violation occurs or continues shall constitute and be punishable as a separate offense. 
(c)  Stop work orders. A stop work order may be issued by the Community Development Director or his designee for violation of any provision of this chapter. All stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall remain in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred and permission has been granted by the city to resume work. No certificate of occupancy or final plat approval shall be issued while a stop work order is in effect or until an assessed fine has been paid and permission has been granted by the city in writing for a certificate of occupancy or final plat approval. 
(d)  Responsibility. The Community Development Director, or his designee is responsible for determining whether a violation has occurred. Violations may include, but are not limited to: failure to obtain a tree removal permit, deviation from the approved plan; failure to properly install tree protection structures; failure to maintain tree protection structures in effective condition; evidence of harmful activities occurring within the tree protection zone; improper planting; failure to conserve or establish the required tree canopy cover; unauthorized delay in tree planting; damage to a conserved or established tree's crown, trunk, roots, or critical root zone; and damage to a city tree's crown, trunk, roots, or critical root zone. 
(e)  Monetary penalties. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter, any permit condition, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any order, notice of code violation or formal charge of violation which the Community Development Director issues as provided in this chapter shall be liable for a penalty of up to $1,000.00 per day for each violation of the provisions of this chapter. Each day that such failure or refusal continues shall constitute a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 21-2012, pt. 1, 8-6-2012) 
Sec. 113-19. - Appeals. 
Any person aggrieved or adversely affected by an administrative decision of the Community Development Director pertaining to the application of the provisions of this chapter may, within 30 days of such decision, appeal the decision to the Tree Preservation Board. Any person aggrieved or adversely affected by a decision of Tree Preservation Board pertaining to the application of the provisions of this chapter may, within 30 days of such decision, appeal the decision to the City Council. Any person aggrieved or adversely affected by the decision of the City Council may, within 30 days of such decision, appeal the decision to the superior court of the county. 
(Ord. No. 21-2012, pt. 1, 8-6-2012) 
Chapter 114 - HISTORIC PRESERVATION 

Sec. 114-1. - Purpose. 
In support and furtherance of its findings and determination that the historical, cultural and aesthetic heritage of the City of Norcross is among its most valued and important assets and that the preservation of this heritage is essential to the promotion of the health, prosperity and general welfare of the people; 
In order to stimulate revitalization of the business districts and historic neighborhoods and to protect and enhance local historic and aesthetic attractions to tourists and thereby promote and stimulate business; 
In order to enhance the opportunities for federal or state tax benefits under relevant provisions of federal or state law; and 
In order to provide for the designation, protection, preservation and rehabilitation of historic properties and historic districts and to participate in federal or state programs to do the same; 
The Norcross City Council hereby declare it to be the purpose and intent of this chapter to establish a uniform procedure for use in providing for the protection, enhancement, perpetuation and use of places, districts, sites, buildings, structures, objects, and landscape features having a special historical, cultural or aesthetic interest or value, in accordance with the provisions of the chapter. 
(Ord. No. 02-2017 , art. I, 7-5-2017) 
Sec. 114-2. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
Building . A building is a structure created to shelter any form of human activity, such as a house, barn, church, hotel or similar structure. Building may refer to a historically related complex such as a courthouse and jail or a house and barn. 
Certificate of appropriateness . A document evidencing approval by the Historic Preservation Commission of an application to make a material change in the appearance of a designated historic property or of a property located within a designated historic district. 
Exterior architectural features . The architectural style, general design and general arrangement of the exterior of a building, structure or object, including but not limited to the kind or texture of the building material and the type and style of all windows, doors, signs and other appurtenant architectural fixtures, features, details or elements relative to the forgoing. 
Exterior environmental features . All those aspects of the landscape or the development of a site which affect the historic character of the property. 
Historic district . A geographically definable area, possessing a significant concentration, linkage, or continuity of sites, buildings, structures or objects united by past events or aesthetically by plan or physical development. A district may also comprise individual elements separated geographically but linked by association or history. A historic district shall further mean an area designated by the Norcross City Council as a historic district pursuant to the criteria established in subsection 114-4(b) of this chapter. 
Historic property . An individual building, structure, site, or object including the adjacent area necessary for the proper appreciation thereof designated by the Norcross City Council as a historic property pursuant to the criteria established in subsection 114-4(c) of this chapter. 
Material change in appearance . A change that will affect either the exterior architectural or environmental features of a historic property or any building, structure, site, object, or landscape feature within a historic district, such as: 
(1)  A reconstruction or alteration of the size, shape or facade of a historic property, including relocation of any doors or windows or removal or alteration of any architectural features, details or elements; 
(2)  Demolition or relocation of a historic structure; 
(3)  Commencement of excavation for construction purposes; 
(4)  A change in the location of advertising visible from the public rights-of-way; or 
(5)  The erection, alteration, restoration or removal or any buildings or other structure within a historic property or district, including walls, fences, steps and pavements, or other appurtenant features, except exterior paint alterations. 
Object . An object is a material thing of functional, aesthetic, cultural, historical or scientific value that may be, by nature or design, movable yet related to a specific setting or environment. 
Site . A site is the location of a significant event, a prehistoric or historical occupation or activity, or a building or structure, whether standing, ruined, or vanished, where the location itself maintains historical or archaeological value regardless of the value of any existing structure. 
Structure . A structure is a work made up of interdependent and inter-related parts in a definite pattern of organization. Constructed by man, it is often an engineering project large in scale. 
(Ord. No. 02-2017 , art. I, 7-5-2017) 
Sec. 114-3. - Creation of a Historic Preservation Commission. 
(a)  Creation of the commission . There is hereby created a commission whose title shall be "Norcross Historic Preservation Commission" (hereinafter "Commission"). 
(b)  Commission position within the city government . The Commission shall be part of the planning functions of the City of Norcross. 
(c)  Commission members—Number, appointment, terms and compensation . The Commission shall consist of five members appointed by the City Council. All members shall be residents of Norcross, or the owner of a property in the district, and shall be persons who have demonstrated special interest, experience or education in history, architecture or the preservation of historic resources. 
To the extent available in the city, at least three members shall be appointed from among professionals in the disciplines of architecture, history, architectural history, planning, archaeology or related professions. 
Members shall serve three-year terms. Members may not serve more than two consecutive terms. In order to achieve staggered terms, initial appointments shall be: one member for one year; two members for two years; and two members for three years. Members shall not receive a salary, although they may be reimbursed for expenses. 
(d)  Statement of commission's power . 
(1)  The Preservation Commission shall be authorized to: 
a.  Prepare and maintain an inventory of all property within the City of Norcross having the potential for designation as historic property; 
b.  Recommend to the Norcross City Council specific districts, sites, buildings, structures, or objects to be designated by ordinance as historic properties or historic districts; 
c.  Review application for certificates of appropriateness, and grant or deny same in accordance with the provisions of this chapter; 
d.  Recommend to the Norcross City Council that the designation of any district, site, building, structure or object as a historic property or as a historic district be revoked or removed; 
e.  Restore or preserve any historic properties acquired by the City of Norcross; 
f.  Promote the use of facade easements and conservation easements, as appropriate, in accordance with the provisions of the Georgia Uniform Conservation Easement Act of 1992 (O.C.G.A., § 44-10-1 et seq.) 
g.  Conduct educational programs on historic properties located within the city and on general historic preservation activities; 
h.  Make such investigation and studies of matters relating to historic preservation, including consultation with historic preservation experts, the Norcross City Council or the Commission itself may, from time to time, deem necessary or appropriate for the purposes of preserving historic resources; 
i.  Seek out local, state, federal or private funds for historic preservation and seek pre-approval from Norcross City Council for any grant request and make recommendations on the findings to the Norcross City Council concerning the most appropriate uses of any funds acquired; 
j.  Submit to the Historic Preservation Division of the Department of Natural Resources a list of historic properties of historic districts designated; 
k.  Perform historic preservation activities as the official agency of the Norcross historic preservation program; 
l.  Employ persons, if necessary, to carry out the responsibilities of the Commission; 
m.  Receive donations, grants, funds, or gifts of historic property and acquire and sell historic properties. The Preservation Commission shall not obligate the City of Norcross without prior consent. 
n.  Review and make comments to the Historic Preservation Division of the Department of Natural Resources concerning the nomination of properties within its jurisdiction to the National Register of Historic Places; and; 
o.  Participate in private, state and federal historic preservation programs and with the consent of the Norcross City Council, enter into agreements to do the same. 
(e)  Commission's power to adopt rules and standards . The Preservation Commission shall adopt rules and standards for the transaction of its business and for consideration of application for designation of certificates of appropriateness, such as by-laws, removal of membership provision, and design guidelines and criteria. The Preservation Commission shall have the flexibility to adopt rules and standards without amendment to this chapter. The Commission shall provide for the time and place of regular meetings and a method for the calling of special meetings. The Commission shall select such officers as it deems appropriate from among its members. A quorum shall consist of a majority of the members. 
(f)  Conflict of interest . The commission shall be subject to all conflict of interest laws set forth in Georgia Statues and in the City of Norcross Charters. 
(g)  Commission's authority to receive funding from various sources . The commission shall have the authority to accept donations and to augment existing commission budgets. 
(h)  Records of commission meetings . A public record shall be kept of the Commission resolution, proceedings and actions. 
(Ord. No. 02-2017 , art. I, 7-5-2017) 
Sec. 114-4. - Recommendation and designation of historic districts and properties. 
(a)  Preliminary research by the commission . 
(1)  Commission's mandate to conduct a survey of local historical resources . The Commission shall compile and collect information and conduct surveys of historic resources within the City of Norcross. 
(2)  Commission's power to recommend districts and buildings to the Norcross City Council for designation . The Commission shall present to the Norcross City Council recommendations for historic districts and properties. 
(3)  Commission's documentation of proposed designation . Prior to the Commission's recommendation of a historic district or historic property to the Norcross City Council for designation, the Commission shall prepare a report for nomination consisting of: 
a.  A physical description; 
b.  A statement of the historical, cultural, architectural and/or aesthetic significance; 
c.  A map showing district boundaries and classification {i.e. contributing, non-contributing or historic, non-historic, vacant, intrusive} of individual properties therein, or showing boundaries of individual historic properties; and 
d.  Representative photographs. 
(b)  Designation of a historic district . 
(1)  Criteria for selection of historic districts . A historic district is a geographically definable area, either contiguous or not per the recommendation of the Commission which contains buildings, structures, sites, objects, and landscape features or a combination thereof, which: 
a.  Has special character or special historic/aesthetic value or interest; 
b.  Represents one or more periods, styles or types of architecture typical of one or more eras in the history of the municipality, county, state or region; and 
c.  Causes such area, by reason of such factors, to constitute a visibly perceptible section of the municipality or county. 
(2)  Boundaries of a historic district . Boundaries of a historic district shall be included in the separate ordinances designating such districts and shall be shown on the official zoning map of the City of Norcross, or in the absence of zoning, on an official map designated as a public record. 
(3)  Evaluation of properties within historic districts . Individual properties within historic districts shall be classified as: 
a.  Historic (more than 50 years old); 
b.  Non-Historic (less than 50 years old, yet possessing architectural character); 
c.  Intrusion (structure less than 50 years old which do not contribute to the character of the district); 
d.  Vacant. 
(c)  Designation of a historic property . 
(1)  Criteria for selection of historic properties . A historic property is a building, structure, site, or object; including the adjacent area necessary for the proper appreciation or use thereof, deemed worthy of preservation by reason of value to the City of Norcross, the region or the State of Georgia for one of the following reasons: 
a.  It is an outstanding example of a structure representative of its era; 
b.  It is one of the few remaining examples of a past architectural style; 
c.  It is a place or structure associated with an event or persons of historic or cultural significance to the City of Norcross, State of Georgia, or the region; or 
d.  It is the site of natural or aesthetic interest that is continuing to contribute to the cultural or historical development and heritage of the municipality, county, state or region. 
(d)  Requirements for adopting an ordinance for the designation of historic districts and historic properties . 
(1)  Application for designation of historic districts of property . Designations may be proposed by the Norcross City Council, the Commission, or: 
a.  For historic districts—A historical society, neighborhood association or group of property owners may apply to the Commission for designation; 
b.  For historic properties—A historical society, neighborhood association or property owner may apply to the Commission for designation. 
(2)  Required components of a designation ordinance . Any ordinance designating any property or district as historic shall: 
a.  List each property in a proposed historic district of describe the proposed individual historic property; 
b.  Set forth the name(s) of the owner(s) of the designated property or properties; 
c.  Require that a certificate of appropriateness be obtained from the Commission prior to any material change in appearance of the designated property; and 
d.  Require that the property or district be shown on the official zoning map of the City of Norcross and be kept as a public record to provide notice of such designation. 
(3)  Require public hearings . The Commission or the Norcross City Council shall hold a public hearing on any proposed ordinance for the designation of any historic district or property. Notice of the hearing shall be published in at least three consecutive issues in the principle newspaper of local circulation, and written notice of the hearing shall be mailed by the Commission to all owners and occupants of such properties. All such notices shall be published or mailed not less than ten days but not more than 20 days prior to the date set for the public hearing. A notice sent via the United States mail to the last-known owner of the property shown on the city tax digest and a notice sent via attention of the occupant shall constitute legal notification to the owner and occupant under this chapter. 
(4)  Notification of Historic Preservation Division . No less than 30 days prior to making a recommendation on any ordinance designating a property or district as historic, the Commission must submit the report, required in subsection 114-4(a)(3), to the Historic Preservation Division of the Department of Natural Resources. 
(5)  Recommendations on proposed designations . A recommendation to affirm, modify or withdraw the proposed ordinance for designation shall be made by the Commission within 15 days following the public hearing and shall be in the form of a resolution to the Norcross City Council. 
(6)  The Norcross City Council actions on the Commission's recommendation . Following receipt of the Commission recommendation, the Norcross City Council may adopt the ordinance as proposed, may adopt the ordinance with any amendments they deem necessary, or reject the ordinance. 
(7)  Notification of adoption of ordinance for designation . Within 30 days following the adoption of the ordinance for designation by the Norcross City Council, the owners and occupants of each designated historic property, and the owners and occupants of each structure, site or work of art located within a designated historic district, shall be given written notification of such designation by the Norcross City Council, which notice shall apprise said owners and occupants of the necessity of obtaining a certificate of appropriateness prior to undertaking any material change in appearance of the historic property designated or within the historic district designated. A notice sent via the United States mail to the last-known owner of the property shown on the city tax digest and a notice sent via United States Mail shall constitute legal notification to the owner and occupant under this chapter. 
(8)  Notification of other agencies regarding designation . The Commission shall notify all necessary agencies within the City of Norcross of the ordinance for designation. 
(9)  Moratorium on applications for alteration or demolition while ordinance for designation is pending . If an ordinance for designation is being considered, the Commission shall have the power to freeze the status of the involved property. 
(Ord. No. 02-2017 , art. I, 7-5-2017) 
Sec. 114-5. - Application to Preservation Commission for certificate of appropriateness. 
(a)  Approval of material change in appearance in historic districts or involving historic properties . After the designation by ordinance of a historic property of a historic district, no material change in the appearance of such historic property, or of a contributing or non-contributing building, structure, site or object within such historic district, shall be made or be permitted to be made by the owner or occupant thereof, unless or until the application for a certificate of appropriateness has been submitted to and approved by the Commission. A building permit shall not be issued without a certificate of appropriateness. The commission shall not approve applications for demolition without reviewing at the same time post-demolition plans. The Commission shall have exclusive jurisdiction to issue or to deny an application for a certificate of appropriateness within the historic district and over any designated historic property. The Architecture Review Board shall not have any jurisdiction within the historic district or over any designated historic property. 
(b)  Submission of plans to commission . An application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be accompanied by such drawings, photographs, plans and documentation as may be required by the Commission. The Historic Preservation Commission shall not require that the plans and specifications be prepared by professionals, but only that such documentation be prepared in such a way as to be easily understood by the Commission members. 
(c)  Interior alterations . In its review of applications for certificates of appropriateness, the Commission shall not consider interior arrangement or use having no effect on exterior architectural features. 
(d)  Technical advice . The Commission shall have the power to seek technical advice from outside its members on any application. 
(e)  Public hearings on applications for certificates of appropriateness, notices, and right to be heard . The Commission shall hold a public hearing at which each proposed certificate of appropriateness is discussed. Notice of the hearing shall be published in the principal newspaper of local circulation in the city and written notice of the hearing shall be mailed by the Commission to all owners and occupants of the subject property. The written and published notice shall be provided in the same manner and time frame as notices are provided before a public hearing for rezoning. 
The Commission shall give the property owner and/or applicant an opportunity to be heard at the certificate of appropriateness hearing. 
(f)  Acceptable commission reaction to applications for certificate of appropriateness . Commission action: The commission may approve the certificate of appropriateness as proposed, approve the certificate of appropriateness with any modifications it deems necessary, or reject it. 
(1)  The Commission shall approve the application and issue a certificate of appropriateness if it finds that the proposed material change(s) in the appearance would not have a substantial adverse effect on the aesthetic, historic, or architectural significance and value of the historic property or the historic district. In making this determination, the Commission shall consider, in addition to any other pertinent factors, the following criteria for each of the following acts: 
a.  Reconstruction, alteration, new construction or renovation . The Commission shall issue certificates of appropriateness for the above proposed actions if those actions conform in design, scale, building materials, setback and site features, and to the Secretary of Interior's standards for rehabilitation and guidelines for rehabilitating historic buildings. 
b.  Relocation . A decision by the Commission approving or denying a certificate of appropriateness for the relocation of a building, structure, or object shall be guided by: 
1.  The historic character and aesthetic interest the building, structure or object contributes to its present setting. 
2.  Whether there are definite plans for the area to be vacated and what the effect of those plans on the character of the surrounding area will be. 
3.  Whether the building, structure or object can be moved without significant damage to its physical integrity. 
4.  Whether the proposed relocation area is compatible with the historical and architectural character of the building, structure, site or object. 
c.  Demolition . A decision by the Commission approving or denying a certificate of appropriateness for the demolition of buildings, structures, sites, judged to be 50 years old or older, or objects shall be guided by: 
1.  The historic, scenic or architectural significance of the building, structure, site, or object. 
2.  The importance of the building, structure, site, or object to the ambiance of a district. 
3.  The difficulty or the impossibility of reproducing such a building, structure, site, object because of its design, texture, material, detail, or unique location. 
4.  Whether the building, structure, site, object is one of the last remaining examples of its kind in the neighborhood or the city. 
5.  Whether there are definite plans for use of the property if the proposed demolition is carried out, and what the effect of those plans on the character of the surrounding area would be. 
6.  Whether reasonable measures can be taken to save the building, structure, site, or object from collapse. 
7.  Whether the building, structure, site, or object is capable of earning reasonable economic return on its value. 
(g)  Undue hardship . When, by reason of unusual circumstances, the strict application of any provision of this chapter would result in the exceptional practical difficulty or undue economic hardship upon any owner of a specific property, the Commission, in passing upon applications, shall have the power to vary or modify strict provisions, so as to relieve such difficulty or hardship; provided such variances, modifications interpretations shall remain in harmony with the general purpose and intent of said provisions, so that the architectural or historical integrity, or character of the property, shall be conserved and substantial justice done. In granting variances, the commission may impose such reasonable and additional stipulations and conditions as will, in its judgment, best fulfill the purpose of this chapter. An undue hardship shall not be a situation of the person's own making. 
(h)  Deadline for approval or rejection of application for certificate of appropriateness . 
(1)  The Commission shall approve or reject an application for a certificate of appropriateness within 45 days after the filing thereof by the owner or occupant of a historic property, or of a building structure, site, or object located within a historic district. Evidence of approval shall be by a certificate of appropriateness issued by the Commission. Notice of the issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness shall be sent by United States mail to the applicant and all other persons who have requested such notice in writing filed with the Commission. 
(2)  Failure of the Commission to act within said 45 days shall constitute approval, and no other evidence of approval shall be needed. 
(i)  Necessary action to be taken by commission upon rejection of application for certificate of appropriateness . 
(1)  In the event the Commission rejects an application, it shall state its reasons for doing so, and shall transmit a record of such actions and reasons, in writing, to the applicant. The Commission may suggest alternative courses of action it thinks proper if it disapproves of the application submitted. The applicant, if he or she so desires, may make modifications to the plans and may resubmit the application at any time after doing so. 
(2)  In cases where the application covers a material change in the appearance of a structure which would require the issuance of a building permit, the rejection of the application for a certificate of appropriateness by the Commission shall be binding upon the building inspector or other administrative officer charged with issuing building permits and, in such a case, no building permit shall be issued. 
(j)  Requirement of conformance with certificate of appropriateness . 
(1)  All work performed pursuant to an issued certificate of appropriateness shall conform to the requirements of such certificate. In the event work is performed not in accordance with such certificate, the Commission shall issue a cease and desist order and all work shall cease. 
(2)  The Commission and the Norcross City Council shall be authorized to institute any appropriate action or proceeding in a court of competent jurisdiction to prevent any material change in appearance of a designated historic property or historic district, except those changes made in compliance with the provisions of this chapter or to prevent any illegal act or conduct with respect to such historic property or historic district. 
(k)  Certificate of appropriateness void if construction not commenced . A certificate of appropriateness shall become void unless construction is commenced, or progress is made toward construction, within six months of date of issuance. A certificate of appropriateness shall be issued for a period of 12 months and is renewable. 
(l)  Recording an application for certificate of appropriateness . The Commission shall keep a public record of all applications for certificates of appropriateness, and or all the Commission's proceedings in connection with said application. 
(m)  Acquisition of property . The Commission may, where such action is authorized by the Norcross City Council and is reasonably necessary or appropriate for the preservation of a unique historic property, enter into negotiations with the owner for the acquisition by gift, purchase, exchange, or otherwise, to the property or any interest therein. 
(n)  Appeals . Any person adversely affected by any determination made by the Commission relative to the issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness my appeal such determination to the Norcross City Council. Any such appeal must be filed with the Norcross City Council within 15 days after the issuance of the determination pursuant to subsection 114-5(h)(1) of this chapter or, in the case of a failure of the Commission to act, within 15 days of the expiration of the 45 day period allowed for the Commission action, subsection 114-5(h)(2) of this chapter. Appeals for properties within the City of Norcross shall be made to the Norcross City Council. The Norcross City Council may approve, modify, or reject the determination made by the Commission, if the governing body finds that the Commission abused its discretion in reaching its decision. Appeals from decisions of the Norcross City Council may be taken to the Superior Court of Gwinnett County in the manner provided by law for appeals from conviction for the City of Norcross ordinance violations. 
(Ord. No. 02-2017 , art. I, 7-5-2017) 
Sec. 114-6. - Maintenance of Historic Properties and Building and Zoning Code provisions. 
(a)  Ordinary maintenance or repair . Ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior architectural or environmental feature in or on a historic property to correct deterioration, decay, or to sustain the existing form, and that does not involve a material change in design, material or outer appearance thereof, does not require a certificate of appropriateness. 
(b)  Failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair . Property owners of historic properties or properties within historic districts shall not allow their buildings to deteriorate by failing to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. The Commission shall be charged with the following responsibilities regarding deterioration by neglect. 
(1)  The Commission shall monitor the condition of historic properties and existing buildings in historic districts to determine if they are being allowed to deteriorate by neglect. Such conditions as broken windows, doors and exterior openings which allow the elements and vermin to enter, or the deterioration of a buildings structural system shall constitute failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. Refer to the existing building code for building conditions. 
(2)  In the event the Commission determines a failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair, the Commission will notify the owner of the property and set forth the steps which need to be taken to remedy the situation. The owner of such property will have 30 days in which to do this. 
(3)  In the event that the condition is not remedied in 30 days, the owner shall be penalized as provided in section 114-8 of this chapter and, at the direction of the Norcross City Council, the Commission may perform such maintenance or repair as is necessary to prevent deterioration by neglect. The owner of the property shall be liable for the cost of such maintenance and repair performed by the Commission. 
(4)  The city may enforce the collection of any amount due on such lien only in the following manner: 
a.  The owner or parties at interest shall be allowed to satisfy the amount due on such lien by paying the city within 30 days after the perfection of such lien, a sum of money equal to 25 percent of the total amount due and by further paying to the city the remaining balance due on such lien, together with interest at the rate of seven percent per annum, in three equal annual payments, each of which shall become due and payable on the anniversary date of the initial payment made as prescribed in this subsection; 
b.  Should the property upon which such lien is perfected be sold, transferred or conveyed by the owner or parties at interest at any time prior to the termination of the three-year period, then the entire balance due on such lien shall be due and payable to the city at the time of the sale, transfer or conveyance; and 
c.  Should the amount of such lien or any portion thereof, be unpaid after the passage of such three-year period, or upon the occurrence of the contingency provided for in subsection (b)(4)b. of this section, the city may enforce the collection of any amount due on such lien for repair of dwellings, buildings or other structures in the same manner as provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-358, and other applicable state statutes. This procedure shall be subject to the right of redemption by any persons having any right, title or interest in or lien upon such property, all as provided by O.C.G.A. § 58-4-40 et seq. 
(c)  Appeals of minimum maintenance and repair decisions . Any owner or other party of interest who takes exception to the city's decision relative to a recommendation of action regarding the failure to provide minimum maintenance and repair may appeal such decision to the superior court of the county in the manner provided by law for convictions of municipal ordinance violations, namely, via petition for writ of certiorari. 
(d)  Affirmation of existing building and zoning codes . Nothing in this chapter shall be constructed as to exempt property owners from complying with existing city building and zoning codes, nor prevent any property owner from making any use of this property not prohibited by other statutes, ordinances or regulations. 
(Ord. No. 02-2017 , art. I, 7-5-2017) 
Sec. 114-7. - Demolition or relocation of a historic property or properties within a historic district. 
(a)  Applications for certificates of appropriateness for demolition or relocation . The Historic Preservation Commission shall have the authority to approve, approve with conditions, or deny certificates of appropriateness for demolition or relocation. The proposed demolition or relocation of all or any portion of a historic property or property within a historic district shall require the obtention of a certificate of appropriateness for demolition or relocation. 
(b)  Public hearing . A public hearing shall be scheduled for each application for a certificate of appropriateness for demolition or relocation. 
(c)  Notice of public hearing pursuant to an application for certificate of appropriateness for demolition or relocation . Notice as provided for in subsection 114-5(e) above shall be provided in the context of an application for a certificate of appropriateness for demolition or relocation, and, in addition, notice of such public hearing containing the information as described at subsection 114-5(e) above shall be published in at least one issue of the official legal organ of Gwinnett County not less than five days and no more than 30 days prior to the date set for the public hearing. 
(d)  Violation . The demolition or relocation of a historic property, or property within a historic district without the obtention of a certificate of appropriateness shall constitute a violation of this chapter of a high and aggravated nature. 
(e)  Consideration of post-demolition or postrelocation plans . The Historic Preservation Commission shall not grant certificates of appropriateness for demolition or relocation without having first reviewed the post-demolition or post-relocation plans for the site. 
(f)  Demolition/relocation criteria . Upon receipt of an application for a certificate of appropriateness for demolition or relocation, the Historic Preservation Commission shall apply the criteria described in subsection 114-4(c) of this chapter to determine whether to grant or deny the application for a certificate of appropriateness for demolition or relocation. 
(g)  Fee to accompany application for certificate of appropriateness for demolition or relocation . The Historic Preservation Commission, in its by-laws, may require a reasonable fee to accompany an application for a certificate of appropriateness for demolition or relocation. 
(h)  Binding upon the commission . The Commission, including its various departments, authorities, commissions, committees and boards shall be bound by the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 02-2017 , art. I, 7-5-2017) 
Sec. 114-8. - Penalty provisions. 
Violations of any provisions of this chapter shall be penalized in the same manner as provided for penalties of violations of validly enacted ordinances of the City of Norcross. 
(Ord. No. 02-2017 , art. I, 7-5-2017) 
Chapter 115 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt plans and exercise the power of zoning, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ IV; the Zoning Procedures Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq.; local government zoning powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-2.k. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 115-1. - Purpose. 
Following is a resolution of the city regulating the location, height, number of stories and size of buildings and other structures; the density of population; the size of yards and other open spaces; the uses of land, buildings and structures for industry, commerce, conservation, recreation, residence, public activities and other purposes; creating districts for said purposes and establishing the boundaries thereof; defining certain terms used herein; providing for the method of administration, amendment and enforcement and for the imposition of penalties for violation; providing for a Zoning Board of Appeals and defining its powers and duties; and repealing conflicting resolutions; and other matters. 
(Code 1979, § 8-4-1; Code 1998, § 106-1; Ord. No. 06-2002, § 106-1, 3-4-2003) 
Sec. 115-2. - Preamble and enactment clause. 
Pursuant to authority conferred by the Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ IV, and for the purposes of promoting the health, safety, morals, convenience, order, prosperity or the general welfare of the present and future inhabitants of the city; of lessening congestion in the streets; securing safety from fire, panic and providing adequate light and air; preventing the overcrowding of land, avoiding both undue concentration of population and urban sprawl; facilitating the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other public requirements; protecting property against blight and depreciation; encouraging the most appropriate use of land, buildings and other structures throughout the city; securing economy in government expenditures; and for other purposes, all in accordance with a comprehensive plan for the development of the city, the City Council does hereby ordain and enact into law the following articles and sections of the zoning resolution. 
(Code 1979, § 8-4-2; Code 1998, § 106-2; Ord. No. 06-2002, § 106-2, 3-4-2003) 
Sec. 115-3. - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Zoning Resolution of the City of Norcross, Georgia." 
(Code 1979, § 8-4-3; Code 1998, § 106-3; Ord. No. 06-2002, § 106-3, 3-4-2003) 
Sec. 115-4. - Interpretation. 
(a)  Definitions. Except as specifically defined in this section, all words used in this chapter have their customary dictionary definitions. 
(b)  Interpretation of certain terms. 
(1)  Terms used in the singular include the plural and terms used in the plural include the singular. 
(2)  Terms used in the present tense include the future tense. 
(3)  The term "building" includes the term "structure." 
(4)  The term "erected" includes the terms "constructed," "moved," "located" or "relocated." 
(5)  The term "lot" includes the term "plot" or "parcel." 
(6)  The term "map" or "zoning map" means the zoning map of the city. 
(7)  The term "person" includes the terms "individuals," "firms," "partnerships," "corporations," "associations," "governmental bodies" and all other legal entities. 
(8)  The term "shall" is always mandatory and never discretionary. 
(9)  The terms "used" or "occupied" include the terms "intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied." 
(Code 1998, § 106-4; Ord. No. 06-2002, § 106-4, 3-4-2002) 
Sec. 115-5. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abutting means touching at one point or along a common side, boundary, or property line. Two pieces of property that are separated by a railroad and/or street or right-of-way, or natural feature, such as, a naturally occurring body of water, are adjacent, but not abutting. 
Adjacent property means property that is either abutting, or on the opposite side of a common street and/or railroad right-of-way, easement, or natural feature, such as, a naturally occurring body of water that directly separates it from the subject property. Properties separated by a railroad track, local street, freeway or stream are not abutting but can be adjacent. 
Architectural modulation means variation in materials, massing, fenestration, and ornamental detail of a facade that divides a facade into unique components or identities, as distinguished from a uniform facade without variation. Architectural modulations of a facade should break the vertical plane by more than two feet in depth, measured from the forward plane of the facade. 
Auto service means any building, structure, improvements, or land used for the repair and maintenance of automobiles, motorcycles, trucks, trailers, or similar vehicles not including body work or vehicle painting. 
Banner means a piece of fabric or similar material which is attached to a pole, enclosed in a frame, or mounted as a temporary sign. 
Bed and breakfast inn means a business operated in an owner-occupied, single-family detached dwelling with up to six guestrooms where overnight accommodations and a morning meal are provided to transients for compensation, and where the bed and breakfast inn is operated as subordinate and incidental to the main residential use of the building. 
Buffer means land used to visibly separate one use from another through screening and distance; to shield or block noise, light, glare, physical or visual or other nuisances; to block physical passage to dangerous or undesirable areas; or to reduce air pollution, dust, dirt and litter or otherwise to promote the public safety and welfare. 
Building means any structure attached to the ground which has a roof and which is designed for the shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, animals or property of any kind. 
Building face means the wall of a building that most closely parallels the front setback line regardless of where the main entrance is located. A building may have more than one face only if a front setback is maintained from more than one right-of-way. 
Bus station means a building in which patrons of a for-pay motor carrier may purchase tickets for passage on such motor carrier, may board and disembark such motor carrier, but which does not allow any motor carrier to remain on the premises for more than two hours at a time, except under extraordinary circumstances, such as inclement weather or mechanical failure. All motor carriers located on bus station property shall have the driver or chauffeur present and in charge of such motor carrier while located on bus station property. 
Bus terminal means a building in which patrons of a for-pay motor carrier may purchase tickets for passage on said motor carrier, may board and disembark such motor carrier, and which allows buses to remain in a secured area for more than 12 hours at a time. All motor carriers located on the bus terminal property shall have the driver or chauffeur or designated company personnel present and in charge of such motor carrier while it is located on bus terminal property. 
Business park means a master planned development that is predominately office in use, with multiple buildings of like architecture and landscaping that provides internal access, private utilities and parking. The overall development is within a campus-like atmosphere and like uses being business and professional offices. 
Common area (RAOD) means land, amenities, accessory structure and improvements consistent with section 115-93(j) not individually owned and not dedicated for a public use and integral to the redevelopment area that encourage pedestrian connectivity to adjacent lots or parcels such as arcades, greenways, sidewalks, public spaces that are clearly intended for gathering spaces (including rooftop recreational amenities and gardens in high-rise buildings) or that act as connectors to adjacent buildings, or such land and amenities, that are otherwise designed and intended for the common use or enjoyment of the residents, tenants, and guests of the development. Lands dedicated for public park land and public spaces within rights-of-way which are beyond the minimum required and are clearly intended as gathering spaces with amenities such as benches, fountains, etc., may be counted as common areas. Required common areas shall not include areas devoted to public or private streets or any land that has been or is to be conveyed to a public agency via a purchase agreement for such uses as schools or other public facilities. 
Compatible means designs of structures and landscapes that are consistent with structures and landscapes that are located on the same property of which they are a part, based on an objective comparison of identified physical elements such as architectural form, building mass, height, scale, land uses, materials and landscape architecture. 
Complementary uses means land uses that serve mutually supportive functions that encourage frequent interactions, and do not cause excessive conflicts with one another in terms of noise, access, traffic, parking, services or utility demands. 
Comprehensive plan means, unless otherwise stated, the general plan for land use, transportation and community facilities prepared and maintained by the City Council. The term "comprehensive plan" includes component or functional plans for the city including, but not limited to, a plan for land use. 
Connectivity means the degree to which streets, sidewalks, trails, and bike paths form a continuous and interconnected system that allows full mobility and convenient access between all origins and destinations as they may be distributed throughout a developed area. 
Density bonus refers to a provision of this zoning chapter that allows a parcel to accommodate additional square footage or additional residential units beyond the maximum otherwise permitted, in exchange for the provision of an amenity specified in this zoning chapter that provides a public benefit. 
Density, gross, (RAOD) refers to the number of square feet of a building, or number of lots or dwelling units on a tract of land divided by the total acres of a parcel or tract of land prior to development or subdivision, including all streets or rights-of-way, open space, floodplain, and other unsubdivided or unused portions of the tract of land. 
Density, net, (RAOD) refers to the number of square feet, lots, or dwelling units on a tract of land, less area for, open space, floodplain, wetland, and other unusable portions of the tract of land. 
Drive-in restaurant means a building or portion thereof where food and/or beverages are sold in a form ready for consumption and where all or a significant portion of the consumption takes place or is designed to take place outside the confines of the building, often in a motor vehicle on the site. Note: A drive-thru pick-up window does not necessarily indicate a drive-in restaurant. 
Driveway means a privately owned and maintained path, appropriately surfaced with asphalt, concrete (pervious or impervious), gravel as allowed or other hard surface, connecting directly with a public thoroughfare, and used for accessing a structure and/or an improved area such as a garage, carport or exterior parking pad; such area primarily designated for vehicular parking, stopping, standing or turnaround. 
Duplex means a residential structure designed for two-family occupancy. 
Dwelling unit means one or more rooms designed for the occupancy, cooking and sleeping of one or more persons living as a family. 
Extended-stay hotel shall mean any structure consisting of one or more buildings, with more than five dwelling units with provisions for living, sanitation, and sleeping, that is specifically constructed, kept, used, maintained, advertised, and held out to the public to be a place where temporary residence is offered for pay to persons for non-transient extended stays and/or stays of 30 days or longer, regardless of the presence of rentals or leases for shorter periods of time. 
Extended stay motel means and includes any building containing six or more guestrooms intended or designed to be used, or which are used, rented or hired out to be occupied or which are occupied for sleeping purposes for guests and contain kitchen facilities for food preparation including but not limited to such facilities as refrigerators, stoves, dishwashers and ovens. 
Family means an individual or two or more persons related by blood, marriage, or law; or a group of not more than four persons, who need not be so related, living together in a dwelling unit. The term "family" does not include any organization or institutional group. 
Fixed public transportation station means a passenger loading area that serves an express form of public transportation such as express bus, bus rapid transit (BRT), light rail, trolley, heavy rail rapid transit, or commuter rail, but not including local bus service or shuttle bus service. 
Flag means a piece of fabric or other flexible material solely containing distinctive colors, patterns, standards, words or emblems used as the symbol of an organization or entity. 
Floor area, one-family dwelling, means the gross horizontal area of the several floors of a one-family residential structure, exclusive of carport, basement, attic and open porches. 
Floor area ratio (FAR) means the relationship between the amount of useable floor area permitted in a building and the area of the lot on which the building stands. FAR is computed by dividing the gross floor area of a building or buildings by the total area of the lot. For purposes of this calculation, floor area of parking structures shall not be included in floor area. See Figure A.10 of the district guidelines for an illustration of FAR. 
Gross floor area, GFA (RAOD) means the sum of the heated floor area of all the habitable stories of a building, measured from the exterior faces of exterior walls. The measurement of GFA excludes unenclosed balconies and floor area of parking structures. 
Height of building means the vertical distance measured from grade to the highest finished roof surface in the case of flat roofs or to a point at the average height of the highest roof having a pitch. 
Home occupation means an occupation customarily carried on within a dwelling unit for profit or support involving the sale of only those articles, products or services produced on the premises, conducted entirely within the dwelling by those who reside in the dwelling unit with equipment customarily used for household purposes and involving no display of articles or products. The term "home occupation" includes: 
(1)  The accommodation of not more than two boarders. 
(2)  The provision of care and supervision by a state registered resident adult for no more than six persons who are not residents of the premises for less than 24 hours per day. 
Hotel or motel shall mean any structure consisting of one or more buildings, with more than five dwelling units with provisions for transient living, sanitation, and sleeping, that is specifically constructed, kept, used, maintained, advertised, and held out to the public to be a place where temporary lodging of 14 days or less is offered for pay to persons, is not intended for long-term occupancy, and does not otherwise meet the definition of an extended-stay hotel as defined in this section. 
Industrial park , means a master planned development that is predominately industrial in use, with multiple buildings of like architecture and landscaping that provides internal access, private utilities and parking. The overall development is within a campus-like atmosphere and like uses being industrial oriented business. 
Junkyard means property used for indoor or outdoor storage, keeping or abandonment, whether or not for sale or resale, of junk including scrap metal, rags, paper or other scrap materials, used lumber, salvaged housewrecking demolition and structured steel materials and equipment or for the dismantling, or abandonment of automobiles or other vehicles or machinery or parts thereof. 
LEED means Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design. 
Light-emitting diode (LED) means a semiconductor diode that emits incoherent narrow-spectrum light when electrically biased in the forward direction of the p-n junction, as in the common LED circuit. This effect is a form of electroluminescence. 
Livestock means and includes the following farm animals that are owned, raised and kept for pleasure, utility or sale: 
(1)  Cattle, horses, goats, sheep, swine and other hoofed animals; 
(2)  Poultry, chicken, ducks, geese and other live fowl; 
(3)  Rabbits, mink, foxes and other fur or hide-bearing animals customarily bred or raised in captivity for the harvesting of their skins; 
Pets, as defined below, and wild animals shall not be deemed livestock. 
Livestock quarters means any enclosed yard, pen or other structure which surrounds or is used to shelter, care for, house, feed, exercise, train, exhibit, display or show any animals, other than fenced pasture land for grazing. 
Lot means a developed or undeveloped tract of land in one ownership, legally transferable as a single unit of land. 
Lot, through, means a lot having frontage on two streets that are approximately parallel. 
Lot width means the horizontal distance between the side lines of a lot measured at the minimum required front yard (building setback) line. 
Lot width (cul-de-sac) means, for a lot having the majority of its frontage on a cul-de-sac, the horizontal distance between the side lines of the lot, measured at the minimum required front yard (building setback) line or at a line parallel to said setback line, which is no more than twice the minimum front yard setback distance from the street. 
Massing refers to the exterior form of a building, a structure or a series of buildings seen as a whole, encompassing bulk, shape, height, width, scale, proportion, and the spatial relationships of buildings, landscaping, and open space. 
Miniwarehouse means a structure containing separate storage spaces of varying sizes leased, rented or owned on an individual basis. No storage of chemicals or flammable goods is allowed. 
Mixed-use development (RAOD) means development of a single building or single parcel to contain two or more of the following types of uses: residential, retail/commercial, office, or institutional, and in which each of such uses constitute at least 20 percent of the gross floor area, excluding accessory uses. Mixed uses may be combined vertically within the same building or placed side by side on the same parcel; provided they are in close proximity, planned as a unified and complementary whole, and functionally integrated with interconnected vehicular and pedestrian access and parking areas. Mixed-use developments may be permitted outside of the RAOD boundaries, within the physical area encompassed by the 2030 Comprehensive Plan's Buford Highway Reinvestment Character Area designation, subject to a Special Use Permit. 
Mobile home or mobile building means a detached, single-family dwelling or other use type factory-manufactured structure with tongue, axles and wheels when originally built designed for occupancy; made to be transported after fabrication on wheels. Removal of the wheels and placement on a foundation does not change its classification. Travel trailers and recreational vehicles are not mobile homes. 
Mobile home lot means a parcel of land for the exclusive use of the occupants of a single mobile home. 
Mobile home park means a parcel of land that has been planned and improved for the placement of mobile homes for nontransient use. 
Modular home or modular building means a factory fabricated transportable building consisting of units designed to be incorporated at a building site on a permanent foundation into a structure to be used for residential or commercial purposes. 
Modulation means the rhythmic variation in the massing and fenestration of a building that divides its roofline and facade into small harmonious components that create visual interest, as distinct from the appearance of a large building with a featureless facade built on a single plane with a single roofline. Modulations of a facade should break the vertical plane with variations that are at least two feet in depth, measured from the forward plane of the facade. 
Multi-tenant building means a single building containing multiple uses or tenants where there are specific exterior entrance ways for individual uses. 
Multi-tenant development means a single development containing multiple buildings where there are specific exterior entrance ways for the individual uses. 
Nonconforming use means any building or land lawfully occupied at the time of passage or amendment of this chapter which does not conform, after the passage or amendment of this chapter, with the use regulations of the district in which it is located. 
Office means structures, or portions of structures, in which business activities take place on a regular basis, but where goods are not produced physically, sold or repaired. These include, but are not limited to: banks, general offices; governmental offices; insurance offices and real estate offices. 
Parking, bicycle, means an area in a parking lot or along a sidewalk that is designed and marked for the purpose of securing bicycles in an upright fashion, using a locker or open framework that is permanently attached to the ground and providing secure anchorage for two or more bicycles. 
Parking, on-street, means areas along curbs of a street that are authorized for temporary (less than 48 hours) storage of automobiles belonging to owners, tenants, customers, or visitors of adjacent or nearby properties. 
Parking structure means decks placed aboveground or underground in a structure designed principally for the storage and circulation of motor vehicles that includes a roof and/or more than one level. A parking structure may be either freestanding or incorporated in one structure along with other uses, such as office, residential or commercial uses. 
Path, multi-use, means a corridor designed for one or more alternative forms of transportation, including pedestrians, joggers, skaters, and slow-moving vehicles such as strollers, bicycles, and golf carts. 
Pervious paving means materials used for surfacing parking lots and driveways such as porous concrete or modular porous paver systems that are designed to allow infiltration of stormwater and are consistent with stormwater BMPs. Pervious paving areas are not considered as impervious surface areas for the purpose of calculating impervious surface coverage. 
Pet (household pet) means any animal owned or kept for pleasure rather than sale, which is an animal of a species customarily bred and raised to live in the habitat of humans and is dependent upon them for food and shelter; except that livestock and wild animals shall not be deemed pets. 
Planned development means an area of not less than five acres, developed according to a development plan containing single-family residential structures to be sold as fee simple units with all streets, recreational areas, and other properties to be owned and maintained by a mandatory home owners association. A planned residential development contains single-family dwelling units, either detached or attached to similar units which is so constructed and arranged that no dwelling unit is above or below any other dwelling unit, and that each dwelling unit is: 
(1)  Separated from any and every other attached dwelling unit by a firewall. 
(2)  Self-contained within defined limits with individual heating or air conditioning systems and separately metered utilities. 
(3)  Served by a private entrance. 
Only the land which is directly beneath the dwelling unit is to be individually owned. 
Portable structure means a structure or building designed to be movable from one location to another which is not designed to be permanently attached or permanently anchored to the ground, and which is not within the definition of the term "modular building" or "mobile building;" such as pushcarts, bicycle carts, motorized carts, tents, etc. 
Private deed restrictions or covenants means private deed restrictions or covenants imposed on land by private landowners. They bind and restrict the land in the hands of the present owners and subsequent purchasers. They are enforced only by the landowners involved and not by any city or other public agency. 
Public art display means a permanent work of visual art intended for the enjoyment of the general public and adornment of public space that is placed where it is accessible to view. Examples may include, but are not limited to, one or more of the following: sculptures, monuments, statuary, murals, mosaics, and mobiles. 
Recovered materials means those materials which have known use, reuse, or recycling potential; can be feasibly used, reused or recycled; and have been diverted or removed from the solid waste stream for sale, use, reuse, or recycling, whether or not requiring subsequent separation and processing. 
Recovered materials processing means any lot, land, structure, or facility, or part thereof, utilized for the purpose of collecting, sorting, processing for resale, and transport of materials to be recycled or reused, including: plastics, glass, paper, aluminum and scrap metals. Recovered materials processing does not include any operation which changes the nature of a material, its chemical composition or its physical qualities. A special use permit is required to operate a recovered materials processing facility on private property, subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  Activities shall be limited to collection, sorting, packaging, resale, and shipping. 
(2)  Recovered materials processing prohibited in Redevelopment Area Overlay district. 
(3)  Outside storage is prohibited. 
(4)  All materials delivered outside of structure must be removed from any outdoor unloading area and brought into a fully enclosed interior space within the time limit as established per the special use permit. 
(5)  All materials collected shall not be visible once deposited in a bin or bunker. All sorting and collection bins shall be enclosed and stored inside a fully-enclosed building. 
(6)  A minimum distance of 1,000 linear feet is required for properties located adjacent to or across the street from any property used for or zoned for residential use. 
(7)  Lighting for such facilities shall be placed in such a fashion as to be directed away from any nearby residential areas. 
Recycling means the process by which recovered materials and waste products are reduced to raw materials and transformed into new and often different products. Such use is prohibited in the city. 
Regional stormwater management facility refers to stormwater management facilities designed to control stormwater runoff from multiple properties, where the owners or developers of the individual properties may assist in the financing of the facility, and the requirement for on-site controls is either eliminated or reduced. 
Residential/business dwelling means a type of attached dwelling in which a commercial business or office may be operated in the basement or first floor/story of the structure. The business need not be operated by the resident of the dwelling. 
Residential property means: 
(1)  Any lot or other tract of land zoned in any of the following districts under this chapter: R100, R75, R65, RMD, RM6, RM8 and RM10; 
(2)  Any lot or other tract of land adjoining, abutting or within 1,000 feet of the city limits in any of the following districts, as defined in the 1985 Zoning Resolution of Gwinnett County, Georgia, as amended: RA200, R140, R100, R75, R60, R100M, R75M, RZT, RTH, RL, RMD, RM, MH, MHS, RM6, RM8, RM10 and RM13. 
Sign means and includes every outdoor advertising device, billboard, poster, panel, statuary, freestanding ground sign, sign painted on or affixed in any manner to a wall, window, marquee, awning or canopy, and shall include any announcement, declaration, demonstration, display, ribbon, banner, illustrations or insignia used to advertise or promote the interests of any person, group, organization, corporation or other legal entity, when the same is placed in view of the general public traveling along a public street right-of-way. 
Sign area means the smallest square, rectangle, triangle, circle, or combination thereof, which encompasses the entire sign, inclusive of any border and trim but excluding the base, apron, supports, and other structural members. 
Sign, awning, means a sign located on a roof-like cover extending before a place as a shelter and which may be used in lieu of a wall sign. 
Sign, billboard, means a stanchion sign with a sign area greater than 181 square feet. 
Sign, business or institution identification, means a sign that may give the name and address of a business or institution that is located on the premises on which the sign is placed, as well as the nature of its activity. 
Sign, freestanding, means a sign securely affixed to a steel support structure which is permanently attached to the ground and wholly independent of any building for support, such as monument or stanchion signs. 
Sign height is measured to the highest portion of the sign, including any molding, trim, border or frame. 
Sign, monument, means a freestanding sign mounted directly upon the ground. Such sign may not be attached to or be a part of or supported by the building in or to which the sign applies. 
Sign, portable, means any sign which is manifestly designed to be transported, including by trailer or on its own wheels, even though the wheels of such sign may be removed and the remaining chassis or support constructed without wheels is converted to an A- or T-frame sign or attached temporarily or permanently to the ground. 
Sign, reader board, means any sign that is designed so that its letters and numbers can be changed. 
Sign, stanchion, means a freestanding sign mounted on one or more steel poles set in the ground and of sufficient strength and size to support the advertisement portion of such structure which rests upon or is supported by such poles. 
Sign, temporary, means a sign of a nonpermanent nature. 
Sign, wall , means a sign applied or mounted to the wall or surface of a building or structure. The total lettering on one side of a building or structure shall constitute one wall sign. 
Single building means a single building containing a single use or tenant where there are one or more entrance ways for the individual use or tenant. 
Single development means a single development containing a single use or tenant where there are one or more entrance ways for the individual use or tenant. 
Special exception means a use listed in this chapter is permitted if it meets stated conditions and is approved by the Zoning Board of Appeals after a public hearing. 
Street means a thoroughfare that affords the principal means of access to abutting property. 
Street, local, residential arterial, major collectors, minor arterials, major arterials, principal arterials and interstates, means the streets that are shown as such on the Official Thoroughfare Map of the City of Norcross, prepared by Robert G. Appleby, G.I.S. Consultants, which has been adopted by the Mayor and Council, was last revised in May of 1998, and which is on file in the Office of Community Development. 
Structure means anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached to something on the ground. 
Surface, improved, means an area no less than nine feet by 19 feet in size, constructed roughly on or slightly above level grade, comprised of a veneer of hard material installed over a compacted sub-base of foundation material. 
Use means the purpose for which land, premises or a building thereon is designated, arranged or intended, or for which it is or may be occupied, used or maintained. 
Use, accessory, means a use or building customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use or building and located on the same lot as the principal use or building. 
Use, permitted, means a use which is lawfully established in a particular district and which conforms to all requirements, regulations and performance standards of such district. A permitted use may be a principal use or an accessory use. 
Use, principal, means a use or structure which determines the predominant or major use of the lot on which it is located. A principal use may be either a permitted or a special use. 
Use, protected, refers to: 
(1)  A church, mosque, synagogue or other place of worship; 
(2)  A public or private nursery school or any other public or private school serving any one or more grades K through 12; 
(3)  A child care facility, licensed by the Georgia Department of Human Resources; 
(4)  A public park, playground or playing field; 
(5)  A public or private cemetery. 
Use, special (conditional), means either a public or private use as listed which, because of its unique characteristics, cannot be properly classified as a permitted use in a particular district. After consideration of the public need for the particular use at the specific location, a permit for such special use may be granted by the City Council or the Community Development Director. A special use may be a principal use or an accessory use. 
Variance means a modification of the specific provisions of this zoning chapter granted when strict enforcement of the zoning chapter would cause undue hardship owning to circumstances unique to the individual property on which the variance is granted. 
Wayfinding means specialized signs giving directions of various nearby attractions that are placed in public view for the convenience and information of visitors and patrons. 
Yard means an open space on a lot situated between the principal building or use on the lot and a lot line and unoccupied by any structure, except as otherwise provided herein. 
Yard, front, means an open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a principal building or use, extending the full width of the lot and located between the street line and the front line of the building projected to the side lines of the lot. 
Yard, rear, means an open space on the same lot with a principal building or use, unoccupied except by an accessory building or use, extending the full width of the lot and located between the rear line of the lot and the rear line of the building or use projected to the side lines of the lot. 
Yard, side, means an open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a principal building or use, located between the building or use and the side line of the lot and extending from the rear line of the front yard to the front line of the rear yard. 
(Code 1979, § 8-4-5; Code 1998, § 106-5; Ord. No. 10-95, 8-7-1995; Ord. No. 16-96, 8-5-1996; Ord. No. 21-96, 10-7-1996; Ord. No. 06-2002, § 106-5, 3-4-2002; Ord. No. 10-2002, § 106-5, 6-3-2002; Ord. No. 18-2003, 12-1-2003; Ord. No. 06-2005, § 106-5, 9-6-2005; Ord. No. 11-2008, § 106-5, 5-5-2008; Ord. No. 20-2008, § 106-5, 7-7-2008; Ord. No. 23-2008, pt. I(106-5), 9-8-2008; Ord. No. 10-2009, pt. I, 7-6-2009; Ord. No. 17-2009, pt. I, 8-3-2009; Ord. No. 25-2011, 12-5-2011; Ord. No. 03-2013, § 1, 3-4-2013; Ord. No. > 09-2015 , § I. 12-7-2015; Ord. No. 1-2016 , § IA, 3-7-2016; Ord. No. 07-2016 , § I, 7-5-2016; Ord. No. 11-2016 , § I, 11-14-2016) 
Sec. 115-6. - General use regulations. 
No building or structure or land shall be used or occupied and no building or structure or part thereof shall be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved or altered, except in conformity with the regulations of this chapter. 
(Code 1979, § 8-4-6; Code 1998, § 106-6; Ord. No. 06-2002, § 106-6, 3-4-2002) 
Sec. 115-7. - Height and density. 
No building or structure shall be erected, constructed, reconstructed or altered to: 
(1)  Exceed the height limits; 
(2)  House a greater number of families per acre or occupy a smaller lot area per family than are herein required; and 
(3)  Have narrower or smaller front, rear or side yards than are herein required. 
(Code 1979, § 8-4-7; Code 1998, § 106-7; Ord. No. 06-2002, § 106-7, 3-4-2002) 
Sec. 115-8. - Reduction in lot size. 
No lot shall be reduced in size so that lot width or depth, size of yards, lot area per family or any other requirement of this chapter is not maintained. This limitation shall not apply when a portion of a lot is acquired for a public purpose. 
(Code 1979, § 8-4-8; Code 1998, § 106-8; Ord. No. 06-2002, § 106-8, 3-4-2002) 
Sec. 115-9. - Yards and other spaces. 
No part of a yard or the off-street parking or loading spaces that are required in connection with any building or use for the purpose of complying with the regulations of this chapter shall be included as part of the yard or off-street parking or loading spaces required for another building, except as specifically provided in this chapter. 
(Code 1979, § 8-4-9; Code 1998, § 106-9; Ord. No. 06-2002, § 106-9, 3-4-2002) 
Sec. 115-10. - Only one principal building or use on a lot. 
Only one principal building or structure or use and its customary accessory buildings and uses shall be permitted on any lot. 
(Code 1979, § 8-4-10; Code 1998, § 106-10; Ord. No. 06-2002, § 106-10, 3-4-2002) 
Sec. 115-11. - Street frontage requirement. 
Except for planned residential developments, no building or structure shall be erected on a lot that does not abut for at least 40 feet upon an open street which shall be either a public street, a publicly approved street or a publicly maintained street. Any unit of a planned residential development as defined in this chapter shall not constitute a lot under the provisions of this section and shall not require road frontage on a public street. 
(Code 1979, § 8-4-11; Code 1998, § 106-11; Ord. No. 21-96, 10-7-1996; Ord. No. 06-2002, § 106-11, 3-4-2002) 
Sec. 115-12. - Classification of streets. 
For the purposes of this chapter, all of the streets, roads and highways in the city are classified as shown on the Official Thoroughfare Map of the City of Norcross, Georgia, prepared by Robert G. Appleby, G.I.S. Consultants, and which is on file in the Office of the Community Development Department. 
(Code 1979, § 8-4-12; Code 1998, § 106-12; Ord. No. 18-95, § XI, 11-6-1995; Ord. No. 06-2002, § 106-12, 3-4-2002) 
Sec. 115-13. - Nonconforming uses. 
(a)  The lawful use of any building or structure or land existing at the time of the enactment or amendment of this chapter may be continued, even though such use does not conform with the provisions of this chapter, except that the nonconforming use shall not be: 
(1)  Extended to occupy a greater area of land. 
(2)  Extended to occupy a greater area of a building or structure unless such additional area of the building or structure existed at the time of the passage or amendment of this chapter and was clearly designed to house the same use as the nonconforming use occupying the other portion of the building or structure. 
(3)  Reestablished after discontinuance for six months. 
(4)  Changed to another nonconforming use. 
(b)  A building occupied by a nonconforming use at the time of the enactment or amendment of this chapter may be retained, except it shall not be: 
(1)  Enlarged, altered or rebuilt, except in conformance with this chapter, but it may be repaired to the extent necessary to maintain it in a safe and sanitary condition. 
(2)  Rebuilt, altered or repaired after damage exceeding 50 percent of its replacement cost at the time of destruction, except in conformity with this chapter. 
(Code 1979, § 8-4-13; Code 1998, § 106-13; Ord. No. 06-2002, § 106-13, 3-4-2002; Ord. No. 14-2003, § 106-13, 10-6-2003) 
Sec. 115-14. - Modular or mobile buildings. 
Except where specifically allowed under other sections of this chapter, modular or mobile buildings used for purposes other than residential or accessory to residential shall not be permitted except as a special exception granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals, i.e. temporary church or school classrooms, car lot sales office, and similar accessory structures. Temporary mobile structures only in association with a permitted temporary outdoor activity, subject to the provisions of chapter 8, article IX, section 8-318, as proposed, are exempt from the requirements of this section. 
(Code 1979, § 8-4-14; Code 1998, § 106-14; Ord. No. 06-2002, § 106-14, 3-4-2002; Ord. No. 20-2009, pt. I, 12-7-2009) 
Sec. 115-15. - Portable structures. 
Portable structures such as tents used for purposes other than residential or accessory to residential shall not be permitted for more than 90 days in any 12-month period, except as a special exception granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
(Code 1979, § 8-4-15; Code 1998, § 106-15; Ord. No. 06-2002, § 106-15, 3-4-2002) 
Sec. 115-16. - Designation of street numbers. 
(a)  Each one- and two-family dwelling unit shall have posted and maintained in a conspicuous place on the property, visible from the street providing general public access, the address of such dwelling unit in figures at least three inches high on a contrasting background that will allow 24-hour visibility. 
(b)  Each multifamily dwelling shall have posted and maintained in a conspicuous place on the building, visible from the parking lot or street providing general public access, the address or number of the building in figures at least six inches high on a contrasting background, and each individual apartment/unit within the building shall be marked on or about its main entrance with individual apartment/unit number and/or address in figures at least three inches high on a contrasting background that will allow 24-hour visibility. In addition to the above, where a multifamily building has more than one exterior entrance, each such entrance shall be marked, in figures at least three inches high on contrasting background, with the number and/or address of each and every individual apartment/unit to which access is provided through that common entrance. 
(c)  Each business or other nonresidential building shall have posted and maintained in a conspicuous place on the property, visible from the street providing public access, the address of such building in figures at least four inches high on a contrasting background that will allow 24-hour visibility. If the numbers are not placed within 15 feet of the back of the street curbing or edge of the street surface, then such figures shall be at least six inches high. In cases where there is a loading deck in the rear of a warehouse building, the numbers must be displayed in the same manner as described above. 
(d)  A quadrant designation will be posted as part of the address in figures at least two inches high on a contrasting background of a material that will allow 24-hour visibility and be placed with the number designation. 
(Code 1979, § 8-4-16; Code 1998, § 106-16; Ord. No. 06-2002, § 106-16, 3-4-2002) 
Sec. 115-17. - Facades of nonresidential buildings. 
In order to aesthetically enhance the appearance of the City, the facades of all new nonresidential buildings must be constructed of wood, composite wood, brick, stone, stucco, glass or a combination of these treatments or other such treatment as approved by the ARB. For purposes of this section the facade of a building is any face that is visible from the public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 16-2004, § 106-17, 12-6-2004; Ord. No. 07-2009, pt. I, 5-4-2009) 
Secs. 115-18—115-37. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - GENERAL REGULATIONS 

Sec. 115-38. - Accessory uses or structures. 
(a)  Accessory uses or structures shall be permitted only in rear yards, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(b)  An accessory use or structure shall be set back not less than five feet from any lot line. 
(c)  No accessory building shall be erected on a lot prior to the time of construction of the principal building to which it is an accessory. 
(d)  In residential districts the total square footage of accessory structures shall not exceed one-half the size of the principal structure. 
(e)  Residential or commercial solar panels not located on the principal building shall be considered an accessory structure and shall be located on site according to subsection 115-38(b). 
(f)  In order to provide location flexibility, and to install the solar equipment in the most efficient location, the accessory structure can be located in the side and front yard without the need of a board of appeals variance approval if the following requirements are met: 
(1)  The ARB shall review an application for any proposed solar equipment located in the front or side yard. At a minimum, the ARB application shall include the following information: 
a.  Completed ARB certificate of appropriateness application. 
b.  A site plan, drawn to scale, showing all existing site conditions and the proposed location of the solar equipment. 
c.  A landscape plan, drawn to scale, that shows screening measures of the solar equipment. The landscape plan shall also include elevations, details, plant schedule and any other information determined by the Community Development Director. 
(2)  Prior to the installation of any solar equipment, the applicant shall obtain a building permit from the Community Development Department. The building permit application shall match all building related conditions from the ARB review. 
(Code 1979, § 8-4-21; Code 1998, § 106-41; Ord. No. 06-2002, § 106-41, 3-4-2002; Ord. No. 11-2003, § 106-41, 8-4-2003; Ord. No. 07-2011, 9-12-2011) 
Sec. 115-39. - Vision clearance at intersection. 
In all zoning districts, no fence, wall, structure, shrubbery or other obstruction to vision between the heights of three feet and 15 feet, except utility poles, light or street sign standards or tree trunks shall be permitted within 20 feet of the intersection of the right-of-way lines of streets, roads, highways or railroads. 
(Code 1979, § 8-4-22; Code 1998, § 106-42; Ord. No. 06-2002, § 106-42, 3-4-2002) 
Sec. 115-40. - Approvals for business and industrial developments on state highways. 
For all business and industrial developments fronting on a state highway, no building permit shall be issued until the approval of the Georgia Department of Transportation has been obtained by the applicant on entrances and exits, curb radii, drainage and other matters that are the appropriate concern of the Department. 
(Code 1979, § 8-4-23; Code 1998, § 106-43; Ord. No. 06-2002, § 106-43, 3-4-2002) 
Sec. 115-41. - City approvals required; zoning fees. 
All city approvals that are required for the use of land and structures and for the location and operation of businesses and industries shall be obtained by the applicant and transmitted by him with his request for a building permit, an occupancy permit, a zoning amendment, a special exception or a variance. Except as otherwise required by state law, no local action shall be taken and no public hearings shall be held until the above required approvals have been obtained by the applicants. A copy of the schedule of zoning fees shall be maintained in the Office of the Community Development Department. 
(Code 1979, § 8-4-24; Code 1998, § 106-44; Ord. No. 06-2002, § 106-44, 3-4-2002) 
Sec. 115-42. - Minimum floor area requirements. 
To promote the public health, safety, morals or general welfare, all single-family residences shall have a minimum area of 1,250 heated square feet, except that there shall be a minimum area of 1,500 heated square feet in the R75 zoning district and a minimum of 1,750 heated square feet in the R100 zoning district. 
(Code 1998, § 106-45; Ord. No. 1-95, § 8-4-25, 2-6-1995; Ord. No. 06-2002, § 106-45, 3-4-2002) 
Sec. 115-43. - Required buffers between dissimilar districts. 
(a)  Required buffer areas shall provide necessary visual privacy for the conduct of residential lifestyles in an undisturbed environment and shall provide protection to preserve property values in residential districts. 
(b)  A buffer shall be required for the following: 
(1)  All property zoned C1, C2, C3, OI, ODW, M1 shall have a buffer strip along all rear and side property lines abutting a residential zoning district (R100, R75, R65, RMD, RM6, RM8 or RM10 districts); provided, that if no buffer is required the Community Development Director may require fencing and/or vegetative screening within the setback in order to provide a visual screen for adjoining property owners. 
(2)  All property zoned for use as RMD, RM6, RM8 and RM10 shall have a buffer strip along all rear and side property lines abutting a zoned single-family residential zoning district; provided, that if no buffer is required the Community Development Director may require fencing and/or vegetative screening within the setback in order to provide a visual screen for adjoining property owners. 
(c)  All buffer areas and screening shall be established in accordance with the following requirements: 
(1)  Buffers shall be established and maintained along required property lines in accordance with the landscaping policies and standards of development regulations and any additional specification that may be established by the Community Development Department and approved by the City Council. All trees to be planted as part of new buffer strip or as an enhancement to an existing buffer strip must meet the requirements of chapter 113. In the event that the buffer includes a utility or pipeline easement, a minimum buffer of no less than 20 feet in width will be required outside the easement. In no case will the buffer be less than 20 feet. 
(2)  Buffers shall meet the minimum width requirements for dissimilar districts as shown in the minimum buffer strip requirements table in subsection (f) of this section. 
(3)  Screening shall be established within any buffer along the entire length of the side and rear lot lines. However, this screening requirement may be adjusted in order to observe the sight distance required in the development regulations or as a condition of zoning, special use, or variance approval or as approved by the Director. 
(4)  Screening shall be required where a nonresidential use abuts a public street across from a residential district. However, this screening requirement may be adjusted in order to observe the sight distance required in the development regulations or as a condition of zoning, special use, or variance approval or as approved by the Director. 
(d)  All buffers shall be designated on the appropriate permit application and indicated on the required site plan or final subdivision plat. 
(e)  Structures including driveways, parking facilities, or retaining walls will be located a minimum of five feet from any buffer. 
(f)  Minimum buffer strip requirements. 

 
(g)  The Community Development Director may require additional screening outside or inside buffer areas, to obscure objectionable features such as dumpsters, rear entrances, utility and maintenance structures, loading facilities, and other objectionable features. 
(h)  The screening requirements of this section may be waived or modified, as appropriate, by the Community Development Director, if and only if any one or more of these criteria apply: 
(1)  It is clearly demonstrated to the Community Development Director that existing topography and/or vegetation achieve the purpose and intent of this section. 
(2)  It is clearly demonstrated to the Community Development Director that because of existing topography, a fence, wall and/or other screening device will not screen activities conducted at ground level from view as required in subsection (c)(3) of this section. 
(3)  Required screening would obscure sight distances necessary for safe ingress and egress from subject properties. 
(i)  All required buffers shall be designated on the appropriate permit application and shown as a permanent buffer on the required site plan or final subdivision plat, as appropriate. 
(j)  Prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy for a structure, the developer or record title holder shall guarantee to the city to replace any required landscaping materials which die within one year after approval or acceptance thereof by the city, and shall warrant all work in the buffer area for a period of one year after approval or acceptance thereof by the city, whichever is later. The Community Development Director may at his option require that a bond or other suitable security be posted to ensure compliance with this provision. 
(k)  The required buffer shall be maintained by the record title holder at the time of development, for so long as he holds title, and thereafter by any subsequent record title holders. 
(Code 1979, § 8-4-27; Code 1998, § 106-47; Ord. No. 04-96, § 8-4-27, 2-5-1996; Ord. No. 08-97, § II, 5-5-1997; Ord. No. 06-2002, § 106-47, 3-4-2002; Ord. No. 26-2008, pt. I(106-47(b)), 11-3-2008) 
Sec. 115-44. - Temporary outdoor activities. 
(a)  Definitions. As used in this article, the phrases used herein shall be defined as follows: 
Goods and merchandise shall mean tangible or movable personal property, other than money. 
Holiday activities shall mean seasonal activities associated with federally-recognized holidays and Halloween. 
Temporary shall mean for a period not to exceed ten consecutive days. A second permit for a temporary outdoor activity on the same property may not be applied for or renewed within six months from the date of any prior approval of a temporary outdoor activity. 
Temporary outdoor activity shall mean for-profit activities involving the temporary outside sale of goods and merchandise in association with an existing business located on the premises as the principal use of the premises. The term shall include the sale of farm produce, carnivals, or the sale of Christmas trees from property which is vacant or which contains a separate and distinct primary use, such activities continuing for a period not exceeding ten consecutive days. Temporary outdoor activities shall occur in nonenclosed areas. 
Temporary outdoor activity permit shall mean written authorization by the Community Development Director, or his designee, for the applicant to engage in temporary outdoor activities at a specified, fixed location meeting all requirements of this article. 
(b)  Temporary outdoor activities; peddling prohibited. The Community Development Director, or his designee, is hereby authorized to inspect the temporary outdoor activity for compliance with the provisions of the following article. 
(1)  Peddling goods and merchandise not customarily sold on a day-to-day basis in the business which constitutes the principal use of the premises is prohibited. 
(2)  Sales shall be conducted by employees of the principal use and goods shall be owned by the owner or tenant of the principal use, not a consignment operation or temporary arrangement with a transient merchant/vendor. 
(3)  Mobile food services and the preparation of food on site shall not be permitted as temporary outdoor activities. 
(4)  No display shall be erected or installed, nor shall any temporary outdoor activities take place, within 50 feet of a county or state right-of-way. 
(5)  Temporary outdoor activities shall be permitted only within the City's C-2 and C-3 Zoning Districts. The Community Development Department shall collect a fee for the issuance of such permit in the initial amount of $50.00. 
(6)  Temporary outdoor activities shall not be permitted on parcels of property which are less than two acres in size. 
(7)  No temporary structure or covering shall be erected as a part of a temporary outdoor activity with the exception that temporary structures shall be permitted as a part of holiday activities. 
(8)  Display tables may be used as a part of a temporary outdoor activity. 
(9)  No operator, employee, or representative of the operator of a temporary outdoor activity shall solicit directly from the motoring public. 
(10)  Temporary outdoor activities shall be permitted only on property where such activities shall not disrupt controlled vehicular ingress and egress or occupy required off-street parking spaces. 
(11)  Occupation tax certificates for temporary outdoor activities shall be issued for a period of not more than ten days from the date of initiation of the temporary outdoor activity. All temporary outdoor activities shall require an occupation tax certificate, which is issued by the General Government Administration Department. 
(12)  Written permission from the property owner shall be obtained and submitted by the applicant to the City of Norcross Community Development Department prior to the issuance of a temporary outdoor activity permit. 
(13)  No more than one temporary outdoor activity shall be permitted simultaneously on a parcel of less than five acres. 
(14)  Temporary outdoor activities, other than holiday activities, shall be conducted on a paved surface and not on grassed or landscaped areas. 
(15)  No evidence of the temporary outdoor activity, other than holiday activities, shall remain on a parcel of property for more than 12 consecutive hours of any calendar day. 
(16)  Mattress and box spring sets, couches or sofas, refrigerators, washers/dryers, large appliances, office shelving and desks, dining room and kitchen tables and similar large furniture, and heavy construction equipment are specifically prohibited from outdoor display. 
(17)  Christmas tree sales shall be permitted between November 1 and December 31 due to the seasonal nature of such sales. 
(18)  Pumpkin sales shall be permitted from September 15 through October 31 due to the seasonal nature of such sales. 
(19)  Carnivals shall be permitted as temporary outdoor activities so long as no structure or equipment is located within 500 feet of any residential property line. 
(20)  Charitable or nonprofit events for which sale proceeds benefit charitable organizations are not regulated by this article. 
(21)  Businesses located in the National Historic Downtown District (as depicted on the Zoning Map), are not regulated by this article. 
(Ord. No. 19-2009, pt. I, 12-7-2009; Ord. No. 06-2012, 2-6-2012) 
Secs. 115-45—115-74. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ZONING DISTRICTS AND USE PROVISIONS 

Sec. 115-75. - Establishment of zoning districts. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the incorporated area of the city is divided into zoning districts designated as follows: 
(1)  R100, One-family residence district. 
(2)  R75, One-family residence district. 
(3)  R65, Multifamily residence district. 
(4)  RM, Multifamily residence district, which includes: 
a.  RMD, duplexes. 
b.  RM6, six units per acre. 
c.  RM8, eight units per acre. 
d.  RM10, ten units per acre. 
(5)  OI, Office-institutional district. 
(6)  C1, Neighborhood business district. 
(7)  C2, General business district. 
(8)  C3, Central business district. 
(9)  M1, Light industry district. 
(10)  FH, Flood hazard district. 
(11)  ODW, Office distribution warehouse district. 
(12)  DCD, Design concept development district. 
(13)  RAOD, Redevelopment area overlay district. 
(Code 1979, § 8-4-41; Code 1998, § 106-76; Ord. No. 06-2002, § 106-76, 3-4-2002; Ord. No. 20-2008, § 106-76, 7-7-2008) 
Sec. 115-76. - Incorporation of official zoning map. 
(a)  Official zoning map. 
(1)  The city is hereby divided into zoning districts, as shown on the official zoning map which, together with all notations, references, data and other information shown on the map, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this zoning ordinance. 
(2)  The Official Zoning Map shall be identified by a signature block that includes the signature of the Mayor, and attested by the City Clerk, over the following words: "This is to certify that this is the official zoning map referred to in the Norcross Zoning Ordinance" together with the date of its adoption. 
(3)  The location and boundaries of the zoning districts established by this zoning ordinance are depicted on and maintained as part of the city's geographic information system (GIS), under the direction of the City Manager. A print out or plot of this "zoning" geographic coverage layer that includes the signature block described in subsection (a)(2) above constitutes the City of Norcross' Official Zoning Map. 
(b)  The latest adopted version of the official zoning map shall be available for inspection in the offices of the City of Norcross Community Development and Planning Department during regular business hours of the City, and a copy will be available for general public reference on the City's official website. 
(c)  Maintenance and updates. The Community Development and Planning Director is responsible for directing revisions to the official zoning map to reflect its amendment as soon as possible after the effective date of zoning map amendments. No unauthorized person may alter or modify the Official Zoning Map. The Community Development Director may authorize printed copies of the official zoning map to be produced, and must maintain digital or printed copies of superseded versions of the official zoning map for historical reference. 
(d)  Replacement of official zoning map. In the event that the official zoning map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost or difficult to interpret because of the nature or number of changes and additions, the Mayor and City Council may by ordinance adopt a new official zoning map which shall supersede the prior official zoning map, and shall be identified by the signature block described in subsection 115-76(a)(2). 
(e)  Annexation. Any land subsequently annexed to the city shall be annexed in accordance with the procedures adopted by mayor and council that are based upon state law and are part of the City Code. It shall, immediately upon annexation, be classified into a zoning category compatible with adjacent zoning and land uses, and sound planning principles in accordance with the procedure in section 115-77, Interpretation of zoning district boundaries, and applicable state law. 
( Ord. No. 07-2017, § I, 2-5-2018 ) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 07-2017, § I, adopted February 5, 2018, repealed the former section 115-76, and enacted a new section 115-75 as set out herein. The former section 115-76 pertained to location and boundaries of zoning districts and derived from Code 1979, § Aug. 4, 1942; Code 1998, § 106-77; Ord. No. 06-2002, § 106-77, Mar. 4, 2002; Ord. No. 06-2005, § 106-77, Sept. 6, 2005. 
Sec. 115-77. - Interpretation of zoning district boundaries. 
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the location of the boundaries of any zoning district in the city, the following rules shall apply: 
(1)  Where a zoning district boundary line is shown as approximately following a corporate limits line, a militia district line, a land lot line, a lot line or the centerline of a street, a county road, a state highway, an interstate highway or a railroad right-of-way or such lines extended, then such lines shall be constructed to be the zoning district boundary lines. 
(2)  Where a zoning district boundary line is shown as being set back from a street, a county road, a state highway, an interstate highway or a railroad right-of-way, and approximately parallel thereto, then such zoning district boundary line shall be construed as being at the scaled distance from the centerline of street, county road, state highway, interstate highway or railroad right-of-way and as being parallel thereto. 
(3)  Where a zoning district boundary line divides a lot, the location of the line shall be the scaled distance from the lot lines. In this situation, the requirements of the zoning district in which the greater portion of the lot lies shall apply to the balance of the lot except that such extension shall not include any part of a lot that lies more than 50 feet beyond the zoning district boundary line. 
(4)  In the case of a through lot fronting on two approximately parallel streets, that is divided by a zoning district boundary line paralleling the streets, the restrictions of the zoning district in which each frontage of the through lot lies shall apply to that portion of the through lot. 
(Code 1979, § 8-4-43; Code 1998, § 106-78; Ord. No. 06-2002, § 106-78, 3-4-2002) 
Sec. 115-78. - R100, One-family residence district. 
(a)  The R100, One-family residence zoning district is intended primarily for one-family residences and related uses. 
(b)  Within the R100, One-family residence district, the following uses are permitted: 
(1)  One-family dwellings, except mobile homes and modular homes. 
(2)  Customary accessory buildings and uses are permitted provided they conform to section 115-38. 
(3)  Home occupation. In order to protect and preserve the residential character of the city: 
a.  The home occupation must be clearly secondary to the use of the dwelling as a residence and must not change the residential character of the dwelling or lot in any visible manner. 
b.  The home occupation must not create any objectionable odor, noticeable vibration, or offensive noise that increases the level of ambient sound at the property lines. 
c.  The home occupation must not cause unsightly conditions or waste which is visible from off the property. 
d.  The home occupation must not cause interference with radio or television reception in the vicinity. 
e.  The home occupation employees in the residence are only those persons who reside in the residence. 
f.  The home occupation has no signs. 
g.  The home occupation occupies less than one-fourth of the floor area of the dwelling. 
h.  The home occupation has a maximum of one commercial vehicle, that is in compliance with the off-street parking ordinance, parked at the residence. 
i.  The home occupation has no storage outside the residence. 
j.  The home occupation does not create a volume of passenger or commercial traffic that is inconsistent with the normal level of traffic on the street on which the dwelling is located. 
k.  The following uses shall not be permitted as home occupations: massage therapists, psychics and fortunetellers, tattoo and/or body piercing businesses. 
(4)  Churches, mosques, synagogues and other places of worship, including church schools as an accessory use, provided: 
a.  They are located on not less than five acres. 
b.  A 30-foot undisturbed buffer is provided where the property abuts residential property. 
c.  Schools are located on the same lot as the church or place of worship and are clearly secondary to the use of the property as a church or place of worship. 
(5)  Existing cemeteries. 
(6)  Public buildings and land uses. 
(7)  Static electric transformer or gas regulator stations, if essential for service to this zoning district, provided: 
a.  The structures are placed not less than 50 feet from any property line. 
b.  The structures are enclosed by a woven wire fence at least eight feet high. 
c.  The lot is suitably landscaped, including a buffer strip at least ten feet wide along the side and rear property lines but not extending into the required front yard, planted with evergreen trees and shrubs that grow at least eight feet tall and provide an effective visual screen. 
d.  No vehicles or equipment are stored on the premises. 
(8)  The raising and keeping of honey bees for personal pleasure or utility on a lot which contains the dwelling of the property owner of the honey bee hive boxes provided that the lot is at least 10,000 square feet in area and that the honey bee hive boxes are located in the rear yard and no closer than five feet to any property line and provided that no nuisance is created as defined under other sections of this Code. It shall be the duty of the chief of police or his delegated representative, including the city code enforcement officer, to administer and enforce the provisions of this subsection (8). 
(9)  The keeping of chickens for personal pleasure or utility on a lot which contains the dwelling of the property owner is permitted, subject to the following requirements: 
a.  The minimum lot size for the keeping of chickens shall be one-half of an acre; 
b.  The keeping of chickens shall be permitted only on the same lot as the dwelling of the owner; 
c.  Chickens must be kept securely in an enclosed yard or six-sided pen at all times; 
d.  Minimum pen area of chickens shall be ten square feet per chicken; 
e.  Chickens must be housed at least 20 feet from any property line and 50 feet from any residence other than the owner's residence; 
f.  Any structure housing chickens must be located in the rear yard; 
g.  The keeping of roosters is not permitted; 
h.  No more than six chickens shall be permitted on any lot; 
i.  No slaughter of chickens is permitted on the property; 
j.  All enclosed yards and pens permitted herein are "accessory structures" as set forth in section 115-38 and shall comply with that code section in addition to the requirements set forth above; 
k.  It shall be the duty of the chief of police or his delegated representative, including the city code enforcement officer, to administer and enforce the provisions of this subsection (9). 
(10)  The raising and keeping of household pets provided that no nuisance is created as defined by other sections of this Code. 
(11)  No more than two garage sales are permitted during any 12-month period and each garage sale is limited to a period not to exceed three consecutive days. 
(12)  Commercial filming operations. 
a.  Prior to the issuance of a permit for conducting commercial filming in the city an application for a permit must be completed and filed with the City Manager's department and the permit fee as set by resolution of the Mayor and Council must be paid to the City Manager's department. 
b.  Commercial filming is limited to four commercial filming operations for a total of six days in any 12-month period. Any part of a day is considered a whole day. Filming of longer duration is not permitted without approval by the Mayor and Council after a public hearing to consider the impact on the community. It is the purpose of this section to give the Mayor and Council the broad power to refuse permission when in their determination such filming would be disruptive to the community. Commercial filming is permitted only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. 
c.  At least one or more off-duty police officer must be employed by the film company to control traffic as determined by the Chief of Police. 
d.  A certificate of insurance including general liability coverage must be provided to the city when commercial filming operations will take place on city property and must list the city as an insured. Where the filming occurs on city property an indemnification and hold harmless agreement shall be supplied to the city. 
(13)  Bed and breakfast inns. 
a.  Bed and breakfast inns are permitted only within the National Historic District Boundaries. 
b.  The dwelling unit in which the bed and breakfast inn operates shall be the principal residence of the owner and lived in by the principal owner when the bed and breakfast inn is in operation. 
c.  The maximum number of guestrooms provided by the bed and breakfast inn shall be six. Unless further restricted by the county Fire Marshal, the maximum occupancy per guestroom shall be no more than three adults. 
d.  Accessory structures and outdoor activities. Accessory structures may be utilized for guest accommodation purposes as part of a bed and breakfast inn use. Such accessory structures do not have to be physically connected to the principal structure. Such accessory structures shall have or shall be constructed to have architectural compatibility with the principal structure. Accessory structures used as accommodations for the guests of bed and breakfast inns shall not exceed 50 percent of the gross floor area of the principal structure, and/or more than 50 percent of the total number of guestrooms, and they shall comply with the setback requirements for accessory structures. 
e.  Passive outdoor activities such as tea-time are allowed outside the principal structure or any accessory structure, but all other activities and functions designed to serve and entertain guests shall take place within the principal residential structure. 
f.  Activities and functions at the bed and breakfast inn shall be provided for overnight guests only and shall be limited to breakfast and an afternoon and/or evening refreshment. In addition to the functions for overnight guests, the bed and breakfast inn may have up to four social gatherings per year at the behest of the paid guests. 
g.  The length of stay of guests shall not exceed a total of 14 consecutive days, nor exceed a total of 28 days in one year. The inn manager shall keep a log to verify guests' lengths of stay each year, with a minimum entry of name, address, and arrival/departure dates. 
h.  The primary structure of the bed and breakfast inn shall not have less than 2,500 conditioned square feet. 
i.  Notwithstanding the limits on number of vehicles in the residential parking ordinance, off-street parking spaces must be provided and shall be a minimum of one per guestroom and a maximum number of non-enclosed parking spaces less than or equal to the number of guestrooms. Parking shall be located on the same lot on which the bed and breakfast inn is located and screened with vegetation or approved fencing from adjacent properties and from the street. 
j.  In residential areas, signage shall be limited to a single sign advertising only the bed and breakfast not to exceed eight square feet, with a maximum height of four feet. The sign may be located in the front yard and indirectly lighted. A sign permit from the city will be required. 
k.  Exterior lighting shall be residential in nature and shall not be directed towards adjacent properties. 
l.  An owner's bed and breakfast inn business license will be required and will be nontransferable with a fee of $1,500.00 per year. The bed and breakfast inn guest fees will be subject to the city hotel/motel tax. 
(Code 1979, § 8-4-44; Code 1998, § 106-79; Ord. No. 22-96, 12-2-1996; Ord. No. 01-99, 1-4-1999; Ord. No. 06-99, 5-3-1999; Ord. No. 08-2001, § 106-79, 6-4-2001; Ord. No. 06-2002, § 106-79, 3-4-2002; Ord. No. 11-2003, § 106-79, 8-4-2003; Ord. No. 23-2008, pt. I(106-79), 9-8-2008; Ord. No. 04-2011, 4-27-2011; Ord. No. > 09-2015 , § II, 12-7-2015) 
Sec. 115-79. - R75, One-family residence district. 
(a)  This zoning district is intended primarily for one-family residences and related uses on land served by a central sewerage system. The development of lots in this district is permitted with septic tanks, provided lot sizes correspond to the area in square feet in the R100 district and provided such installation conforms to all other restrictions found in this Code. All septic tank installations are subject to the approval of the county health department and the City Council. 
(b)  Within the R75, One-family residence district, the following uses are permitted: all uses permitted in the R100, One-family residence district, including special exceptions. 
(c)  Within an R75, One-family residence district, the following uses may be permitted as a special exception, subject to the approval of the Zoning Board of Appeals after a public hearing and subject to such appropriate conditions as the Zoning Board of Appeals may require: 
(1)  One mobile, manufactured, or modular home as a second and temporary accessory dwelling on a lot, providing the following conditions are met: 
a.  The mobile, manufactured, or modular home is an accessory use on a lot that meets all of the requirements of the R75, One-family residence district, provided further that the occupant of the mobile, manufactured, or modular home and the occupant of the principal dwelling and lot are related to one another, i.e., father, mother, son or daughter. 
b.  The mobile, manufactured, or modular home is not located within any required front or side yard. 
c.  The mobile, manufactured, or modular home is located on a lot that is not less than one acre in size. 
d.  It is the intent herein that when any of the required conditions no longer are met the special exception is rendered invalid and the mobile home must be removed. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place, store or maintain any trailer in the city except as outlined in this chapter. 
(Code 1979, § 8-4-45; Code 1998, § 106-80; Ord. No. 1-95, 2-6-1995; Ord. No. 10-95, 8-7-1995; Ord. No. 06-2002, § 106-80, 3-4-2002) 
Sec. 115-80. - R65, One-family residence district. 
The R65, One-family residence zoning district is intended primarily for one-family residences and related uses on land served by a central sewerage system. Within the R65, One-family residence district the following uses are permitted: 
(1)  All uses permitted in the R100 and R75, One-family residence districts, including special exceptions. 
(2)  Single-family residential subdivisions meeting the following criteria: 
a.  A minimum tract size of one acre (gross); 
b.  A minimum lot size of 7,200 square feet; 
c.  A minimum lot width at the building line 65 feet; 
d.  Minimum setbacks: 
1.  Front yard: 25 feet; 
2.  Rear yard: 25 feet; 
3.  Side yard: 7.5 feet, 15 feet between houses; 
e.  Maximum height of 35 feet; 
f.  Minimum dwelling size of 2,000 square feet with the following exception: within the same subdivision one dwelling size may be reduced to 1,800 square feet for every dwelling constructed or under construction containing 2,500 square feet; 
g.  Two trees each with a diameter of three inches or more must be planted in every front yard prior to issuance of the certificate of occupancy; 
h.  At least 50 percent of the dwellings in the subdivision must have fronts constructed of brick or other approved masonry material; and 
i.  All houses must have a two-car garage. 
(Code 1998, § 106-81; Ord. No. 10-95, 8-7-1995; Ord. No. 06-2002, § 106-81, 3-4-2002; Ord. No. 16-2004, § 106-81, 12-6-2004) 
Sec. 115-81. - RM, Multifamily residence district. 
The following districts are intended for two-family and multifamily dwellings. These zoning districts are to be located where public water supply and sewerage facilities are available or can be obtained and where there is convenient access to collector streets, major thoroughfares or state or interstate highways. The purpose of the following zoning districts is to promote better utilization of land and freedom of architectural and engineering design without maximizing density. On any tract of land zoned for RMD, RM6, RM8 or RM10, the entire tract must be developed as the same type of use. No combinations of allowed uses are permitted on any one tract of land. 
(1)  RMD, Multifamily residence district (duplexes). This zoning district is intended primarily for two-family dwellings providing only one two-family structure is constructed on each lot of record. Within the RMD, Multifamily residence district (duplexes), the following uses are permitted: 
a.  All uses permitted in the R65, One-family residence district, including special exceptions; and 
b.  Two-family dwellings which may be duplexes. 
(2)  RM6, Multifamily residence district (maximum density six units per acre). This zoning district is intended primarily for multifamily dwellings with a maximum density of six units per acre. Within the RM6, Multifamily residence district (maximum density six units per acre), the following uses are permitted: 
a.  All uses permitted in the RMD, Multifamily residence district (duplexes); and 
b.  Multifamily dwellings, which may be duplexes, apartments, condominiums, or planned residential developments, subject to the following provisions: 
1.  All condominium developments shall comply with all state laws regarding condominium developments; 
2.  All planned residential developments shall provide for a mandatory homeowners association, which shall hold title to all common areas in the development. A declaration of covenants for the development shall be provided to and approved by the city prior to said declaration of covenants being recorded in the public records. Following the approval by the city, the declaration of covenants shall be recorded in the public records of the county and title to the common areas transferred to the homeowners association prior to the approval of a final plat for the planned residential development and before any certificates of occupancy for the individual residential units are issued by the city; 
3.  RM8, Multifamily residence district (maximum density eight units per acre). This zoning district is intended primarily for two-family and multifamily dwellings. Within the RM8, Multifamily residence district (maximum density eight units per acre), the following uses are permitted: all uses permitted in the RM6, Multifamily residence district (maximum density six units per acre); 
4.  RM10, Multifamily residence district (maximum density ten units per acre). This zoning district is intended primarily for two-family and multifamily dwellings. Within the RM10, Multifamily residence district (maximum density ten units per acre), the following uses are permitted: All uses permitted within the RM8, Multifamily residence district (maximum density eight units per acre). 
(Code 1979, § 8-4-46; Code 1998, § 106-82; Ord. No. 14-95, 8-16-1995; Ord. No. 21-96, 10-7-1996; Ord. No. 08-97, § II, 5-5-1997; Ord. No. 19-98, 12-7-1998; Ord. No. 06-2002, § 106-82, 3-4-2002; Ord. No. 18-2003, § 106-82, 12-1-2003) 
Sec. 115-82. - OI, Office-institutional district. 
(a)  The OI, Office-institutional zoning district is established to provide a location for offices, institutions and limited related service activities in buildings of high character in attractive surroundings. 
(b)  Within the OI, Office-institutional district, the following uses are permitted: 
(1)  Professional and business offices. 
(2)  Public offices. 
(3)  Semipublic institutions, such as clubs and churches, mosques, synagogues or other places of worship, provided: 
a.  The church, mosque, synagogue or other place of worship is located on not less than five acres if it is a stand-alone use; or 
b.  A special use permit is obtained if the church, mosque, synagogue or other place of worship is located in an established business park or industrial park. 
(4)  Cultural facilities. 
(5)  Accessory parking garages and parking lots. 
(6)  State licensed health care home; provided such home is located on not less than three acres. 
(c)  Office-institutional districts shall be located on collector or arterial streets, as shown on the official thoroughfare map. 
(Code 1979, § 8-4-47; Code 1998, § 106-83; Ord. No. 21-96, 10-7-1996; Ord. No. 22-96, 12-2-1996; Ord. No. 08-97, § II, 5-5-1997; Ord. No. 19-98, 12-7-1998; Ord. No. 06-2002, § 106-83, 3-4-2002) 
Sec. 115-83. - C1, Neighborhood business district. 
(a)  The C1, Neighborhood business district provides a location for convenience goods and services for people in nearby residential neighborhoods. 
(b)  Within the C1, Neighborhood business district, the following uses are permitted: 
(1)  Retail and service uses. 
a.  Antique shops. 
b.  Art, school and office supply stores. 
c.  Art galleries. 
d.  Bakeries. 
e.  Banks or financial institutions (without drive-in facilities). Automatic teller as an accessory use (no drive-in). 
f.  Beauty parlors and barbershops. 
g.  Book or stationery stores. 
h.  Instructional dance studios. 
i.  Dry cleaning and pickup and delivery stations. 
j.  Florists. 
k.  Food stores. 
l.  Gift shops. 
m.  Hardware stores. 
n.  Hobby shops. 
o.  Ice cream shops. 
p.  Interior decorating shops. 
q.  Jewelry stores. 
r.  Museums. 
s.  Music studios. 
t.  Nursery schools and kindergartens meeting the following requirements: 
1.  At least 100 square feet of outdoor recreation space per child based on the total number of children that the facility is licensed to serve, enclosed with a woven wire fence at least four feet high; 
2.  Compliance with all state day care requirements; and 
3.  Compliance with all health regulations. 
u.  Photography shops and studios. 
v.  Radio and television repair shops. 
w.  Shoe stores and shoe repair shops. 
x.  Small appliance repair shops. 
y.  Tailor shops. 
z.  Toy stores, children's and hobby shops. 
aa.  Weaving apparel shops. 
(2)  Professional office uses. 
a.  Accounting offices. 
b.  Architecture or engineering offices. 
c.  Doctor, dentist or chiropractor offices. 
d.  Insurance offices. 
e.  Other public or professional offices. 
f.  Real estate offices. 
(3)  Public and semipublic uses. 
a.  Semipublic institutions, such as clubs, churches, mosques, synagogues or other places of worship, provided: 
1.  The club, church, mosque, synagogue or other place of worship is located on not less than five acres if it is a stand-alone use; or 
2.  A special use permit must be obtained if the club, church, mosque, synagogue or other place of worship is located in an established business park or industrial park. 
b.  Public or semipublic buildings and land uses, parks, playgrounds or community centers. 
(c)  Within the C1, Neighborhood business district, gasoline service station pumps are permitted within the front yard setback, provided they are located: 
(1)  Not closer than 15 feet to the highway right-of-way; and 
(2)  Not less than the existing setback for any residential structure on abutting lots on either the frontage street or a side street. 
(Code 1979, § 8-4-48; Code 1998, § 106-84; Ord. No. 10-95, 8-7-1995; Ord. No. 21-96, 10-7-1996; Ord. No. 22-96, 12-2-1996; Ord. No. 06-2002, § 106-84, 3-4-2002) 
Sec. 115-84. - C2, General business district. 
(a)  [In general.] The C2, General business district is intended to provide adequate space in appropriate locations along major streets, thoroughfares and at intersections for various types of business use. These uses should include the retailing of major goods and services, general office facilities and public functions that would serve a community area of several neighborhoods. Development of uses in the district characteristically occupies a larger area than in the C1, Neighborhood business district because it is intended to serve a greater population and to offer a wider range of services. Orientation and expansion of this district should occur as an increase in depth at major intersections rather than as a strip-like extension along the street or thoroughfare. 
(b)  Permitted uses. Only the following permitted use shall be allowed in the C2, General business district and no structure shall be erected, structurally altered or enlarged for any use other than a use permitted herein with the exception of: uses lawfully established prior to the effective date of the amendment; special uses as permitted herein; accessory uses as defined in section 115-5, pertaining to definitions; or other uses which are clearly similar to and consistent with the purpose of this district. 
(1)  Retail and service uses. 
a.  Antique shops. 
b.  Animal hospitals or veterinary clinics. 
c.  Art and school supply stores. 
d.  Art galleries. 
e.  Automotive parts stores, no on-premises installation. 
f.  Bakeries. 
g.  Banks or financial institutions. Automatic tellers as accessory or freestanding use. 
h.  Barbershops and beauty shops. 
i.  Bicycle shops. 
j.  Blueprinting establishments. 
k.  Bookstores or stationery stores. 
l.  Building, electrical or plumbing contractors, provided no equipment or materials are stored outside. 
m.  Business college or business schools operated as a business enterprise. 
n.  Bus stations, provided: 
1.  They are not located in shopping centers; 
2.  They are located in a freestanding building; 
3.  No other uses are permitted on the same lot as the bus station. 
o.  Certified massage therapist meeting the requirements of chapter 8, article XI, pertaining to massage therapy. 
p.  Clothing sale or rental stores. 
q.  Convenience food stores with or without fuel pumps. 
r.  Custom dressmaking and sewing shops. 
s.  Instructional dance studios. 
t.  Day care centers, provided the following conditions are met: 
1.  At least 100 square feet of outdoor recreation area per child and the outdoor play area is enclosed with a six-foot-high fence. 
2.  Comply with all state day care requirements. 
3.  Comply with all health regulations. 
u.  Department stores. 
v.  Drive-in restaurants. 
w.  Drugstores. 
x.  Dry cleaning pickup and delivery stations. 
y.  Electronic sales and service establishments. 
z.  Emission inspection stations, provided the following design standards are met: 
1.  The facility shall be located in a permanent noncombustible structure. 
2.  The structure shall include a designated indoor public waiting area (minimum six fixed seats) with restrooms; or as an alternative, shall provide the required designated indoor waiting area and restrooms upon the same lot, within 500 feet of the testing facility. 
3.  The facility shall provide a minimum of four paved parking spaces. Drive-through facilities shall also provide a paved stacking lane for a minimum of four vehicles. Parking spaces and stacking lane shall be striped. 
4.  If constructed in an existing parking lot, the facility and stacking lane shall not occupy any required on-site parking space or encroach into any minimum required driveway width. 
aa.  Florists. 
bb.  Food catering establishments. 
cc.  Food stores or grocery stores. 
dd.  Funeral homes and mausoleums. 
ee.  Furniture rental or sales establishments. 
ff.  Equipment rental, excluding heavy equipment, bulldozers, backhoes, forklifts, cranes, etc., and provided there is no outside storage associated with the use. 
gg.  Garden supply centers and greenhouses, including accessory outdoor storage. 
hh.  Gift shops. 
ii.  Group and congregate personal care homes. 
jj.  Hardware stores. 
kk.  Health clubs or spas. 
ll.  Hobby shops. 
mm.  Ice cream shops. 
nn.  Instruction of fine arts. 
oo.  Interior decorating shops. 
pp.  Jewelry stores. 
qq.  Laundries and dry cleaning establishments, including self-service laundries. 
rr.  Locksmith shops. 
ss.  Mobile buildings, temporary, while any of the permitted or special uses are under construction but not exceed six months. 
tt.  Motels and hotels provided the following minimum standards are met: 
1.  Guest rooms shall be accessed internally to the building with no direct room access to the outside. The lobby shall be a minimum of 700 square feet in size. 
2.  Each hotel/motel site shall be a minimum of two acres. 
3.  Each hotel/motel must provide management on duty 24 hours a day. 
4.  Each guest room shall have a minimum of 300 square feet and shall be accessed with a magnetic keycard entry-locking device. 
5.  For buildings three stories or less or containing no more than 130 rooms, each motel/hotel building shall have a minimum roof pitch of four in 12. 
6.  Outside storage of commercial equipment is prohibited. 
7.  No business license shall be issued for any business operating from any guest room of the facility. 
8.  Provide a 75-foot natural buffer, enhanced with an additional 25-foot landscaped buffer (total 100 feet) adjacent to residentially zoned property. 
uu.  Museums and libraries. 
vv.  Music stores or studios. 
ww.  Newspaper and printing plants. 
xx.  Off-street parking lots. 
yy.  Outdoor theatres, provided there are acceleration and deceleration lanes at least 200 feet in length, and provided the screen is not visible from any public street located within 500 feet of the screen. 
zz.  Parking lots and garages. 
aaa.  Pest control businesses. 
bbb.  Pet shops or grooming establishments. 
ccc.  Photocopying and reproduction services. 
ddd.  Photography shops and studios. 
eee.  Plant nursery sales facilities. 
fff.  Plumbing, electrical, pool and home building supply showrooms and sales centers, provided there is no outdoor storage associated with the use. 
ggg.  Psychics and/or fortunetellers, provided they meet the following standards: 
1.  Road frontage requirement. The proposed establishment must have road frontage, in conformance with the requirements of this zoning district, on a major arterial street. Major arterial streets are shown on the official thoroughfare map of the City, on file with the Office of Community Development. 
2.  Minimum distance requirement from other psychics and/or fortunetellers. No psychics and/or fortunetellers shall be located, established, maintained or operated on any lot that has a property line within 500 feet of the property line of any other lot on which any other psychics and/or fortunetellers are located, established, maintained or operated. 
3.  Minimum distance from protected uses. No psychic and/or fortuneteller shall be located, established, maintained or operated on any lot that has a property line within 500 feet of the property line of any lot on which any protected use is located, established, maintained or operated. 
4.  Minimum distance from residential property. No psychic and/or fortuneteller shall be located, established, maintained or operated on any lot that has a property line within 500 feet of the property line of any residential property. 
5.  Measurement. For purposes of this subsection, distances shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest point on the property line of the lot on which the psychic and/or fortuneteller is located to the nearest point on a property line of any residential property or any lot on which a protected use or other psychic and/or fortuneteller, as the case may be, is established, maintained or operated. 
6.  Limited exception for subsequent protected uses or residential property. A psychic and/or fortuneteller lawfully operating under this Code shall not be deemed to be in violation of the location restrictions set forth solely herein because a protected use subsequently locates within the minimum required distance of the psychic and/or fortuneteller, or property within the minimum required distance of a psychic and/or fortuneteller subsequently becomes residential property. This subsection shall not apply to a psychic and/or fortuneteller at a time when an application for a business license for that establishment is submitted after the license has previously expired, has been revoked, or is at that time under suspension. 
hhh.  Radio, recording or television studios and broadcasting stations. 
iii.  Radio and television repair shops. 
jjj.  Record/video sales and rental stores. 
kkk.  Recreation facilities, indoor, such as bowling alleys, skating rinks, shooting ranges, movie theatres, and game rooms. 
lll.  Restaurants, including brewpubs meeting all of the regulations of article 4 of the city Code with respect to alcoholic beverages and the following supplemental standards: 
1.  Brewing activities shall be accessory to sales and consumption of food and beverages on-premises. 
2.  Shall be located wholly in an enclosed building. 
3.  Production space shall be limited subject to O.C.G.A. § 3-5-36. 
4.  No outdoor equipment or outdoor storage is permitted. 
mmm.  Shoe stores and shoe repair shops. 
nnn.  Small appliance repair shops. 
ooo.  Sporting goods. 
ppp.  Tailor shops. 
qqq.  Tattoo and/or body piercing establishments. 
1.  Road frontage requirement. The proposed establishment must have road frontage, in conformance with the requirements of this zoning district, on a major arterial street. Major arterial streets are shown on the official thoroughfare map of the city, on file with the office of community development. 
2.  Minimum distance requirement from other tattoo and/or body piercing establishment. No tattoo and/or body piercing establishments shall be located, established, maintained or operated on any lot that has a property line within 500 feet of the property line of any other lot on which any other tattoo and/or body piercing establishments are located, established, maintained or operated. 
3.  Minimum distance from protected uses. No tattoo and/or body piercing establishments shall be located, established, maintained or operated on any lot that has a property line within 500 feet of the property line of any lot on which any protected use is located, established, maintained or operated. 
4.  Minimum distance from residential property. No tattoo and/or body piercing establishments shall be located, established, maintained or operated on any lot that has a property line within 500 feet of the property line of any residential property. 
5.  Measurement. For purposes of this subsection, distances shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest point on the property line of the lot on which the tattoo and/or body piercing establishments are located to the nearest point on the property line of any residential property or any lot on which a protected use or other tattoo and/or body piercing establishment as the case may be, is established, maintained or operated. 
6.  Limited exception for subsequent protected uses or residential property. A tattoo and/or body piercing establishment lawfully operating under this Code shall not be deemed to be in violation of the location restrictions set forth solely herein because a protected use subsequently locates within the minimum required distance of the tattoo and/or body piercing establishments, or property within the minimum required distance of a tattoo and/or body piercing establishments subsequently becomes residential property. This subsection shall not apply to a tattoo and/or body piercing establishment at a time when an application for a business license for that establishment is submitted after the license has previously expired, has been revoked, or is at that time under suspension. 
rrr.  Taxidermist. 
sss.  Theaters and other indoor places of amusement, not specifically excluded by law. 
ttt.  Toy stores (children's and hobby stores). 
uuu.  Travel agencies. 
vvv.  Watch and clock repair shops. 
www.  Weaving apparel shops. 
xxx.  Indoor flea markets. 
yyy.  Reserved. 
zzz.  Private schools, vocational schools and commercial schools. 
aaaa.  Window tinting or stereo installation that is not associated with an auto repair business. 
bbbb.  Personal services, hair salons, nail salons, tanning salons, hydrotherapy salons, and sauna salons. 
cccc.  Adult entertainment establishments meeting all the requirements of the adult entertainment establishment ordinance. 
dddd.  Within the C2, General business district, gasoline service station pumps are permitted within the front yard setback, provided they are located not closer than 15 feet to the highway right-of-way. 
(2)  Office uses. 
a.  Accounting offices. 
b.  Architecture or engineering offices. 
c.  Doctor, dentist or chiropractor offices. 
d.  Insurance offices. 
e.  Law offices. 
f.  Medical clinics. 
g.  Office/showroom facilities. 
h.  Other public or professional offices. 
i.  Real estate offices. 
j.  Wholesale warehouse and with no outdoor storage. 
(3)  Public and semipublic uses. 
a.  Semipublic institutions, such as clubs, churches, mosques, synagogues or other places of worship, provided: 
1.  The club, church, mosque, synagogue or other place of worship is located on not less than five acres if it is a stand-alone use; or 
2.  A special use permit must be obtained if the club, church, mosque, synagogue or other place of worship is located in an established business park or industrial park. 
b.  Clubs, lodges, fraternal institutions and meeting halls. 
c.  Government offices. 
d.  Post offices. 
e.  Public or semipublic buildings and land uses, parks, playgrounds or community centers. 
f.  Utility offices. 
(4)  Residential. Caretaker or watchman quarters as an accessory use when granted a special exception by the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
(5)  Special uses. Within the C2, General business district the following uses may be permitted provided the applicant for such development is granted a special use permit by the governing authority after receiving recommendation from the Community Development Department head and the Planning and Zoning Board and after a public hearing. 
a.  Auto body repair shops. 
b.  Automotive car wash (full-service or self-service). 
c.  Auto repair shops or tire stores including lubrication or tune-up centers (full service and self-service). 
d.  Automotive sales lots new or used and associated service facilities with the following conditions: 
1.  Lot size one and one-half acres for used. 
2.  Minimum inventory of automobiles shall be displayed in parking lot/spaces that meet the minimum standard of this Code for parking lots/spaces including size and surface treatment; and 
3.  All vehicles on sales lots are in operating condition at all times. 
e.  Pawn shops, title loan and check cashing facilities. 
f.  Pool halls or billiard halls (three or more tables). 
g.  Precious metals dealers. 
h.  Taxi cab or limousine services. 
i.  Any retail or service establishment not specifically permitted herein, but which is similar to the listed uses, compatible with uses on adjoining property and which meets the intent and purpose of the district. 
j.  Telecommunications antenna. 
k.  Telecommunication tower. 
(Code 1979, § 8-4-49; Code 1998, § 106-85; Ord. No. 1-95, 2-6-1995; Ord. No. 10-95, 8-7-1995; Ord. No. 13-96, 5-6-1996; Ord. No. 16-96, 8-5-1996; Ord. No. 21-96, 10-7-1996; Ord. No. 08-97, § II, 5-5-1997; Ord. No. 06-98, 4-6-1998; Ord. No. 02-99, 2-1-1999; Ord. No. 13-2000, 10-2-2000; Ord. No. 14-2000, 11-6-2000; Ord. No. 06-2002, § 106-85, 3-4-2002; Ord. No. 03-2003, § 106-85, 3-3-2003; Ord. No. 11-2003, § 106-85, 8-4-2003; Ord. No. 14-2003, § 106-85, 10-6-2003; Ord. No. 18-2011, 10-3-2011; Ord. No. 09-2013 , 12-3-2013; Ord. No. 07-2018 § I, 6-4-2018; Ord. No. 09-2018 , § 1, 8-6-2018) 
Sec. 115-85. - C3, Central business district. 
(a)  [Permitted uses.] Within the C3, Central business district, the following uses will be permitted: 
(1)  Professional office uses. 
a.  Accounting offices. 
b.  Architecture or engineering offices. 
c.  Doctor, dentist or chiropractor offices. 
d.  Insurance offices. 
e.  Other public or professional offices. 
f.  Real estate offices. 
(2)  Public buildings and structures. 
(3)  Churches, mosques, synagogues and other places of worship, provided that the church or other place of worship meets the following requirements: 
a.  A church, mosque, synagogues or other place of worship which is a stand-alone use must be located on not less than five acres; or 
b.  A special use permit is obtained if the church or other place of worship is located in an established business park or industrial park. 
(4)  Restaurants and delicatessens with no drive-in service or drive-through windows, including brewpubs meeting all of the regulations of article 4 of this Code with respect to alcoholic beverages and the following supplemental standards: 
a.  Brewing activities shall be accessory to sales and consumption of food and beverages on-premises. 
b.  Shall be located wholly in an enclosed building. 
c.  Production space shall be limited subject to O.C.G.A. § 3-5-36. 
d.  No outdoor equipment or outdoor storage is permitted. 
(5)  Animal hospitals and veterinarian clinics. 
(6)  Business, social and catering event facilities of high quality construction. 
(7)  Retail uses: 
a.  Antique shops. 
b.  Art, school and office supply stores. 
c.  Art galleries. 
d.  Automotive parts. 
e.  Bakeries, retail sales only. 
f.  Banks or financial institutions, without drive-in facilities. Automatic teller as an accessory use (no drive-in). 
g.  Beauty parlors and barbershops. 
h.  Book or stationery stores, other than adult bookstores. 
i.  Instructional dance studios. 
j.  Dry cleaning and pickup and delivery stations. 
k.  Drugstores and pharmacies. 
l.  Florists. 
m.  Food stores. 
n.  Gift shops. 
o.  Hardware stores. 
p.  Hobby shops. 
q.  Ice cream shops. 
r.  Interior decorating shops. 
s.  Jewelry stores. 
t.  Museums. 
u.  Music studios. 
v.  Photography shops and studios. 
w.  Radio and television repair shops. 
x.  Shoe stores and shoe repair shops. 
y.  Small appliance repair shops. 
z.  Sporting goods stores. 
aa.  Tailor shops. 
bb.  Toy stores, children's and hobby shops. 
cc.  Watch and clock repair shops. 
dd.  Weaving apparel shops. 
(8)  Public parking facilities and parking lots associated with a business establishment. 
(b)  [New construction in the National Historic District.] In the C3, Central business district, construction of new buildings within the limits of the National Historic District shall be subject to the architectural review and approval of the Downtown Development Authority. In reviewing and approving new construction, the Downtown Development Authority may refer to the Norcross Downtown Study prepared by EDAW in 1987 and the Norcross Town Center Study prepared by Jordan, Jones and Goulding in 2001. This review and the requisite approval is conducted in order to maintain the historical integrity and viability of the National Historic Business District. 
(c)  [Alteration of appearance—Existing buildings in the National Historic District.] In the C3, Central business district, alteration of the appearance of existing buildings used for commercial purposes within the National Historic District shall be subject to review and approval of the Community Development Director. Alteration means any change to the exterior appearance of the structure including reconstruction, demolition, remodeling, siding replacement using a different material including painting over unpainted brick, replacement or addition of awnings and shall also include any change in the color of the exterior. Prior to commencement of any such alteration, a certificate of appropriateness shall be obtained by applying to the Community Development Department. Said application shall be accompanied by such drawings, photographs, plans or other documentation as may be required by the Community Development Director and shall be signed by the owner of record. In reviewing the application, the Director may refer to the Norcross Downtown Study prepared by EDAW in 1987, the Norcross Town Center Study prepared by Jordan, Jones and Goulding in 2001 and the compatibility of the proposed alterations with the building itself and the surrounding buildings. If the Community Development Director denies the certificate of appropriateness, then the applicant may make appeal to the Mayor and Council. This subsection is adopted in order to protect, enhance and perpetuate the historical, cultural and aesthetic heritage of the City and promote the health, prosperity and general welfare of its people as well as stimulate the revitalization of the Historic Business District thereby attracting visitors and tourists. 
(d)  [Single-family dwellings in the National Historic District.] Within the C3, Central business district, a single-family dwelling unit may be permitted as a secondary use in the National Historic District, provided the applicant is granted a special use permit by the City Council after receiving recommendations from the Planning and Zoning Board and after a public hearing. A special use permit may only be considered for applications meeting the following minimum criteria: 
(1)  The dwelling unit must be a secondary use to an established C3 use on the same lot (the principal use); 
(2)  The principal use and secondary use shall be subject to fire separation as required by the county Fire Marshal; 
(3)  The dwelling unit must not occupy ground floor frontage (storefront) on South Peachtree Street or Jones Street; 
(4)  The heated square footage shall be no less than 1,250; 
(5)  The dwelling unit must not displace any space that has been actively used within the preceding 12 months for retail, office or food service not including passive storage; 
(6)  The exterior appearance of any new construction will be subject to the approval of the City Council; 
(7)  Only one secondary use per lot is permitted. 
(e)  Special uses. Within the C-3 Central business district, the following uses may be permitted provided the applicant for such a development is granted a Special Use Permit by the Mayor and City Council after receiving recommendations from the Community Development Director and Planning Commission and after a public hearing. 
(1)  Indoor custom auto repair shall be permitted provided: 
a.  The gross-square-foot area of the business in the building is less than 3,000 square feet; 
b.  No auto repairs are conducted outside the building; 
c.  No inoperable vehicles are parked outside the building; 
d.  No more than a maximum of two vehicles other than employee vehicles are parked outside the building; 
e.  No car sales; 
f.  No outdoor air compressors; 
g.  No outdoor storage of any kind; 
h.  No outdoor incidental uses such as carwashes. 
It is the intent of this article that the historical integrity and viability of the National Historic Business District take priority in consideration of any secondary residential use requested by an applicant for a special use permit. 
(Code 1979, § 8-4-50; Code 1998, § 106-86; Ord. No. 1-95, 2-6-1995; Ord. No. 10-95, 8-7-1995; Ord. No. 16-96, 8-5-1996; Ord. No. 21-96, 10-7-1996; Ord. No. 18-97, § I, 11-3-1997; Ord. No. 11-99, 7-12-1999; Ord. No. 08-2000, 3-6-2000; Ord. No. 13-2000, § 106-86, 10-2-2000; Ord. No. 06-2002, § 106-86, 3-4-2002; Ord. No. 03-2003, § 106-86, 3-3-2003; Ord. No. 14-2003, § 106-86, 10-6-2003; Ord. No. 18-2003, § 106-86, 12-1-2003; Ord. No. 19-2011, 10-3-2011; 07-2018 § I, 6-4-2018) 
Sec. 115-86. - M1, Light industry district. 
(a)  The M1, Light industry district is comprised of lands that are located on or have ready access to a major street or state highway and are well adapted to industrial development but whose proximity to residential or commercial districts makes it desirable to limit industrial operations and processes to those that are not objectionable by reason of the emission of noise, vibration, smoke, dust, gas, fumes, odors or radiation and that do not create fire or explosion hazards or other objectionable conditions. 
(b)  Within the M1, Light industry district, the following uses are permitted: 
(1)  Auto service, excluding auto body work and painting, with the following requirements: 
a.  No outdoor storage of vehicles; 
b.  No outdoor storage of equipment or material; 
c.  All work on vehicles to be completed inside the structure; 
d.  The sides and rear of the business will be screened from view of surrounding properties with an opaque eight-foot-fence. 
(2)  Baking plants. 
(3)  Building material or other outdoor storage yards, other than junkyards, if they meet the following requirements: 
a.  Not be located within a required front yard; 
b.  Set back at least 25 feet from any side or rear property lines and shall be screened by a solid fence at least six feet high set back a similar distance from any side or rear property lines, appropriately landscaped and maintained; and 
c.  If an outdoor storage yard is established in connection with a permitted building, it shall meet the above requirements. 
(4)  Businesses that serve industries or their employees. 
(5)  Cold storage plants. 
(6)  Farm equipment, mobile home, recreational vehicles and equipment, sales and service. 
(7)  Billboard signs. 
(8)  Soft drink bottling and distributing plants. 
(9)  Truck terminals. 
(10)  Wholesaling and warehousing with offices, accessory retail sales are permitted, but shall not exceed 20 percent of gross floor area. 
(11)  Miniwarehouses, provided the storage of flammable and/or hazardous materials is prohibited. 
(12)  Similar industries that meet the standards of this zoning district, to include manufacturers of malt beverages and beer known as microbreweries or craft breweries subject to all regulations of article 4 of this Code surrounding alcoholic beverages and the following supplemental standards: 
1.  Shall be a maximum of 20,000 square feet. 
2.  No outdoor public address system shall be permitted. 
3.  Production space shall be in a wholly enclosed building. 
(13)  Telephone marketing (telemarketing) enterprises. 
(14)  Open air markets and outdoor flea markets. 
(15)  Bus terminals. 
(16)  Trade/vocational school. 
(17)  Recreational facility/training center, indoor (gymnastic schools, baseball academies, etc.). 
(18)  Professional office. 
(c)  Within the M1, Light industry district, the following uses are permitted subject to the approval of a special use permit: 
(1)  Churches or other places of worship, provided that a special use permit is obtained if the church or other place of worship is located in an established business park or industrial park. 
(2)  Temporary shelters, provided that: 
a.  No temporary shelter use shall be located, established, maintained or operated on any lot that has a property line within 1,000 feet of the property line of any other lot on which any other temporary transitional housing establishment is located, established, maintained or operated. 
b.  The applicant for such development is granted a special use permit by the governing authority only after receiving recommendation from the Community Development Department Director and the Planning and Zoning Board after a public hearing. 
c.  The shelter site should have ready access to a major street or state highway, serviced by public transportation; and proximity to local commercial districts. 
d.  The applicant for such a development shall provide to the Community Development Department a business plan outlining the mission of the institution and its proposed clientele, uses, services, a statement of financial stability, and a statement of other similar shelters the applicant has established. 
e.  All temporary shelters shall comply with chapter 111, pertaining to temporary shelters. 
f.  Issuance of special use permits for temporary shelters shall be granted to the owner of the shelter at the time of application. Should the ownership of the shelter change, the special use permit shall be deemed expired and a new special use permit must be requested. 
(d)  Within the M1, Light industrial district the following uses may be permitted provided the applicant for such development is granted a special use permit by the governing authority after receiving recommendation from the Community Development Department head and the Planning and Zoning Board and after a public hearing. 
(1)  Telecommunications antenna. 
(2)  Telecommunication tower. 
(Code 1979, § 8-4-51; Code 1998, § 106-87; Ord. No. 13-96, 5-6-1996; Ord. No. 16-96, 8-5-1996; Ord. No. 21-96, 10-7-1996; Ord. No. 22-96, 12-2-1996; Ord. No. 14-2000, § 106-87, 11-6-2000; Ord. No. 06-2002, § 106-87, 3-4-2002; Ord. No. 11-2004, § 106-87, 8-2-2004; Ord. No. 11-2007, § 106-87, 4-1-2007; Ord. No. 07-2912, 2-6-2012; Ord. No. 17-2012, 6-4-2012; Ord. No. 04-2013, § 1, 3-4-2013; Ord. No. 1-2016 , § IB, 3-7-2016, 07-2018 § I, 6-4-2018) 
Sec. 115-87. - FH, Flood hazard district. 
(a)  The FH, Flood hazard district is comprised of lands that are subject to periodic flooding. The intent of the regulations within this zoning district is to limit the use of such floodplain lands to: 
(1)  Prevent flood damage to persons and properties and minimize expenditures for flood relief programs, flood control projects and flood damage repair. 
(2)  Preserve drainage courses that will be adequate to carry stormwater runoff from existing and future land developments. 
(3)  Prohibit landfills or other obstructions to the flow of floodwaters, except those included in the permitted uses listed below. 
(4)  Permit uses that are appropriate on floodplains and utilize effectively this valuable city resource. 
(b)  Within the FH, Flood hazard district, the following uses are permitted: 
(1)  Dams, provided they are constructed in accordance with specifications of the United States Department of Agriculture Soil Conservation Service or the United States Army Corps of Engineers; 
(2)  Fences; 
(3)  Parking areas; 
(4)  Roads, provided adequate portions of them are constructed on bridges or piers to permit the free flow of floodwaters; 
(5)  Public, semipublic, private and commercial recreation uses requiring no structures within the floodplain except structures for temporary shelter; 
(6)  Public utility poles, towers, pipelines and sewage treatment outfalls; 
(7)  Wastewater treatment facilities, including sewage lagoons, provided: 
a.  They are located so as not to obstruct the flow of floodwaters; 
b.  The elevation of the top of their embankments is such that they are not subject to flooding; 
c.  Their embankments are protected against erosion by rip-rap, vegetative cover or other permanent protective cover; and 
d.  They are surrounded by a woven wire fence at least six feet high. 
(8)  The erection, construction or maintenance of signs in areas adjacent to and within 660 feet of either side of the rights-of-way of primary and interstate highway systems shall be limited to M1 zoning districts. 
(c)  Procedure for correction of error in the FH, Flood hazard zoning district boundary line. If a property owner can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Zoning Board of Appeals that an error has been made in establishing the flood hazard zoning district boundary line and that his property or a designated portion of it that now lies in the flood hazard zoning district is actually not subject to flooding, the Zoning Board of Appeals may correct the flood hazard district boundary line accordingly. The Zoning Board of Appeals and the property owner involved may seek the advice and assistance of the Soil Conservation Service of the Department of Agriculture or of the United States Army Corps of Engineers. 
(Code 1979, § 8-4-52; Code 1998, § 106-88; Ord. No. 06-2002, § 106-88, 3-4-2002) 
Sec. 115-88. - ODW, Office-distribution-warehouse district. 
(a)  The ODW, Office-distribution-warehouse district is to provide for large scale office facilities and related distribution/warehouse activities that may be incompatible with other land use classifications. The ODW district provides for office, office distribution and office warehousing facilities in high-quality buildings in attractive surroundings. No product manufacturing or outdoor storage of any type shall be permitted in an ODW district. Office and business park activities are allowed in this district, so long as outside storage is prohibited. Buildings must be developed on public street frontage. 
(b)  Within the ODW, Office-distribution-warehouse district, the following uses are permitted: 
(1)  Professional and business offices. 
(2)  Office-distribution-warehouse facilities, provided the distribution/warehouse activity is an integral part of the office activity and is located in the same facility. 
(3)  Wholesale trade/distribution offices with showroom and/or display facilities and areas for assembly and warehousing; provided, however, no more than 50 percent of the floor area shall be used for these purposes and no assembly or storage activity shall be allowed outdoors. 
(4)  Accessory uses such as retail business and service establishments, cafeterias, snack shops, etc., located within office buildings. 
(5)  Telephone marketing and telemarketing enterprises. 
(6)  Other uses determined by the City Council to be similar and compatible with the permitted uses listed in this section. 
(Code 1979, § 8-4-53; Code 1998, § 106-89; Ord. No. 1-95, § 8-4-53(b), 2-6-1995; Ord. No. 06-2002, § 106-89, 3-4-2002) 
Sec. 115-89. - DCD, Design concept development district. 
(a)  The purpose of a design concept development district is to encourage the best possible site plans and building arrangements under a unified plan of development, rather than under lot-by-lot regulation. The city benefits from better land utilization, economy in the provision of roads and utilities and flexibility in design. Approval of an overall concept plan will be in accordance with the latest adopted version of the Norcross Comprehensive Plan. 
(b)  The design concept development district is intended to encourage ingenuity and resourcefulness in land planning in order to promote unique solutions to land development issues, and to promote mixed-use infill developments. 
(c)  In furtherance of the purposes for which the DCD district is established, the following provisions shall apply to all proposed DCD projects: 
(1)  Concept plan required. Development of the DCD shall be guided by a concept plan that designates the land uses of the DCD. The concept plan shall be accompanied by a development standards text, which may be approved as a condition of zoning, providing development standards and uses for the project which can vary, augment or limit the requirements of this zoning chapter and the development regulations. The concept plan shall be submitted as a part of the petition to rezone any property within the Downtown Development District to the DCD district. At a minimum the concept plan shall include architectural elevations of four sides, a description of the types of exterior treatments of buildings, a site plan to scale, a tree plan showing the existing trees on site that are ten inches in diameter at breast height or greater for hardwoods and 16-inch dbh for other trees, an existing site survey and a grading plan. 
(2)  Applicability of existing regulations. To the extent that the approved concept plan and development standards for a DCD contradict the development regulations and this zoning chapter, the contradictory provisions of the development regulations and zoning chapter are inapplicable. 
(3)  Concept plan as a condition of zoning. No changes in land use or density shall be allowed in any approved and incorporated concept plan or development standards text, except as subsequently approved pursuant to a rezoning of the property. 
(4)  Underlying assumptions regarding architectural and site design standards. The City Council has adopted or accepted different architectural and site design standards for application in various areas of the city, including those prepared for the Norcross Town Center Study by Jordan Jones and Goulding in 2001, and the Norcross Architectural and Site Design Standards by The Jaeger Company in 2006. These documents provide desired design characteristics for streets, buildings, yards and other spaces. All persons, firms or agencies wishing to develop a DCD proposal for consideration by the city must utilize the latest versions of the design guidelines adopted or approved by the City Council applicable to their site location in developing their concept plans and accompanying development standards text. 
(5)  Procedure for application. After receipt of a complete rezoning application of DCD, the Community Development Director will route the application to the Downtown Development Authority (DDA) before presentation to City Council. The DDA will review the application and make a recommendation to the Mayor and City Council based on whether or not the proposed development promotes trade, commerce, industry, or employment in the downtown development area of the city. The application will also be routed to the Architectural Review Board to review for compatibility and compliance with the latest architectural design standards adopted by the City, and Planning and Zoning Board for their recommendations as is standard practice of any rezoning before submittal to Council for action. 
(6)  Allowed uses. The approved concept plan and any conditions approved by the Mayor and City Council shall regulate the uses allowed on the property. Rezoning applications must clearly state the intended percentage mix of uses based on gross floor area, and such uses must be consistent with the character of the surrounding neighborhood, and the land use policies of the latest adopted version of the Norcross Comprehensive Plan. 
(Ord. No. 06-2002, § 106-90, 3-4-2002; Ord. No. 16-2004, § 106-90, 12-6-2004; Ord. No. 06-2005, § 106-90, 9-6-2005; Ord. No. 26-2008, pt. 1(106-90(a), (b)), 11-3-2008; Ord. No. 09-2017, § I, 2-5-2018 ) 
Sec. 115-90. - Area, yard and height requirements. 
(a)  Residential uses. The area, yard and height requirements for residential uses are as follows: 

 
N/A = Not Applicable 
R-O-W = Right-of-way 
(b)  Nonresidential uses. The area, yard and height requirements for nonresidential uses are as follows: 

 
N/A = Not applicable 
R-O-W = Right-of-way 
*65 feet in height allowed by approval of the Community Development Director only in Jimmy Carter Blvd/Brook Hollow Activity Center Character Area as identified in the Norcross Comprehensive Plan. 
For purposes of determining the setback requirements as to a corner lot, both sides abutting the street shall be considered front yards for setback purposes, and the minimum front yard setback of this section shall apply; provided the setback as imposed does not fall within the exceptions of section 115-116. When a lot is deemed to have two front yards, then the remaining yards shall be considered side yards for determination of setbacks for the principal building. The minimum separation between buildings located on the same lot shall be 20 feet, unless fire, building or other applicable codes require a greater separation; except that the minimum separation between a residential building and residential accessory building located on the same lot shall be five feet. 
(Code 1979, § 8-4-54; Code 1998, § 106-90; Ord. No. 18-95, § XI, 11-6-1995; Ord. No. 21-96, 10-7-1996; Ord. No. 03-98, 2-2-1998; Ord. No. 06-2002, § 106-91, 3-4-2002; Ord. No. 03-2003, § 106-91, 3-3-2003; 06-2018 § I, 5-7-2018) 
Sec. 115-91. - Permitted encroachments upon required setbacks. 
Cornices, eaves, chimneys, landings, porches, bay windows or other similar architectural features may extend into the required front, side or rear yard setbacks, provided such extensions do not exceed three feet into the setback. Decks and patios may extend into the side or rear yard setbacks but no closer than five feet from any property line. Steps and landings may extend into the required setbacks, provided such extensions do not exceed ten feet into the front yard setback. Steps and landings may extend into the rear yard setback, but no closer than five feet from the property line. 
(Code 1998, § 106-91; Ord. No. 03-98, 2-2-1998; Ord. No. 06-2002, § 106-92, 3-4-2002) 
Sec. 115-92. - CSO, Conservation subdivision/open space development. 
(a)  Short title. This section may also be known as the "Conservation Subdivision/Open Space Development Ordinance." 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Conservation space means permanently protected land and water, including agricultural and forestry land, that is in its undeveloped, natural state or that has been developed only to the extent consistent, or is restored to be consistent, with one or more of the following goals: 
(1)  Water quality protection for rivers, streams and lakes; 
(2)  Flood protection; 
(3)  Wetlands protection; 
(4)  Reduction of erosion through protection of steep slopes, areas with erodible soils and stream banks; 
(5)  Protection of riparian buffers and other areas that serve as natural habitat and corridors for native plant and animal species; 
(6)  Scenic protection; 
(7)  Protection of archaeological and historic resources; 
(8)  Provision of recreation in the form of boating, hiking, camping, fishing, running, jogging, biking, walking and similar outdoor activities; and 
(9)  Connection of existing or planned areas contributing to the goals set out in this definition. 
Environmental site assessment (phase one) means a written report that documents the process by which a person or entity determines if a parcel of real property is subject to recognized environmental conditions. The report itemizes and assesses the environmental and historical features to be identified or delineated on an existing features site analysis plan. The assessment and report shall be conducted in a methodical manner and in accordance with accepted practice as contained in the American Society for Testing and Materials Standard ASTM 1527. 
Exotic plant means a plant that does not meet the definition of native plant. 
Invasive exotic plant means a plant that is able to proliferate and aggressively alter or displace indigenous biological communities. 
Native plant means a plant that occurs naturally in a particular region, state, ecosystem, and habitat without direct or indirect human actions (Federal Native Plant Conservation Committee, 1994). 
Pocket park or neighborhood green means a relatively flat, level and landscaped area, larger than 0.33 acres, and constructed for community gathering or play, or visual enhancement. 
Primary conservation areas means areas of conservation space required to be permanently protected and undeveloped with the exception of road crossings and sanitary sewer lines. Wetland and stream bank mitigation projects are permitted. Stormwater drainage systems are allowed except that they shall not be counted toward the minimum required amount of conservation space. Because permanently protecting wetlands, riparian areas and floodplains will provide significant long term benefits ranging from protection of water quality to wildlife habitat to quality of life for individuals resulting from natural spaces available for passive recreation, these features must be permanently protected. The inclusion of uplands, undeveloped slopes and forested areas in conservation space is encouraged. 
Secondary conservation areas means areas that are desirable to be included in conservation space, but which may or may not be suitable to be permanently protected. Examples are pocket parks, neighborhood greens and stormwater management facilities that may revert to a relatively natural state. 
(c)  CSO, Conservation subdivision overlay district. 
(1)  Purposes. The purposes of this overlay district are as follows: 
a.  To encourage the development of residential communities, that are density neutral based upon the comprehensive plan, designed to preserve and protect environmental resources, scenic vistas, and natural and cultivated landscapes. 
b.  To enhance land, water, air and tree resources by minimizing the area of land disturbance, reducing impervious surface, optimizing stream buffers, preserving tree cover and encouraging retention and protection of conservation space. 
c.  To reduce infrastructure maintenance costs as a result of efficient community design. 
d.  To provide conservation space and pedestrian linkages and wildlife corridors among residential communities and to encourage recreation opportunities. 
e.  To preserve significant historical and archeological features. 
f.  To preserve and protect contiguous undeveloped areas within the development. 
(2)  Applicability. This overlay district may be overlaid only upon the R100 and R75 districts utilizing the public sanitary sewer system. The overlay district shall be a use by right for those properties zoned R100 or R75 as of the effective date of the adoption of this overlay district. Any conditions of zoning or special use approval of the underlying district shall also be observed (exception: lot area, width or quantity). For properties which are submitted for rezoning to R100 or R75, the applicant shall declare the intent to utilize this overlay district at the time of application and the application shall be accompanied by an existing features site analysis plan, an environmental site assessment (phase one) report, and a concept plan meeting the requirements of this subsection. In the absence of a declaration of intent to use the overlay district with a rezoning application, the overlay district shall not be used on rezoned property for at least two years from the date of the resolution adopting a zoning change. The overlay district shall not be used on property that has been timber harvested within 24 months prior to adoption of a zoning change or approval of a concept plan. 
(3)  Permitted uses. Those uses permitted in the underlying district are permitted. 
(4)  Existing features site analysis plan. At time of development, or if a zoning action is proposed, and prior to preparing the concept plan, an existing features site analysis plan, sealed by a registered engineer or landscape architect, and an environmental site assessment (phase one) report, shall be prepared and submitted by the applicant or developer. 
a.  The purposes of the site analysis plan are to: 
1.  Delineate areas that have been identified as worthy of permanent protection in conservation space because of their environmental values. This delineation shall include, but shall not be limited to, the information and steps listed in this section. 
2.  Set forth the particulars of the site, including boundary, topographic data (minimum four-foot contour intervals), existing structures and utility easements. 
3.  Together with the environmental site assessment (phase one) report, provide the starting point for design of the conservation subdivision with built areas being designed as separate from the areas delineated as worthy of permanent protection. 
b.  The existing features site analysis plan shall include at least the following information: 
1.  Perennial and intermittent streams, FEMA designated 100-year flood hazard zones and wetlands. The source of this information shall also be indicated. 
2.  Identification of tree lines, native woodlands, open fields or meadows, peaks or rock outcroppings, and prime agricultural land. 
3.  Delineation of tree resource areas by type such as hardwoods, pines or mixed; and old or new growth. 
4.  Delineation of steep slope areas (25 percent or greater). The designer shall endeavor to preserve slopes greater than 40 percent. 
5.  Identification of historical, archeological or other significant features identified in the environmental site assessment (phase one) report. 
6.  Identification of scenic vistas as listed in the comprehensive plan. 
7.  Identification of conservation space, open space or common areas adjacent to the project. 
8.  Identification of protected plant species as listed by the state department of natural resources, to be certified by a registered landscape architect, forester, arborist, biologist, botanist or horticulturist. The plan also shall include certification that timber harvesting activity has not occurred on the property in the previous 24 months prior to the approval of a rezoning application or the approval of a concept plan. At time of development, a concept plan shall be submitted by the developer for review and approval in accordance with the requirements and procedures of the development regulations. If a zoning action is proposed, the rezoning site plan shall include the following information: 
(i)  Delineation and specifications of conservation space including calculations and exclusions (see section 1316.5.c); and any pocket parks, neighborhood greens, play areas, or trail system to be constructed. 
(ii)  A typical detail on the plan indicating dwelling size, lot width, building setback lines, off-street parking, street trees, sidewalks, and street pavement and right-of-way width. 
(iii)  Lot width average, area and percent of floodplain specifications in tabular form; and density calculations (gross and net). 
(d)  Conservation space requirements. In order to qualify for this overlay district, conservation space shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Delineation. Priority shall be given in delineating conservation space areas as those areas of significance identified in the existing features site analysis plan, around which the built areas are designed. 
(2)  Undeveloped and natural. Conservation space shall remain undeveloped and natural except for the provision of non-motorized passive recreation opportunities such as running, walking, biking, and similar outdoor activities. Wetland and stream bank mitigation projects also are permitted. Primary conservation areas are required to be included in the conservation space. These areas shall be covered by a provision for permanent protection and shall include 100-year floodplains, stream buffer zones, slopes greater than 40 percent consisting of a contiguous area of at least 5,000 square feet, wetlands, endangered or threatened species or their habitat, archeological sites, cemeteries or burial grounds. Secondary conservation areas are features and areas recommended and desirable for conservation space designation and may be covered by the provisions for permanent protection. These include important historic sites, existing healthy, native forests of at least one contiguous acre, scenic view sheds, peaks and rock outcroppings, prime agriculture lands consisting of at least five contiguous acres, and existing trails that connect the tract to neighboring areas. Also considered secondary conservation areas are pocket parks, neighborhood greens and stormwater management facilities and practices and may be constructed and maintained in conservation space. However, pocket parks and neighborhood greens shall not exceed ten percent of the total required conservation space. 
(e)  Exclusions. Excluded from meeting the minimum amount of conservation space are the following (also see the definition of primary conservation areas): 
(1)  Residential yards. 
(2)  Proposed permanent lakes that may be used for wet detention. No more than 50 percent of land area located within a proposed permanent lake may be credited. 
(3)  Recreation area improvements. Impervious surfaces in recreation areas shall not be credited. 
(4)  Easements. Land area within power, or gas pipeline easements, sewer line easements or pump stations shall not be credited. 
(5)  Other. Land area devoted to public or private streets or any land that has been, or is to be, conveyed to a public agency via a purchase agreement for such uses as parks, schools, or other public facilities shall not be credited. 
(f)  Ownership. Conservation space shall be owned in fee-simple by a mandatory property owner's association; or other entity approved in advance by the Mayor and Council during their normal course of business. The developer shall record the deed to the conservation space prior to, or concurrent with, the recording of the first final subdivision plat. An access easement following the alignment of future public streets is acceptable. However, pocket parks or neighborhood greens may be deeded concurrent with the unit or phase of the final subdivision plat of which it is a part. 
(g)  Property owner's association. The property owner's association bylaws or covenants, at a minimum, shall contain the following provisions: 
(1)  Governance of the association by the Georgia Property Owner's Association Act (O.C.G.A. § 44-3-220 et seq.) or a successor to that Act that grants lien rights to the association for maintenance expenses and tax obligations. 
(2)  Responsibility for the appropriate maintenance of the conservation space and should include removal of invasive or exotic plant species such as Chinese privet, kudzu and Japanese honeysuckle. 
(3)  Responsibility for insurance and taxes. 
(4)  Automatic compulsory membership of all lot purchasers and their successors; and compulsory assessments. 
(5)  Conditions and timing of transferring control of the association from the developer to the lot owners. 
(6)  Guarantee that the association will not be dissolved without the advance approval of the Mayor and Council. 
(h)  Maintenance. The property owner's association, or other entity approved in advance by the Mayor and Council, shall be responsible for the continuous maintenance of buffers, conservation space and recreation areas. 
(i)  Conservation surety. Conservation space delineated on the final plat and required to be in a primary conservation area shall be permanently protected by either one or both of the following options: 
(1)  Option 1, conveyance to the public and subdivision lot owners. A deed conveying ownership of the conservation space to the mandatory property owner's association shall be recorded and delivered prior to, or concurrent with, the approval of the final plat for the first phase of the subdivision. Both the deed and the final plat shall contain, at a minimum, the following covenant: 
"The conservation space conveyed by deed and shown on the final plat shall remain permanently protected and shall not be disturbed, cleared or developed except in accordance with section 1316.6.b. of the 1985 Zoning Resolution of the City of Norcross and with O.C.G.A. § 36-22-1 et seq., having the following greenspace goals: protection of streams, floodplains and wetlands; steep slopes; woodlands, open fields and meadows; historical and archeological features; significant wildlife habitats; scenic vistas; passive recreation and connectivity with nearby open spaces. The following uses may be allowed: passive recreational amenities, such as pervious-surface paths and minimal parking spaces; picnic and restroom facilities (constructed facilities shall not exceed 15 percent of the conservation space). This covenant is intended to benefit said area to the public and the use of same to the subdivision lot owners and residents, and it shall run in perpetuity as provided by O.C.G.A. § 44-5-60(c)." 
(2)  Option 2, conveyance to other qualified organizations or entities. Except for pocket parks or neighborhood greens, developed recreation areas or secondary conservation areas not desired for permanent protection, conservation space shall be permanently protected by the: 
a.  Recording of a covenant or conveyance of an easement which runs in perpetuity under O.C.G.A. § 44-5-60 in favor of any corporation, trust, or other organization holding land for the use of the public or certain governmental entities; or 
b.  Conveyance of a conservation easement running in perpetuity to a third party qualified organization recognized by Federal Treasury Regulation section 170A-14(c)(1). Qualified organizations recognized by this treasury regulation include, but may not be limited to, governmental entities, certain publicly supported charities, local and national land trusts, or other conservation groups that are organized or operated primarily or substantially for one of the conservation purposes specified in the Internal Revenue Code. Governmental entities that qualify to be named in covenants under O.C.G.A. § 44-5-60 or to receive conservation easements under the treasury regulation referred to in this subsection (h)(2)b for purposes of this section shall include the federal government, the state, the city, or authorities of the state or the city. If a covenant is recorded or an easement conveyed in favor of a governmental entity, formal acceptance by the governmental entity or qualified conservation organization shall be obtained prior to the recording of the covenant or conveyance of the easement. The developer shall record the necessary legal instrument to accomplish protection of the conservation space prior to, or concurrent with, the recording of the final plat. The legal instrument shall contain, at a minimum, the same language required to be placed on a deed as stated in Option 1 of this section. Secondary conservation areas may also be covered by the same permanent protection options. 
(j)  Density. The comprehensive plan establishes recommended residential density not to exceed three units per acre in many areas of the city. Consequently, subdivisions in the overlay district shall not exceed a maximum net density in the underlying district, and shall provide at least the percent of conservation space, as stated in subsections (i)(1) and (2) of this section: 
(1)  R100: 2.3 units per acre with 40 percent conservation space; or 3.0 units per acre with 50 percent conservation space. 
(2)  R75: 3.0 units per acre with 40 percent conservation space. 
(k)  Development requirements. Subdivisions in this overlay district shall meet the following requirements unless a special use permit is submitted and approved by the Board of Commissioners: 
(1)  Minimum subdivision size: Ten contiguous acres. 
(2)  Lot area: No minimum. 
(3)  Average lot width: The average width of all building lots shall be at least 60 feet. Exception: Any lot located less than 50 feet from adjacent property lines zoned RA200, R140, R100 and R75 (except modified and cluster subdivisions) shall meet the lot width (for the entire depth of the lot) and the rear setback of the underlying zoning district. 
(4)  Minimum road frontage per lot: 40 feet. Exception: Road frontage may be reduced to 20 feet for lots with frontage upon cul-de-sac or "eyebrow cul-de-sac" turnarounds. 
(5)  Minimum yard areas (setbacks): 
a.  Front: 20 feet. Exception: The front yard setback may be reduced to five feet if dwellings are provided side or rear entry garages. To qualify for the reduced setback on a corner lot, side entry garages must be located to the side adjacent to an abutting lot. 
b.  Rear: 20 feet. 
c.  Side: five feet. 
(6)  Street frontage buffer: 50 feet in width (not part of any building lot). The street frontage buffer shall remain undisturbed and natural, except for entrance features, necessary street construction activities, right-of-way crossings and corner right-of-way miters or radii. If the required street frontage buffer is void of vegetation, it shall be replanted to provide an effective visual screen, which may include landscaped berms and decorative fences. The street frontage buffer may be counted towards conservation space calculations. 
(7)  Maximum height: 35 feet. 
(8)  Minimum floor area: Each dwelling unit shall have a minimum heated finished living area, excluding a basement, attic, carport or garage, as follows: 
a.  One story: 1,600 square feet. 
b.  Two story: 1,800 square feet. 
(9)  Sodded yards: All grassed areas on dwelling lots shall be sodded. 
(10)  Garages: Dwellings shall have two-car garages. 
(11)  Street trees: Street trees, in accordance with the requirements of the Buffer, Landscape and Tree Ordinance, shall be provided. 
(12)  Underground utilities: Utilities shall be located underground. 
(l)  Grandfathering. 
(1)  Any concept plan approved prior to the adoption of this amendment shall be considered "grandfathered" and, at the developer's option, may proceed to project completion. 
(2)  Any concept plan submitted but not approved shall be considered "grandfathered" and, at the developer's option, may proceed to plan approval and project completion provided that the concept plan is approved within 90 calendar days of the adoption of this amendment. 
(Ord. No. 14-2006, 11-6-2006) 
Sec. 115-93. - RAOD, Redevelopment area overlay district. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of the RAOD, Redevelopment area overlay district is as follows: 
(1)  To encourage the revitalization of underused commercial and residential areas into pedestrian-oriented developments that provide a complementary mix of uses, including a variety of residential options, within convenient walking distance. 
(2)  To encourage efficient land use and redevelopment plans forming a live-work-play environment that offers employees and residents the opportunity to fulfill their daily activities with minimal use of single-occupant automobiles. 
(3)  To allow and encourage development densities and land use intensities that will allow for making productive use of alternative transportation modes such as bus transit, rail transit, ridesharing, bicycling, and walking. 
(4)  To encourage formation of a well designed, pedestrian-friendly activity center with high-density commercial and residential development that increases choices for safe living environments for the citizens of the city. 
(5)  To allow flexibility in development standards in order to encourage the design of innovative development projects that set high standards for landscaping, greenspace, urban design, and public amenities. 
(6)  To promote a distinct, unified theme that will reinforce the branding process and improve the market attractiveness of the area for investments by the private and public sectors. 
(7)  To provide for the appropriate incentives to encourage reinvestment and renewal necessary to realize the potential of the city's Buford Highway/Jimmy Carter Boulevard character area, consistent with the city comprehensive plan. 
(8)  To provide for connectivity of streets and sidewalks for improved vehicular and pedestrian circulation and reduce the dependence on automobile uses by increasing the ease of movement and opportunities for alternative modes of travel. 
(9)  To encourage design measures that improve public safety and security. 
(b)  Incorporation of design standards and guidelines. The Director or his designee is authorized to administer and interpret the district guidelines and their relationship to the city redevelopment area district design guidelines. These guidelines provide acceptable architectural design controls, landscaping, detail drawings, signage, fencing, lighting, and street and site furniture. These guidelines shall be used to promote proper design criteria for the RAOD. In the case that any provision of this section conflicts with those of the city redevelopment area district design guidelines, the provisions of this section shall govern. 
(c)  Applicability . 
(1)  Relationship to underlying zoning district provisions. The RAOD is an overlay zone. The land use regulations applicable to the underlying zoning classifications remain in full force and effect except where superseded herein. Where there is a provision not expressed in the underlying zoning classification, or where a provision hereof is in conflict with the underlying zoning classification, the provision of this RAOD shall be controlling. The rezoning of an underlying zoning classification after the adoption of the RAOD does not supersede the requirements of the RAOD. 
(2)  Except as provided in subsection (c)(6) of this section, the provisions of this section shall apply to all parcels of land and rights-of-way within the boundaries of the RAOD provided in subsection (d) of this section. 
(3)  The provisions of this RAOD apply to all applications for land disturbance permits, plan review, plat approval, sign permits and building permits for all property within the boundaries of the RAOD. 
(4)  Concept plan reviews, plat approvals, land disturbance permits, and building permits for each parcel located within this RAOD shall meet all applicable requirements of this chapter, as amended, and all city development regulations, except where, and to the extent that, the requirements of this section, as well as the district guidelines and City of Norcross Redevelopment Area District Design Guidelines provide otherwise. In case of a conflict between the provisions of this section and any other city ordinance, the provisions of this section shall govern. 
(5)  Change in use. 
a.  A change in use may be initiated by an application for a certificate of occupancy, business license, building permit, development permit, change of occupancy or any actual change in use on the property, whether initiated by a formal application or otherwise. 
b.  Except where prohibited by affidavit prepared in accordance with subsection (c)(5)d, any change in use to a use permitted as a matter of right by the underlying zoning classification will not invoke the RAOD; and the exception set forth in subsection (c)(6)b. shall apply to future development activity authorized by the underlying zoning classification. 
c.  Any change in use to a use permitted by the RAOD that is not a use authorized by the underlying zoning classification as a matter of right shall mandate that all future development for the affected parcel shall be in accordance with the RAOD and not the underlying zoning classification, and the exception set forth in subsection (c)(6)b. shall not apply to future development activity. 
d.  Any change in use permitted by subsection (c)(5)c. shall require the owner of the property to execute an affidavit approved by the Director of the Community Development Department which shall commit that all future development of the affected property shall be in accordance with the RAOD and not with the underlying zoning classification, and acknowledging that the exception set forth in subsection (c)(6)b. is forever waived for all future development activity on the affected parcel. 
e.  Any parcels of land where an approved affidavit has been filed with the City stating that the property can only be developed in accordance with the provisions of the RAOD and not those of the underlying zoning district will be noted on the Official Zoning Map. 
(6)  Exemptions. 
a.  Development activity for which the Director has received a valid and complete application for a building permit, development permit, or land disturbance permit prior to the enactment of this section shall be exempt from this section to the extent of property covered by such permit or application. 
b.  Development activity at the site and/or exterior of any building or structure which is valued at 15 percent or less than the current county appraised value of the property. The cumulative impact of improvement allowed under this exemption may not exceed the fifteen percent improvement allowance within a three-year period. This exception shall not apply for a change in use permitted by the RAOD that is not authorized by the underlying zoning classification as set forth in subsections (c)(5)c. and (c)(5)d. above. 
c.  Development activity that is strictly interior to an existing building or structure. 
d.  Variances from all the provisions of this section, other than subsection (f) of this section, use regulations, shall be subject to a formal review process outlined in the provisions of subsection (n), Procedures. 
(d)  Incorporation of boundaries onto official zoning map . 
(1)  Boundaries. The official zoning map of the city shall include boundaries of the redevelopment area overlay district and their respective tiers in accordance with this section. 
(2)  Tiers. Each redevelopment area overlay district may be divided into sub-districts comprised of one of the following tiers: 
a.  Tier 1: Transitional Zone. 
b.  Tier 2: Neighborhood Center. 
c.  Tier 3: Town Center. 
d.  Tier 4: Regional Center. 
(3)  Changes to district and tier boundaries. Changes to the boundaries of this RAOD and the associated tiers are zoning map amendments. No change in the boundary of a RAOD or to the boundaries of a tier within a RAOD shall be authorized, except by recommendation of the City Planning and Zoning Board and approval by the Mayor and City Council pursuant to procedures in article X of this chapter, as amended. 
(e)  Concept plan. All development activity that is subject to this section shall be consistent with an approved site plan as provided in the city redevelopment area district design guidelines and this chapter. The purpose of the site plan is to ensure consistency of all phases and aspects of the proposed development with the purposes of the RAOD throughout the development and permitting process. 
(f)  Use regulations. 
(1)  Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted by right on any parcel located in the RAOD, subject to subsections (f)(2) and (3) of this section, the supplemental use standards provided in subsection (g) of this section, Table 1, Dimensional Standards, the district guidelines, and other applicable standards in this section: 
a.  Residential uses. The following residential uses are permitted in the Redevelopment area overlay district: 
1.  Single-family detached dwellings, with customary accessory buildings and uses. 
2.  Two-family dwellings, with customary accessory buildings and uses. 
3.  Townhouses, with customary accessory buildings and uses. 
4.  Multifamily dwellings, with customary accessory buildings and uses, allowed in the RM zoning district are allowed only in Tiers 2, 3, and 4 and provided that at least 70 percent of the required parking spaces are provided in a parking deck. See district guidelines Figures A.12 through A.21, as applicable. 
b.  Commercial retail, services, and office uses. All uses permitted in OI, C1, C2 and C3 zoning districts shall be permitted, along with the respective accessory buildings and uses allowed in such districts, subject to the limitations in subsections (f)(2) and (3) of this section. 
c.  Mixed-use developments. 
1.  The RAOD authorizes and encourages mixing of complementary uses. Mixed-use developments shall consist of two or more types of uses permitted in this section (commercial, office, and residential) provided that each type of use that is in the mixed-use development constitutes at least 20 percent of the gross floor area of the development project, excluding accessory uses. 
2.  Uses in a mixed-use development shall be combined either vertically within the same building, or placed side by side on the same parcel, provided that they are in close proximity, planned as a unified and complementary whole, and functionally integrated with interconnected vehicular and pedestrian access and parking areas. 
3.  Examples of a mixture of complementary uses include, but are not limited to, the following specifically permitted uses: 
(i)  Multifamily dwelling units located over office, retail, and service uses subject to subsection (g)(4) of this section. 
(ii)  Residential/business dwellings, subject to subsection (g)(3) of this section. 
(iii)  Office uses located over retail and service uses. 
(iv)  Hotel uses located over retail and service uses or office uses. 
4.  Mixed-use development projects may include two or more contiguous parcels of land having different owners when submitted together and subject to a unified plan of control and development. 
(2)  Special uses. The following uses shall require a special use permit before being permitted in the RAOD: 
a.  Building, electrical, or plumbing contractors, with outdoor storage. 
b.  Commercial outdoor recreation. 
c.  Garden supply centers and greenhouses (including accessory outdoor storage). 
d.  Multifamily dwelling units located on a parcel in Tier 1, subject to conformity with the standards of subsection (g)(4) of this section and the district guidelines (See A.12 through A.18). 
e.  Veterinary clinics. 
(3)  Prohibited uses. 
a.  Adult entertainment. 
b.  Automotive and/or truck body repair, mechanical repair, maintenance, alteration, customization, fabrication, and/or restoration. 
c.  Automotive carwash. 
d.  Automotive parts stores. 
e.  Boat sales establishments. 
g.  Building material sales with outdoor storage. 
h.  Equipment rental, sales, or service (including heavy equipment, farm equipment, bulldozers, backhoes forklifts, cranes, etc.). 
i.  Emissions inspection stations. 
j.  Extended stay hotels. 
k.  Funeral homes, mausoleums, and crematories. 
l.  Heavy equipment and farm equipment sales and service, and truck rental. 
m.  Lawnmower repair shops. 
n.  Liquor stores. 
o.  Log-splitting and storage lots. 
p.  Manufactured homes. 
q.  Mobile home or mobile building leasing or sales lots. 
r.  Machine or welding shops. 
s.  Mini-warehouse facilities. 
t.  New and used automobile sales and/or rental. 
u.  Pawnshops; title pawn; check cashing as carried out by nondepository institutions which are not state, national or federal banks. 
v.  Pest control businesses that store toxic chemicals on site. 
w.  Recovered materials processing. 
x.  Motels that provide outside entries to individual units. 
y.  Self-service laundries that are principal uses. 
z.  Tattoo parlors. 
aa.  Taxidermists. 
bb.  Yard trimmings composting. 
(g)  Supplemental use standards. The following supplemental use standards apply to the uses listed below when developed within the RAOD. See also the district guidelines, as applicable. 
(1)  Single-family detached or zero lot line dwellings. Single-family detached dwellings or zero lot line (ZLL) dwellings shall be subject to dimensional requirements in Table 1, and the following: 
a.  Minimum heated floor area the same as for single-family dwellings in the R65 district. 
b.  Each dwelling unit shall include a garage, subject to the following standards: 
1.  The garage must be set back at least 15 feet behind the facade of the dwelling. 
2.  The maximum floor area of the garage shall be 800 square feet. 
3.  If a block contains a majority of lots less than 65 feet in width, vehicle access for that block shall be from an alley located to the rear or side lot line, not from a public street. 
4.  Garage doors of front entrance garages may occupy no more than 45 percent of the facade of the dwelling. 
5.  The architectural style of a garage or other accessory building shall be compatible with that of the principal structure, i.e., utilizing the same type of building materials, similar roof pitch, and similar types and sizes of windows. 
(2)  Townhouse dwellings. Townhouse dwellings on individual lots, subject to dimensional requirements in Table 1, and the following: maximum building length or width of eight attached units or 200 feet, whichever is less. 
(3)  Residential and business dwellings. Residential/business dwellings subject to dimensional requirements in Table 1, and: 
a.  Business activities shall be limited to those allowed within the C1 or OI zoning districts provided that: 
1.  Only one business may be operated in each dwelling. 
2.  The businesses shall be located on the ground floor only and shall have direct entry from the sidewalk along the street frontage. 
3.  No more than 50 percent of the dwelling unit may be used for conducting the business. 
b.  Maximum building length: 200 feet. 
(4)  Multifamily dwellings. 
a.  Minimum building height: two floors/stories. 
b.  Ground floor residential units that face a street shall have entrances with a stoop or porch between the sidewalk and building facade. 
c.  If located in a mixed-use building, the following standards apply to the residential portion of the building: 
1.  Residential portion shall have at least two entrances/exitways to the ground floor that are separate from the entrances/exitways used by occupants of nonresidential portions of the building. 
2.  Primary entrance for the residential portion of the building shall be clearly visible from the street and shall face the street. If a building fronts more than one street, the primary entrance shall face the street with the highest classification. 
d.  Buildings containing multifamily dwellings shall be constructed in substantial conformity with the district guidelines. 
e.  Multifamily dwellings in Tier 1 shall be subject to approval of a special use permit and shall be part of a mixed-use development that contains no more than 200 multifamily dwellings. 
(5)  Mixed-use buildings. 
a.  Ground floor commercial uses located in a mixed-use building shall have entrances opening directly onto the sidewalk adjacent to the street or to a common area connected to the street. 
b.  No more than 70 percent of the gross floor area of a mixed-use project may consist of multifamily residential uses. 
(6)  Parking structures. 
a.  Aboveground decks of parking structures shall be designed so that the only openings at street level are those to accommodate vehicle entrance and pedestrian access to the structure. Any openings for ventilation, service, or emergency access located on the first floor level in the building facade must be decorative and must be an integral part of the overall building design or screened from view with landscaping that is at least ten feet in height. See Figure A.7.1 of the district guidelines. 
b.  The balance of the street frontage of the aboveground decks of a parking structure shall be occupied by retail/office space or designed with exterior materials, structural elements, and external openings having proportions similar to those of upper floors of occupied buildings. External openings shall be screened with decorative elements, such as grill-work, brick, or louvers. 
c.  Aboveground decks of parking structures that have a total length or width of 250 feet or more shall provide a lighted and signed ten-foot-wide pedestrian arcade passing completely through the parking structure near the midpoint of the longest side and connecting with other sidewalks leading to adjacent buildings and to the surrounding streets. 
(7)  Outdoor seating. Outdoor seating for restaurant service is permitted in the Redevelopment area overlay district provided that such seating meets all of the following conditions: 
a.  All outdoor seating facilities shall not obstruct a six-feet wide clear zone reserved for pedestrian passage along the public sidewalk. (See Figure A.7.3 of the district guidelines.) 
b.  Outdoor seating areas shall be approved by the Fire Marshal and shall not obstruct fire exitways. 
(8)  Building services. 
a.  Off-street loading and servicing areas shall be located to the rear of all buildings or screened from public view by a combination of opaque walls and landscaping. See Figure A.9.6 of the district guidelines. Walls shall be constructed of materials and colors that are compatible with those of the principal building facade. 
b.  Access ways and loading areas used for delivery trucks, service vehicles, and driveway and loading areas for garbage trucks shall provide safe means of ingress and egress from public streets such that delivery vehicles and garbage trucks are not required to back into streets classified as boulevards, thoroughfares, or avenues. 
c.  All access ways and loading areas shall provide a minimum horizontal and vertical clearance of 14 feet at all points. 
d.  Dumpsters shall not be located in any required front yard. Dumpsters shall be placed on a concrete pad of sufficient size and strength to support service vehicles without failure. Dumpsters that would be visible from a public street or from abutting or adjacent property shall be completely screened from such visibility by an opaque wall that is a minimum of six feet in height, but not less than the height of the dumpster. Service access shall be via an opaque metal gate. 
e.  Mechanical equipment located at ground level and roof level shall be screened from view from all streets and public rights-of-way with screening walls or landscaping. 
f.  Screening walls for dumpsters, loading docks, and mechanical equipment shall be constructed of materials that are compatible with those of the principal building facade. 
(9)  Transit passenger shelters. To be eligible for bonus gross floor area (GFA) credit, as provided in subsection (h)(4) of this section, transit passenger shelters and related access areas shall: 
a.  Be in a location approved by Gwinnett Transit System; and 
b.  Include a canopy, hard surface floor, signs, and landscaping that is approved by the Gwinnett Transit System and is in accordance with Figure B.13 of the district guidelines. 
(10)  Regional stormwater management facilities. The owner of property upon which a regional stormwater management facility is constructed shall be eligible for bonus GFA credit, as provided in subsection (h)(4) of this section, provided: 
a.  The regional stormwater management facility is part of an approved stormwater management plan that includes each land development project being served by the regional facility; 
b.  The regional stormwater management facility serves as the stormwater detention/retention area for at least 100 acres in the same drainage basin; 
c.  The developer of such regional stormwater management facility presents to the Director written agreements with the property owners to serve at least five separate properties that would otherwise be required by local regulations to construct separate facilities; 
d.  The regional stormwater management facility is designed and adequately sized to provide a level of stormwater quantity and quality control that is equal to or greater than the stormwater quantity and quality control that which would be afforded by separate on-site facilities; 
e.  The regional stormwater management facility is controlled by an entity that is legally obligated to accept responsibility for longterm operation and maintenance of the regional stormwater facility; 
f.  The regional stormwater management facility is located and designed in accordance with the requirements of the city and the state environmental protection division; and 
g.  The regional stormwater management facility either is out of view entirely, or is attractively landscaped and integrated with surrounding common areas that provide public amenities such as fountains, outdoor plazas, multi-use paths, or other amenities approved by the Director. 
(11)  Multi-use paths. To be eligible for GFA bonus credit as provided in subsection (h)(4) of this section, multi-use paths shall meet all of the following standards: 
a.  Location of the multi-use path shall be reviewed and approved by the Community Development Department. Such approval shall be contingent on a finding that the new multi-use path will serve a public purpose, such as improving bicycle and pedestrian safety and circulation or improving pedestrian and bicycle access to nearby recreation or concentrations of employment, housing, and commercial services. 
b.  Right-of-way and design of the new multi-use path shall meet requirements of Figure A.5.4. of the district guidelines. 
c.  The new trail shall contribute to an interconnected network for bicycle and pedestrian circulation. 
d.  Access to the new multi-use path shall not be gated or otherwise restricted for access by the public. 
(12)  LEED certification. To receive a density bonus for LEED certification, as provided in subsection (h)(3) of this section, the applicant shall submit for approval appropriate documentation prepared by a LEED certified professional that the project, if constructed as proposed, meets the silver standards of LEED. 
Off-street parking lots shall be screened from adjacent roadways and sidewalks by a decorative fence or wall, berm, or vegetative screen at least 30 inches in height. Fence or wall shall be of similar design and materials to the surrounding buildings. Screening shall be installed between the parking lot and the sidewalks. See Figure A.7.2 of the district guidelines. Perpendicular driveway crossings and pedestrian paths are allowed through the screening. 
(h)  Development standards. 
(1)  Dimensional standards. Table 1 provides dimensional standards that apply to all uses in the RAOD. 

 
Notes to Table 1 
Note a - 1,000 square feet outside 100-year floodplain. 
Note b - Front yard setbacks for individual units may vary within a block. The space between the sidewalk and the building facade shall contain only landscaping, steps, front porches or stoops. 
Note c - Front yard setbacks greater than five feet shall be used for outdoor dining or outdoor display; no parking allowed. 
Note d - 15 feet on non-attached side or 20 feet if the side yard abuts an existing building with windows facing said side yard. 
Note e - Where adjacent to a required transitional buffer, the minimum required side or rear yard setback shall be 25 feet. 
Note f - Parking requirements per use as established in section 115-152, as modified by subsection (i) of this section. 
(2)  Maximum height and density. Except as provided in subsections (h)(3) and (h)(4) of this section, the maximum height and density of development on parcels located in the RAOD shall be as provided in Table 2. The residential density (dwelling units/acre) shall be based upon buildable acreage exclusive of easements, common areas, wetlands, and floodplains, except as otherwise provided in subsections (h)(3) and (h)(4) of this section. 

 
(3)  Bonus density. The maximum allowable floor area ratio (FAR) of a development on a parcel located in Tiers 2, 3, and 4 may be increased in exchange for one or more of the additional amenities as provided in Table 3. See Figure A.10 of the district guidelines for an illustration of FAR. 

 
*These bonuses are additive and can be accumulated subject to total maximum FAR shown in Table 6. 
(4)  Additional GFA bonus. 
a.  To encourage public dedication of right-of-way and construction of streets, multi-use paths, parks, public art displays, and other improvements, the developer shall be entitled to additional gross floor area (GFA), in addition to that otherwise allowed, for uses otherwise authorized in the applicable tier and in accordance with Table 4. 
b.  Sites that meet the requirements of the city for a FAR bonus or bonus GFA shall apply for a certificate of density bonus allocation from the Community Development Department. A copy of said certificate, along with the as-built drawings of the improvements meriting the award of bonus GFA or FAR, shall be attached to the final plat or approved development plan for the property and recorded with the property deed by the Office of Clerk of Superior Court of Gwinnett County. The certificate of density bonus allocation shall be specific to the property to which it was initially conferred shall require current and future property owners to maintain the property and/or improvements meriting the award of bonus GFA or FAR in an attractive and fully operable condition. 

 
*These bonuses are additive and can be accumulated subject to total maximum FAR shown in Table 6. 
c.  Land dedicated to the city pursuant to the provisions of subsection (h)(4) of this section shall be deemed part of the area of the parcel from which it was subdivided when computing maximum allowable FAR and GFA for a development. Such land shall not be included in the area of a private lot for the purposes of establishing minimum yards and setbacks. 
d.  If buildings in Tiers 2, 3 and 4 are entitled to increased FAR and GFA in accordance with subsections (h)(3) or (h)(4) of this section, then the residential density of these buildings may be increased in proportion to FAR as shown in Table 5. 

 
e.  Notwithstanding subsection (h)(4)d of this section, in no case may the total GFA of a development, including all bonuses earned in subsections (h)(3) and (h)(4) of this section, exceed the FAR, building height, and dwelling unit density shown in Table 6 under administrative review. A FAR, building height, or dwelling unity density bonus up to twice that allowed in Table 6 maybe granted by the Mayor and City Council, only under formal review in accordance with subsection (n)(3). See Figure A.11 of the district guidelines for an example of the application of bonuses to increase height and FAR. 

 
(5)  Transitions along exterior boundaries. Where a lot on the external boundary of the RAOD adjoins the boundary of any property outside the district that is zoned for single-family residential use, a transitional height plane of 45 degrees shall apply. No portion of any building within the RAOD shall protrude through the transitional height plane beginning 45 feet above the property line between the district and the adjacent property outside the district and extending inward 30 feet over the transitional buffer zone and then at an angle of 45 degrees over the RAOD. See Figure A.8.1 of the district guidelines. 
(6)  Internal height transitions. To the extent possible, within each development, a change in building type or change in building height greater than two stories or 20 feet should occur only at rear lot lines or alleyways, not in the middle of a block face, so as to form a uniform building front along both sides of streets that are internal to the development. See Figure A.8.2 of the district guidelines. 
(7)  Landscape, buffers, and tree protection. Landscape, buffers and tree protection shall be in conformity with chapter 113 and section 115-43 as amended, except as follows: 
a.  Transitional buffers shall not be required between nonresidential and residential uses within the RAOD. 
b.  No tree shall be planted closer than two feet from the street or sidewalk, and no closer than ten feet from a fire hydrant, water/sewer line, sign post, streetlight standard, utility pole, or similar structure. 
c.  For developments located in the RAOD with an approved FAR of 1.0 or higher, up to 50 percent of tree canopy required by chapter 113, pertaining to tree preservation, may be satisfied by planting approved plant materials in designated offsite receiving sites within the RAOD, subject to approval of the Director. Such approval shall require submission and approval of a buffer and landscape plan for both the site seeking development approval and the approved receiving site. 
d.  Designated receiving sites for tree replacement may include, but are not limited to, sites within the RAOD that are designated as approved offsite common areas in accordance with subsection (j)(4) of this section. 
e.  Outdoor storage. Any use requiring outdoor storage of equipment or materials shall be screened from adjacent roadways and sidewalks by a decorative fence or wall, berm, or evergreen vegetative screen. Proper screening must meet the requirements of Section 115-43, Required buffers between dissimilar districts, Any fence or wall used for screening shall be of similar design and materials to the surrounding buildings on the site. 
(8)  Access easements and inter-parcel access. Inter-parcel access, joint driveways, cross-access drives, and access easements shall be provided, as follows, except where the Director determines that they are infeasible because of topographic or other site-specific constraints: 
a.  Abutting nonresidential developments on boulevards, thoroughfares, or avenues shall provide a cross-access drive and sidewalk access to allow circulation between sites. 
b.  Joint driveways and cross-access easements shall be established for multi-parcel, nonresidential development wherever feasible along streets classified as boulevards, thoroughfares, and avenues. The building site shall incorporate all of the following: 
1.  Continuous cross-access drive connecting adjacent parcels along the street frontage; 
2.  A design speed of 15 mph and a two-way travel aisle with a minimum of 20 feet to accommodate automobiles, service vehicles, and loading vehicles; and 
3.  Driveway aprons, stub-outs, and other design features to indicate that abutting properties may be connected to provide cross-access via a service drive. 
(9)  Connectivity. 
a.  Interconnected network. It is the intent of this section that the public access ways, walkways, transportation facilities, and improvements in the RAOD contribute to an interconnected and continuous network providing convenient vehicular and pedestrian access to abutting properties. The design of developments and related public improvements shall provide for maximum connections for autos, pedestrians, bicycles, and public transportation to offsite and on-site attractions, such as concentrations of employment, shopping, housing and community services, public parking, parks, and public facilities. 
b.  Vehicular connectivity. 
1.  Streets shall be constructed to create an interconnected system of grid-patterned streets. 
2.  No street may be longer than 600 feet without an intersection with another street. 
3.  Culs-de-sac are prohibited, except where approved following review and approval by the Director because of unusual site conditions such as steep topography, streams, lakes, floodplains, wetlands or stream crossings, safety hazards, or other unusual property development or access constraints. 
4.  In order for a developer/owner to receive GFA bonus credit for constructing a new street connection, as provided in subsection (h)(4) of this section, such new street shall contribute to an interconnected network and meet all of the following standards: 
(i)  Location of the new street shall be reviewed and approved by the city. Such approval shall be contingent on a finding that the new street will serve a public purpose such as improving traffic safety, reducing traffic congestion, or improving vehicular and pedestrian circulation and access to major thoroughfares. 
(ii)  Right-of-way and design of the new streets shall meet applicable requirements provided in subsection (m) of this section and the district guidelines . 
(iii)  Each new street shall connect at least two other streets. 
(iv)  Access to the new street shall not be gated. 
c.  Pedestrian connectivity. (See Figure A.8.3 of the district guidelines.) 
1.  Sidewalks and other pedestrian walkways within a development shall be constructed of materials that distinguish them from paved surfaces used by motorized vehicles. 
2.  Safe, convenient, and continuous pedestrian walkways shall be provided: 
(i)  Between building entrances for all buildings in the same block. 
(ii)  Along both sides of the street frontage of all streets. 
(iii)  Through parking lots and parking structures at regular intervals connecting to building entrances and the public sidewalks on surrounding streets. 
(i)  Parking management. 
(1)  Required parking. The minimum number of required parking spaces shall be as provided in Table 1 of this section and section 115-152, except as follows: 
a.  Required parking. Required parking may be provided through a combination of off-street, on-street, or shared spaces provided that all required parking is located within 700 feet of the principal entrance of buildings it is intended to serve. 
b.  Walking distance standard. In no case shall parking spaces that are farther than 700 feet from a building entrance be allowed to satisfy the parking requirements of this section for uses in that building. 
c.  Maximum parking in parking lots. Except for single-family dwellings, the maximum number of parking spaces permitted in a parking lot for a development shall be 125 percent of the minimum required number of parking spaces required in Table 1 of this section or section 115-152, whichever is less. The number of parking spaces in parking lots that exceed 105 percent of the minimum number required in section 115-152 shall be constructed on pervious surfaces approved by the Director. This provision does not apply to spaces located in parking decks or parking structures. 
d.  Lighting. Parking lots shall be well-lighted and provided in the rear or side yards, and if visible from the street, shall be screened with landscaping, as provided in subsection (i)(1)f. of this section and Figure A.7.2 of the district guidelines. 
e.  Off-street parking areas. No more than ten percent of the required parking for a building shall be in parking spaces located between the facade of the building and the street on which the building faces. 
f.  Screening off-street parking lots. Off-street parking lots shall be screened from adjacent roadways and sidewalks by a decorative fence or wall, berm, or vegetative screen at least 30 inches in height. Fence or wall shall be of similar design and materials to the surrounding buildings. Screening shall be installed between the parking lot and the sidewalks. See Figure A.7.2 of the district guidelines. Perpendicular driveway crossings and pedestrian paths are allowed through the screening. 
g.  Parking for transit-oriented development. The Director may grant an administrative variance to reduce by no more than 20 percent the number of required parking spaces for uses that are located along pedestrian walkways and within 1,320 feet of a fixed public transportation stop. 
h.  Motorcycle only parking. The Director may grant an administrative variance to reduce by no more than five percent the number of required parking spaces for uses which include specifically designated motorcycle and motor scooter parking areas. Such areas will be surfaced with concrete or pervious concrete (not asphalt or macadam) and will exclude automobile parking or standing by the use of concrete bollards or decorative planters installed in such a way to prevent larger vehicle use. Motorcycle and motor scooter only parking spaces are to be five feet wide by eight feet deep and will number the amount of full-sized parking spaces for which the variance is sought. 
i.  Shared parking. 
1.  The Director may approve a reduction of up to 25 percent in the number of parking spaces required for a use or a development where inter-parcel access is provided and a shared parking analysis approved by the Director demonstrates that adequate parking will be provided with the approved reduction. 
2.  Where shared parking involves more than one property owner or developer, a cross-access easement and agreement shall be provided to the Director and shall be recorded with the deed of such properties. Such agreement must certify the allocation of parking spaces among the parties that is consistent with the shared parking analysis approved by the Director. 
3.  The minimum term for cross-access and shared parking agreements shall be 21 years from the date a building permit is issued for any use claiming such shared parking guarantee. 
4.  Required residential parking shall be segregated from parking for all other uses, with the exception of additional parking for residential/business dwellings. 
5.  If a parking structure is constructed for public use or for joint use by several properties within a 700-feet radius of such parking structure that enter into agreements guaranteeing them longterm use of specific numbers of parking spaces, then the Director is authorized to substitute written guarantee of longterm access to such parking spaces for spaces otherwise required in this section or by section 115-151. 
j.  Fees in lieu of parking. If an entity authorized by the city is created to provide parking on an area wide basis within the RAOD pursuant to an agreement approved by the Mayor and City Council, then such entity may collect fees from designated properties in lieu of such designated properties being required to meet some or all of the off-street parking requirements of this section and section 115-152. Fees collected in this manner shall be pursuant to a fee schedule approved by the Mayor and City Council and shall be used only for the acquisition of land, improvement, or maintenance of off-street parking facilities constructed for the benefit of those buildings, structures, and users paying such fees. 
(2)  On-street parking. 
a.  The Director may approve credit for on-street parking spaces on streets classified as local streets or avenues consistent with the district guidelines as a means to reduce the off-street parking requirements for a parcel. 
b.  The number of on-street parking spaces credited for a parcel shall not exceed the number of feet of linear frontage of approved on-street parking curb space (not including frontage devoted to driveways, bulb-outs, and intersection approaches) divided by the constant 24. 
(3)  Bicycle parking. All uses that are required to provide off-street parking spaces for motorized vehicles also shall provide bicycle parking spaces consistent with Figure A.8.4 of the district guidelines and each of the standards as follows: 
a.  Uses that require more than 100 off-street parking spaces for motorized vehicles shall provide at least one bicycle space for every 50 parking spaces required for motorized vehicles. 
b.  No single building shall be required to provide more than 20 bicycle parking spaces. 
c.  Bicycle parking shall be provided in a lighted area that is no more than 100 feet from the principal entrance of the building that it serves. 
(j)  Common area. Common area shall be provided according to the following standards: 
(1)  Minimum percentage. At least 20 percent of the net project acreage (total acreage of the project excluding 100-year floodplain and wetland areas) shall be designated on a recorded plat as permanent common area for the use of the residents, workers, patrons and visitors to the development. 
(2)  Standards of development and design. 
a.  Common areas shall form an interconnected and continuous network of paths, greenways, and trails throughout the development within the RAOD. 
b.  Common areas shall be distributed throughout the project to provide linkages, amenities, and visual appeal for the development. 
c.  Final common area design shall include provision of at least one centrally located public gathering area (with related amenities and improvements) in the form of a town green, amphitheater, landscaped plaza, or similar approved element. 
d.  Common areas shall have multiple points of entry that are directly accessible from adjacent sidewalks and surrounding buildings. 
e.  To the maximum extent possible, lands containing 100-year floodplains, stream buffers, wetlands, slopes over 15 percent, and shallow or exposed rock shall remain undisturbed and included in common area. 
f.  Wetland and floodplain areas shall be preserved in their natural state, except for the installation of required detention facilities and stormwater best management practices (BMPs). 
g.  Sidewalks and associated amenities may be credited toward common area calculations if the sidewalk and streetscape is constructed consistent with the standards of the applicable district guidelines. 
h.  Landscaped strips along internal or external streets may be credited toward common area calculations if the landscaped strip is constructed at a continuous width of 25 feet or greater (including sidewalk). 
i.  Stormwater management facilities may be located within common areas, if designed and improved as an amenity, subject to review and approval of the Director of Community Development. 
j.  Stormwater management facilities that meet the standards of subsection (g)(10) of this section may not receive density bonuses for both common area and regional stormwater management facilities. 
(3)  Ownership of common areas. Common areas, stormwater management facilities, floodplain and wetland areas shall be owned in fee simple by a mandatory property owners' association or approved entity which administers a reciprocal access and maintenance agreement for the project or other entity approved in advance by the Director during his normal course of business. The developer shall record the deed to the common area prior to, or concurrent with, the recording of the first final subdivision plat or certificate of occupancy. An access easement following the alignment of future public streets is acceptable. However, pocket parks or greens may be deeded concurrent with the unit or phase of the final subdivision plat of which it is a part. See also subsections (j)(4) and (5) of this section. 
(4)  Relocation of minimum common area requirements. Upon written application and written approval of the Director, up to 50 percent of a development project's 20 percent required common area for public space may be relocated to an approved offsite parcel or parcels (receiving area) within the same RAOD, provided the receiving area meets the following criteria: 
a.  The receiving area meets the definition and standards of common areas contained in this section. 
b.  The receiving area is owned and maintained either by a public agency or by a private property owners' association approved by the Community Development Department. 
c.  The receiving area must contain more than the required minimum amount of common area from each and every development project that has been authorized for such relocation that would have been necessary to fulfill the unmet portion of the required 20 percent common area to be relocated. Floodplain, wetlands, slopes over 15 percent, or other factors that reduce the utility for public access, recreation, and enjoyment on the receiving parcel cannot be counted towards common area acreage. 
d.  The receiving area includes a quantity, quality, and design of amenities that could not feasibly have been provided by separate common areas on the individual developments that contributed their common space to the receiving area. 
e.  The loss of common area from the original sites does no public detriment. 
f.  The receiving area is connected by sidewalks to the adjacent properties and to all properties that have relocated common area to it. 
g.  The receiving area is located adjacent to and visible from a public street and is made accessible to the public daily during daylight hours. 
h.  The receiving area is approved by the Mayor and City Council. 
(5)  Public gathering space. At least one receiving area shall consist of a centrally located and accessible public gathering space (with related amenities and improvements) in the form of a town green, amphitheater, landscaped plaza, or similar approved element unless such a public space already exists within a 700-feet radius of housing units within the RAOD. The perimeter of this public gathering space should be lined with a variety of uses, including both residential and commercial or office with entrances facing the public gathering space intended to ensure pedestrian traffic throughout the day. 
(6)  Maintenance and protection of common areas. A property owners' association, or other entity approved in advance by the Director, shall be responsible for the continuous maintenance and protection of buffers, common areas and recreation areas established pursuant to this section. The property owners' association bylaws or covenants, at a minimum, shall contain the following provisions: 
a.  Governance of the association by the Georgia Property Owners' association Act (O.C.G.A. § 44-3-220 et seq.) or a successor to that Act that grants lien rights to the association for maintenance expenses and tax obligations. 
b.  Responsibility for maintenance of buffers, common areas and recreation areas. 
c.  Responsibility for insurance and taxes. 
d.  Automatic compulsory membership of all property owners and their successors, and compulsory assessments. 
e.  Conditions and timing of transferring control of the association from the developer to the property owners. 
f.  Guarantee that the association will not be dissolved without the advance approval of the city. 
g.  Restrict the time of deliveries to commercial businesses and dumpster pickup to between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. 
(7)  Public art displays. A developer or builder who receives permits for new construction, expansion, or addition of more than 100,000 square feet and provides within said development a permanent public art display, as defined in this chapter that meets the following standards of this subsection, shall be entitled to a credit of 10,000 square feet towards common area otherwise required in subsections (j)(1) and (4) of this section. Standards for public art display are: 
a.  The valuation of the public art display shall exceed the greater of $50,000.00 or one percent of the development to which this provision applies. 
b.  The nature, size, location, and positioning of the public art display shall be as approved by the Director, or designee, prior to issuance of a building permit for the construction of the development of which the public art display is a part. 
c.  The size, shape, and nature of the public art display shall be sufficient to provide a visual focal point and be commensurate with the size, shape, and character of the public space in which it is sited. A public art display that is of a size, shape, or nature that is inappropriate for the public space in which it is sited may be rejected by the Director. 
d.  No public art display, once approved, shall be removed or relocated, except temporarily for upkeep or repair, except with the approval of the Director. 
e.  The owner of property containing the public art display is responsible for maintaining the artwork in good condition continuously after its installation. Maintenance shall include all related landscaping, lighting, and upkeep of the display area and public access ways serving the public art display. However, the Director may allow a public art display that becomes damaged or worn beyond repair to be replaced by another public art display that meets the standards of this subsection. 
(k)  Signs . 
(1)  Wall signs for buildings with a multi-tenant building, single building, multi-tenant development or single development shall be permitted in accordance with this chapter and article VI, sections 115-195—115-198. 
(2)  One shared sign, which shall be of a monument type, is permitted per frontage for multiple-tenant developments in the RAOD. (See example in figure A.9.5 of the district guidelines.) No more than one such monument sign shall be allowed per entrance. Maximum size and minimum setbacks shall be in accordance with section 115-187. 
(3)  Signage for individual establishments within a multi-tenant building or development shall be limited to wall signs, awning signs, canopy signs, projecting signs, and suspended signs. Cumulative sign face area for all signage applied for under this section shall be the lesser of 50 square feet or two and one-half square feet per linear foot of frontage of an individual building, unit, or tenant space. One projecting and one suspended sign shall be allowed per individual establishment within a multi-tenant building or development, not to exceed 25 square feet in area and maintain a minimum clearance of eight feet six inches. (See figures A.9.1 through A.9.4 of the district guidelines.) 
(4)  Signage for a single building or single development shall be limited to wall signs, awning signs, canopy signs, projecting signs, and suspended signs. Cumulative sign face area for all signage applied for under this section shall be the lesser of 100 square feet or two and one-half square feet per linear foot of frontage of an individual building, unit, or tenant space. One projecting and one suspended sign shall be allowed per individual establishment within a multi-tenant building or development, not to exceed 25 square feet in area and maintain a minimum clearance of eight feet six inches. (See figures A.9.1 through A.9.4 of the district guidelines.) 
(5)  Buildings that provide a secondary entrance for customers or residents on the rear or side of the building are allowed one wall sign, awning sign, canopy sign, projecting sign, or suspended sign per side or rear entrance in addition to all other signs that would otherwise be permitted. The total area of all signs permitted by this subsection shall not exceed 32 square feet per side or rear entrance. 
(6)  Each building, use or tenant shall be allowed window signs not to exceed ten percent of the total window area of any facade containing the window sign. 
(7)  The lowest point of a projecting sign, suspended sign, awning sign, or canopy sign must be a minimum of eight feet, six inches above the sidewalk or ground elevation beneath it. 
(8)  Signs located more than 20 feet above the finished floor level are prohibited. 
(9)  Incidental signs, such as "no parking," "loading zone," "exit only," "no stopping or standing," etc., that are up to four feet in height and up to three square feet in area are permitted. The cumulative area of incidental signs shall be limited to a total of 12 square feet per building tenant and shall not be included in the sign area provided in subsections (k)(2) and (3) of this section. 
(10)  The following types of signs are prohibited: 
a.  Oversized signs. 
b.  Internally illuminated signs. 
c.  Neon signs. 
d.  Signs using LED panels. 
e.  Day-glow signs. 
f.  Signs with more than two sign faces, including V-shaped signs. 
g.  Signs which rotate or otherwise feature movement. 
(11)  Illuminated signs shall use external lighting fixtures directed toward the sign face so that light fixtures do not cast direct light or glare into adjacent streets or property. 
(l)  Standards of architectural design. 
(1)  Conformity with design guidelines. The applicant for a building permit in the RAOD shall prepare and submit preliminary architectural plans and elevations of all buildings for review by the Director. The Director shall review such plans and elevations in order to determine if they are substantially consistent with the district guidelines. No building permit shall be approved in the RAOD unless the Director finds that the architectural design is substantially consistent with the district guidelines. 
(2)  Exterior building materials. 
a.  Exterior building materials for all buildings except single-family residential buildings are restricted to brick, stone, textured concrete masonry, precast concrete, architectural metal, hardiplank, stucco, and glass. 
b.  The use of precast concrete, textured concrete masonry, hardiplank, stucco or architectural metal is restricted to no more than 30 percent of the any building's total exterior wall surfaces. 
c.  Vinyl siding and metal siding is prohibited for residential buildings, and wood or hardiplank siding is permitted on exteriors of residential buildings, but is limited to 50 percent of the total exterior wall surfaces of any building larger than 600 square feet in floor area. 
(m)  Public improvements. 
(1)  Street designations established. The following hierarchy of streets is established: 
a.  Boulevards. Principal, multi-lane, divided arterials that form the central multi-modal corridors for the most intense land uses and trip generators within the RAOD. 
b.  Thoroughfares. Multi-lane, undivided arterials that function primarily as through routes for vehicle traffic traversing the RAOD, linking major activity centers to the interstate highway system and to each other. 
c.  Avenues. Secondary public thoroughfares serving as access routes between local streets, thoroughfares, and avenues. 
d.  Local streets. Minor streets that primarily provide access for vehicles and pedestrians to land areas that are between avenues and other local streets. 
e.  Alleys. Short public or private ways built between two or more local streets that provide secondary access and utility easements for dwellings, parking areas, and building services. 
(2)  Street designation maps. The designation, location, and arrangement of existing and new streets within the RAOD shall be in substantial conformity with the street designation map. 
(3)  Street design standards. Street designs and specifications for each street designation within the RAOD shall be in accordance with the district guidelines. 
(4)  Curb radii. The maximum curb radius at any intersection shall not exceed 20 feet, except along streets classified as boulevards and thoroughfares. 
(5)  Sidewalks. Sidewalks at least five feet in width shall be provided on both sides of all streets. Sidewalk widths in excess of five feet shall be provided when specified in public improvement standards pertaining to each street designation provided in subsection (m)(1) of this section. 
(6)  Crosswalks. See Figure A.9.7 of the district guidelines. 
a.  All intersections shall provide marked crosswalks that connect to sidewalks in all quadrants of the intersection. 
b.  Crosswalks shall include pedestrian crossing signage consistent with the most recent edition of the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
c.  Crosswalks shall be demarcated with approved materials such as high-reflectivity thermoplastic paint, approved textured surfacing, or pavers. 
(7)  Streetscape design. The location and specifications of other improvements in public rights-of-way, including bike racks, trash receptacles, benches, street trees, landscaping, on-street parking, bike lanes, wayfinding, and street lights, shall be as provided in the district guidelines. 
(8)  Utilities. All existing and proposed utilities located along streets in the RAOD, except for substations and major electric transmission lines located on separate easements, are required to be placed underground or relocated to the rear of the property so that they will be less visible from streets. 
(9)  Escrow in lieu of improvements. At the option of the city, the developer shall pay funds into an escrow account in lieu of making project improvements required in this section. Such escrow account shall be established only for the purpose of coordination of such project improvements with a public improvement project that is part of an approved capital improvements program. The amount of the escrow fund shall be established by the Mayor and City Council based on the projected construction cost of the improvements, based on the most recent edition of Georgia Department of Transportation. The term "item" means summary or other comparable standardized cost estimation procedure. 
(n)  Procedures. 
(1)  Development application requirements. 
a.  Preapplication conference. Prior to preparation of a concept plan or land disturbance permit application, the applicant shall schedule a preapplication conference with the Director of the Community Development Department or his assign. The purpose of the preapplication conference is to formally discuss the intent of the application and to review with staff the requirements of the RAOD. 
b.  Concept plan. At least 15 days prior to filing an application for a land disturbance permit within the RAOD, the applicant shall submit a proposed concept plan to the Director. The concept plan application shall consist of the following: 
1.  Conceptual site plan. The conceptual site plan shall be submitted on approved media at a scale of 1:100 or greater, with the following information: 
(i)  Building footprints, including existing and proposed buildings. 
(ii)  Parking locations and number of spaces. 
(iii)  Locations of vehicular access and circulation systems. 
(iv)  Location, extent and type of public amenities. 
(v)  New and existing streets and curb cuts. 
(vi)  Locations of sidewalks, trails, and paths. 
(vii)  Proposed phasing, if applicable. 
(viii)  Other information identified by the Director in the preapplication conference. 
2.  Statement of intent. A concept plan in the RAOD shall include a written statement of intent explaining how the proposed development will meet the standards of this section. The written statement shall include: 
(i)  The number of acres of the site and how it is divided among land uses. 
(ii)  The gross floor area of the site and how it is divided by use. 
(iii)  The floor area ratio of the proposed development. 
(iv)  The number of dwelling units, by type. 
(v)  The residential density in dwelling units per net acres. 
(vi)  The height of all buildings in stories and feet above average grade. 
(vii)  The common area acreage and percent of the total site area that qualifies as common area. 
(viii)  The proposed methods of ownership and maintenance of common area. 
(ix)  The amenities provided in exchange for bonuses in gross floor area or floor area ratio, if applicable. 
(x)  Other information identified by the Director in the preapplication conference. 
3.  Application for certificate of density bonus allocation. If the applicant intends to apply for bonus density or additional GFA bonuses as provided in subsection (h)(3) or (h)(4) of this section, the applicant shall submit such application at the same time as the concept plan, using a form provided by the Department. 
(2)  Administrative review and Mayor and City Council approval of concept plan. 
a.  The Director shall review the concept plan application and the application for certificate of density bonus allocation, if applicable, with respect to conformity with the provisions of this section and other applicable provisions of this chapter and the development regulations. 
b.  A review meeting shall be scheduled with the applicant within ten working days of submission of the concept plan. A determination will be made at this meeting of whether or not the application is eligible for administrative approval by the Director, or requires formal review as outlined in subsection (n)(3). 
c.  Within 20 working days following receipt of a completed application, the Director shall complete the review of the concept plan and certificate of density bonus allocation. The Director may recommend approval of the concept plan to Mayor and City Council, recommend approval with comments or conditions, or disapprove the concept plan. If the Director recommends approval with comments or conditions or disapproves the concept plan, he shall issue written explanations, comments and/or revisions to the applicant. 
d.  Following a recommendation of approval or approval with comments or conditions, the Director will present the recommendation to the Mayor and City Council at their next Policy Work Session for their consideration, and final action at a following regular meeting. 
e.  Upon approval of the concept plan and the certificate of density bonus allocation by the Mayor and City Council, if applicable, individual phases of the redevelopment project may be undertaken through the site development and subdivision platting process, if applicable, contained in the development regulations. Projects in the RAOD may be constructed as a single phase, or may be constructed in multiple phases, in accordance with the approved concept plan. 
(3)  Formal review and approval of concept plan. 
a.  If the Director determines that variances from the site and building design criteria of this section subsections (h) through (l), are required, and that an administrative approval of the concept plan cannot be granted, formal review and approval of the concept plan may be sought by the applicant. 
b.  Formal review and approval of the application and concept plan requires, a recommendation from the following boards and authorities before presentation to the Mayor and Council for final action: 
1.  Downtown Development Authority. 
2.  Architectural Review Board, 
3.  Planning and Zoning Board, 
c.  A project undergoing formal review must still demonstrate that it meets the purpose and intent of the RAOD. 
d.  The Mayor and City Council under this formal review process can grant any variance from the site and building design criteria of this section, including a housing density bonus of twice that allowed in each Tier. 
(4)  Modification of approved concept plan. 
a.  Minor modifications. Within the RAOD, the Director is authorized to approve minor changes in any previously approved concept plan, subject to the limitations in this section, within ten working days of a completed submittal. 
b.  Contents. Minor modifications to an approved concept plan for a concept plan in the RAOD may include, but are not limited to: 
1.  Changes to the location of permitted uses provided such changes do not materially affect the development concepts or nature of the approved development. 
2.  Minor shifting of the location of streets, public or private ways, utility easements, parks, or other public open spaces, or other incidental features of the plan, provided that such changes meet all of the following: 
(i)  Do not increase densities. 
(ii)  Do not change the outside boundaries of the development tract. 
(iii)  Do not affect the form of ownership, control or maintenance of common areas. 
c.  Major modifications. 
1.  Any modification of an approved concept plan that is requested by an applicant/developer that does not qualify as a minor modification shall be a major modification. 
2.  A major modification to an approved concept plan within the RAOD shall be reviewed by the Director and shall conform to all the applicable standards and requirements of this section and other applicable ordinances of the city. A major modification shall constitute a new concept plan application and shall be subject to all the requirements of subsections (n)(1), (2) and (3) of this section. 
(5)  Appeals. Any person aggrieved or adversely affected by an administrative decision of the Community Development Director pertaining to the application of the provisions of this section may appeal the decision to the Zoning Board of Appeals, following the requirements of Article IX. 
(6)  Site development application. Prior to application for approval of construction plans, the developer shall prepare a site development plan as provided in the city development regulations. 
a.  Contents of application. In addition to the information required for site development plans each site development plan application in the RAOD shall be accompanied by the following documents: 
1.  Projects over 100,000 square feet of gross floor area shall submit a traffic study meeting the standards of section 105-300 of the City Code. 
2.  All projects shall submit a multi-modal access plan. The multi-modal access plan shall show connections from the system of streets, alleys, sidewalks, and multi-use paths shown in the conceptual transportation plan to the entrances of all occupied buildings within the subject property. Convenient pedestrian ways shall be shown from sidewalks along streets to each building entrance, including designated pedestrian access routes across parking lots and between adjacent buildings within the same development. Where an existing or planned public transportation station or stop is within 1,250 feet (straight line distance) from any boundary of the subject property, the access plan shall show how pedestrians may travel safely and conveniently from such station or stop to the entrance of buildings on the subject property. Where an existing or planned multi-use path is located within 500 feet of the subject property, the access plan shall show how safe, continuous, and convenient bicycle access may be provided to the subject property. 
3.  Submit a shared parking analysis for use of shared parking, if applicable. The shared parking analysis shall meet the requirements of the Director. 
b.  Review of multi-modal access plan, traffic impact study, and shared parking analysis. Concurrent with review of the site development plan, as applicable, the Director shall review the traffic study, multi-modal access plan, and shared parking analysis, if required. Such review shall assess the consistency of these documents with the applicable City of Norcross Redevelopment Area District Design Guidelines and conformity with each of the standards and requirements of this section. 
c.  Certificate of development plans approval. Issuance of a certificate of development plans approval shall be contingent upon the Director's approval of the site plan, traffic study, and multi-modal access plan, as well as the shared parking analysis and certificate of density bonus allocation, if applicable. 
d.  Permitting. For property within this RAOD, the Director shall have sole authority to issue or withhold site plan approval, land disturbance permits, development permits and building permits subject to the development's conformity with the requirements of this chapter, and development regulations, as applicable. 
(Ord. No. 20-2008, § 106-95, 7-7-2008; Ord. No. 22-2008, pt. I(106-95), 9-8-2008; Ord. No. 24-2012, pt. 1, 10-1-2012; Ord. No. 07-2016 , §§ II, III, 7-5-2016; Ord. No. 08-2017, § I, 2-5-2018 ) 
Sec. 115-94. - Appendix of inactive zoning districts. 
This appendix is provided as a reference for projects developed under requirements of the Gwinnett County Zoning Resolution prior to adoption of the current regulations and the Referendum Annexation of House Bill H.B. 579 Act 207 approved on May 12, 2011. No new zoning applications will be accepted for the following zoning districts: 
(a)  R-TH Single-family residence townhouse district. 
(1)  (Prior to January 2005). This zoning district is intended primarily for rowhouse or townhouse attached or detached single-family dwelling units. Such dwelling units may be held in the condominium form of ownership, or in fee simple. It is not the intention of Gwinnett County or of this ordinance to determine or dictate which form of ownership is most desirable. 
(2)  Within the R-TH Single-family residence townhouse district, the following requirements shall be met: 
a.  All dedicated street rights-of-way shall be a minimum of 50 feet. 
b.  Front and rear yard setbacks shall total a minimum of 75 feet with a minimum of 20 feet for a yard which faces on an interior street. If the subject property abuts property zoned R-60, R-75, R-100, or property developed as same, the rear yard setback shall be 40 feet at the point of abutment. 
c.  Side yards shall be a minimum of 20 feet to any exterior property line. Side yards between individual units, groups of units or rows of units shall be determined based upon individual site plan review. 
d.  Densities shall not exceed eight units per gross acre. 
e.  A minimum of two off-street parking spaces per unit shall be provided. 
f.  A minimum of a two-hour rated firewall shall be required between each attached dwelling unit. A four-hour rated firewall shall be required between every fourth attached dwelling unit. Firewalls shall be constructed in accordance with applicable building codes of Gwinnett County. 
g.  The specific requirements set forth above are not necessarily exhaustive of all requirements or conditions which the Board of Commissioners may require prior to approval of any rezoning application under this district. This enactment specifically reserves, in the favor of the Board of Commissioners, the discretion to deny any individual rezoning application submitted hereunder, if after review of the site plan and other materials submitted therewith and a careful consideration of all of the facts and circumstances relating to the proposed development, the Board of Commissioners deems the proposed development not to be in the best interest of the health, safety and welfare of the present and future citizens of Gwinnett County. 
h.  All roads, both interior and exterior, including roads dedicated and not dedicated to the county, must meet the minimum county standards as established by the County Engineer. 
(b)  R-ZT Single-family residence zero lot line/townhouse district. 
(1)  (Prior to January 2005). This district is intended to provide areas for the development of moderate density residential uses and structures in moderately spacious surroundings. It is intended that these districts be located in the urban and suburban portions of Gwinnett County where a protected environment suitable for moderate-density residential use can be provided, as well as in established moderate-density residential areas as a means to ensure their continuance. The use of this district is also appropriate on a smaller scale in the suburban portions of the county as a transitional zone between low-density residential districts and commercial districts, industrial districts, or major transportation arteries, or other uses that are not compatible with a low-density residential environment. In fulfilling the intent of this district, the townhouse or rowhouse concept may be used which permits the construction of single-family dwellings immediately adjacent to one another without side yards between the individual units and which units may or may not be structurally connected. The intent of this district may also be fulfilled by the use of the zero lot line concept, which permits the construction of detached single-family dwellings on lots without a side yard requirement on one side of the lot. This concept permits better use of the entire lot by compacting the usual front, rear and side yards into one or more internal gardens which may be completely walled in or screened. 
(2)  Within the R-ZT Single-family residence zero lot line/townhouse district, the following uses are permitted: 
a.  Zero lot line single-family detached dwellings. 
b.  Townhouses. 
c.  Single-family detached dwellings. 
d.  Customary home occupations (provided the building lot is a minimum of 60 feet in width and 7,200 square feet in area). 
e.  Within the R-ZT Single-family residence zero lot lot/townhouse district, the following requirements shall be met: 
1.  Maximum density shall not exceed eight units per acre for attached dwelling units and six units per acre for detached dwelling units. 
2.  Minimum lot width for zero lot line or single-family detached units—40 feet. Minimum lot width for townhouse attached units—22 feet. Zero lot line or single-family detached lots shall maintain a minimum road frontage of 20 feet. Townhouse lots shall maintain a minimum road frontage of 15 feet. 
3.  Minimum front yard depth shall be 20 feet. 
4.  Minimum side yard depth—None for townhouses except that on corner lots the minimum side yard of the corner side shall be 20 feet. Zero lot line lots shall have a zero-foot side yard on one side and a minimum of ten feet on the opposite side. Single-family detached units shall have a minimum five-foot side yard on each side. 
5.  Minimum rear yard depth—When abutting an R-75 or R-100 district, the rear yard shall be equal to the required buffer plus an additional five feet. However, the rear yard setback shall not be less than 25 feet. 
6.  Maximum height—35 feet or two and one-half stories. 
7.  Provide two or more off-street parking spaces per dwelling unit. 
8.  Provide sidewalks adjacent to interior streets, excluding cul-de-sac turnarounds. 
9.  Provide a minimum 40-foot building setback adjacent to exterior streets. The setback may be reduced to 30 feet if a berm, landscaping, fence or wall is provided adjacent to the exterior street(s). 
10.  A maximum of eight dwelling units shall be allowed in each row of townhouses. When an end unit of a townhouse row does not side on a street, an open space or court of at least 20 feet in width shall be provided between it and the adjacent row of townhouses, and this open space shall be divided between the two immediately adjacent townhouse lots as to property or lot lines. 
11.  Where townhouse lots and dwelling units are designed to face upon an open or common access court rather than upon a street, this open court shall be a minimum of 40 feet in width and said court shall not include vehicular drives or parking areas. 
12.  Townhouses shall be constructed up to side lot lines without side yards, and no windows, doors, or other opening shall face a side lot line except that that the outside wall of end units may contain such openings. 
13.  Zero lot line dwellings shall be constructed against the lot line on one side of a lot, and no windows, doors, or other openings shall be permitted on this side. The access for exterior maintenance shall be assured through a perpetual wall maintenance easement of five feet in width as necessary. 
14.  A minimum of a two-hour rated firewall shall be required between each attached dwelling unit. A four-hour rated firewall shall be required between every fourth attached dwelling unit. Firewalls shall be constructed in accordance with applicable building codes of Gwinnett County. 
(c)  R-60 Single-family residence district. 
(1)  This zoning district is intended primarily for single-family detached residences and accessory uses on land served by a central sewerage system. 
(2)  Within the R-60 Single-family detached residence district, the following uses are permitted: 
(3)  All uses permitted in the R-75 Single-family residence district, including special uses, except group day care homes, family group or congregate personal care homes. 
(4)  Subdivision development provided the following guidelines are met: 
a.  Maximum density shall not exceed four units per acre. 
b.  The subdivision development shall have a minimum land area of at least five contiguous acres. 
c.  Dwellings shall include double-car garages and where garages are front entry, driveways shall be 16 feet in width. On cul-de-sac lots driveways may taper from 16 feet at the right-of-way line to the street pavement, but a minimum 16′ × 35′ paved parking pad must be provided. 
d.  Provide sidewalks adjacent to interior streets, excluding cul-de-sac turnarounds. 
e.  Provide a minimum 40-foot building setback adjacent to exterior streets. The setback may be reduced to 30 feet if a berm, landscaping, fence, or wall is provided adjacent to the exterior street(s). 
(d)  M2 Heavy industry district. The M-2 Heavy industry district provides a location for industrial operations and processes conducted both indoors and outdoors, and which due to their intensity of use, should be located on or have ready access to a major thoroughfare or state highway. 
(1)  Only the following uses shall be permitted within the M-2 Heavy industry district and no structure shall be erected,, structurally altered or enlarged for any use other than a use permitted herein with the exception of a) uses lawfully established prior to the effective date of this amendment, b) special uses as permitted herein, c) accessory uses as defined in article III, definitions, or d) other uses which are clearly similar to and consistent with the purpose of this district: 
a.  Accessory uses such as retail business and service establishments. In addition to the limitations on "accessory use" imposed under "article III, "definitions", such permitted accessory uses specifically exclude retail business, office, and service establishments that could be construed as principal uses except as provided herein, and include only those uses that are primarily intended for and used by patrons or occupants of the principal use to which said establishment is accessory. 
b.  Aircraft factory. 
c.  Aircraft hanger/maintenance. 
d.  Aircraft landing field. 
e.  Alcoholic beverage plant/distillery. 
f.  Animal hospital or veterinary clinic. 
g.  Appliance repair shop. 
h.  Automatic teller machine. 
i.  Automobile or truck storage lot, excluding junk or wrecked vehicles (subject to screening requirements for outdoor storage). 
j.  Automobile rental. 
k.  Baking plant. 
l.  Bank/financial services institution. 
m.  Billboards or oversized signs, as provided in the Sign Ordinance of Gwinnett County. 
n.  Building material sales (wholesale). 
o.  Cabinet shop. 
p.  Cafeteria (employee/accessory only). 
q.  Catering service (no retail sales). 
r.  Cement, concrete, masonry plant. 
s.  Clothing and apparel manufacturing. 
t.  Cold storage plant. 
u.  Contractor's office, with accessory vehicle maintenance. (subject to screening requirements for outdoor storage). 
v.  Convention facility. 
w.  Crematory. 
x.  Depot/passenger terminal (bus, rail). 
y.  Distribution facility. 
z.  Dye casting works. 
aa.  Food processing/packaging/canning plant (other than poultry/meat processing). 
bb.  Fraternal club or lodge. 
cc.  Funeral home and/or crematory 
dd.  Heavy equipment and farm equipment rental or sales and service. 
ee.  Hospital or medical clinic. 
ff.  Hotel or motel provided the minimum standards are met as specified in the C-2 zoning district, section 1308. 
gg.  HVAC equipment dealer/contractor. 
hh.  Ice manufacturing/packing plant. 
ii.  Laboratory. 
jj.  Laundry/dry cleaning plant. 
kk.  Lawn treatment service. 
ll.  Liquid wastes treatment/recycling (paint, oil, grease, etc.). 
mm.  Machine shop (not including on-site automotive repair). 
nn.  Maintenance shop (automobile or truck fleet vehicles). 
oo.  Manufacturing or assembly plant, general (including outdoor activities subject to screening requirements). 
pp.  Medical/dental laboratory. 
qq.  Movie studio. 
rr.  Museum. 
ss.  Office park. 
tt.  Offices, professional/business. 
uu.  Outdoor storage, other than junk/salvage yards, meeting the following requirements: 
1.  It shall not be located within a required front yard. 
2.  It shall be screened by a solid wood fence, masonry wall or slatted chain-link fence at least eight feet high. 
3.  Materials stored outdoors shall not be placed or stacked at a height exceeding that of the screening fence. 
vv.  Parking garage. 
ww.  Pest control/extermination business. 
xx.  Pharmaceutical manufacturing plant. 
yy.  Photo processing plant. 
zz.  Plant nursery (wholesale). 
aaa.  Plastics extrusion plant. 
bbb.  Plumbing equipment dealer/contractor. 
ccc.  Printing/bookbinding/publishing plant. 
ddd.  Radio/television station. 
eee.  Railroad repair/storage yard. 
fff.  Recording/rehearsal studio. 
ggg.  Recovered materials processing facility, wood chipping and shredding, yard trimmings composting facility, provided the following conditions are met: 
1.  Recovered materials processing activities shall be limited to collection, sorting, compaction, and shipping. Composting materials shall be limited to tree stumps, branches, leaves, and grass clippings or similar putrescent vegetative materials, not including animal products, inorganic materials such as bottles, cans, plastics, metals, or similar materials. 
2.  During the preceding 90 days of operation, the amount of material that is recycled, sold, used, or reused shall equal at least 60 percent by weight or volume of the material received during that 90-day period and 60 percent by weight or volume of all material previously received and not recycled, sold, used, or reused and carried forward into that 90-day period. 
3.  Along the entire road frontage (except for approved access crossings), and along the side and rear property lines, provide a three-foot high landscaped earthen berm with a maximum slope of three to one and/or a minimum eight-foot high, 100 percent opaque, solid wooden fence or masonry wall. The fence/wall or berm must be located outside of any public right-of-way and interior to any landscaped strip or buffer. The finished side of a fence/wall shall face the exterior property lines. 
4.  No such facility shall be located adjacent to or across the street from any property used for or zoned for residential use. 
5.  Lighting for such facilities shall be placed in such a fashion as to be directed away from any nearby residential areas. 
6.  Materials collected shall not be visible once deposited in a bin. All sorting and collection bins shall either be enclosed and have chutes available to the public or be located inside a fully-enclosed building. 
7.  Any outside storage areas shall be screened by a minimum eight-foot high, solid wood fence, masonry wall or slatted chain-link fence. Materials stored outdoors shall not be placed or stacked at a height exceeding that of the screening fence. 
hhh.  Research and testing facility. 
iii.  Soft drink bottling/distribution plant. 
jjj.  Stadium/concert hall/amphitheater. 
kkk.  Taxi/limousine service. 
lll.  Textile/carpeting factory. 
mmm.  Trade/vocational school. 
nnn.  Truck rental or leasing 
ooo.  Truck fleet maintenance shop, principal use. 
ppp.  Truck terminal. 
qqq.  Upholstery shop. 
rrr.  Welding shop. 
sss.  Wholesaling and warehousing (accessory retail sales are permitted, not to exceed 15 percent of gross floor area). 
ttt.  Wholesale membership club. 
(2)  Public and semi-public uses. 
a.  Electrical, telephone or other public or semi-public utility station. 
(3)  Residential uses. 
a.  Caretaker or watchman quarters as an accessory use. 
(4)  Special uses. Within the M-2 Heavy industry district the following uses may be permitted provided the applicant for such a development is granted a special use permit by the Board of Commissioners after receiving recommendations from the Planning Director and Planning Commission and after a public hearing: 
a.  Asphalt plant. 
b.  Bulk storage tanks including natural gas, chemical and petroleum and excluding accessory fuel dispensing/storage tanks or stations. No above ground storage facilities may be located closer than 500 feet to a residential district. All storage is to be subject to approval of the Fire Department. 
c.  Chemical plant. 
d.  Church, temple or synagogue. 
e.  Composting facility, municipal solid waste. 
f.  Day care facility. 
g.  Explosives plant/storage. 
h.  Fat and bone rendering plant. 
i.  Feed processing facility. 
j.  Fertilizer plant. 
k.  Group homes. 
l.  Health club or fitness center. 
m.  Metal smelting/forging works. 
n.  Mini-warehouses or self-service storage facility. 
o.  Nursing home, personal care home or assisted living facility. 
p.  Paper/pulp mill. 
q.  Petroleum refinery/processing plant. 
r.  Poultry/meat processing plant. 
s.  Private school. 
t.  Quarry for the removal of minerals and other natural materials, together with the necessary accessory asphalt plant, buildings, machinery, and appurtenances thereto, provided that: 
1.  Quarry areas being excavated shall be entirely enclosed within a fence located at least ten feet back from the edge of any excavation and of such construction and height as to be demonstrably able to exclude children and animals from the quarry area. 
2.  The operators and owners of the quarry present to the Municipal Gwinnett County Planning Commission and to the County Commissioners of Gwinnett County an acceptable comprehensive plan for the re-use of the property at the cessation of the quarry operation. 
3.  In case of an existing quarry, any extension of the quarrying operations beyond the areas being quarried or approved for quarrying at the effective date of this amendment to the resolution, shall be permitted and shall not be considered a new operation nor require the approval of the Board of Commissioners as a special use permit, provided that said extension does not extend to within 300 feet of a residential district boundary line. 
u.  Recreation facility/training center, indoor (gymnastics schools, baseball academies, etc.). 
v.  Residential or community shelter, subject to the provisions of Rules for Shelters in Gwinnett County. 
w.  Restaurant, provided the following minimum standards are met: 
1.  The proposed site shall be located within a recorded concept plan or subdivision plat for a business or office park which: 
(i)  Has an overall area of not less than 50 acres. 
(ii)  Has existing principal use structures already developed within the office/business park. 
(iii)  Has controls in place through protective covenants which will ensure building appearance and landscaping compatible with the remainder of the business or office park and which will ensure compliance with the requirements of this section. 
2.  No more than ten percent of the acreage within the recorded concept plan or subdivision plat for the business or office park may be occupied by uses requiring a special use permit. 
3.  The proposed restaurant: 
(i)  Shall have a minimum of 2,000 square feet of seating area excluding kitchen facilities. 
(ii)  Shall have sit-down waiter or waitress service. 
(iii)  Shall not have drive-thru or pick-up windows. 
(iv)  Shall not be adjacent to or across a public street from residentially zoned property. 
x.  Rubber/tire/retreading plant. 
y.  Salvage operation, junk yard, impound lot (subject to screening requirements for outdoor storage). 
z.  Scrap tire processing plant. 
aa.  Self-service ice manufacturing/vending machines (metal buildings shall be prohibited). 
bb.  Slaughter house. 
cc.  Solid waste transfer station. 
dd.  Sugar refinery. 
ee.  Tannery/leather processing. 
ff.  Towing/wrecker service. 
gg.  Waste incineration facility. 
(e)  Minimum area requirements. 

 
(f)  Minimum yard and height requirements. 

 
(Ord. No. 14-2012, 5-7-2012) 
Sec. 115-95. - Donation drop-off boxes. 
(a)  Findings and intent. 
(1)  The purpose of this article is to establish minimum requirements and standards for registration and placement of donation drop-off boxes in order to promote and protect the public health, safety, convenience, order and general welfare of the citizens of the city. 
(2)  The Council finds that: 
a.  There is a need to establish a registration system for donation drop-off boxes to protect the health, welfare and safety of all citizens, to protect property values for all property owners and to encourage proper upkeep and maintenance of such properties. 
b.  The lack of adequate maintenance and security of donation drop-off boxes have an adverse effect on the property values and quality of life of neighboring properties and are detrimental to the health, welfare and safety of all citizens. 
c.  Improperly maintained and secured donation drop-off boxes can become a hazard to the health and safety all citizens and the owners of neighboring properties. 
d.  Difficulties often arise in locating the person responsible for the condition of donation drop-off boxes. This proposed system will require owners and agents to provide the city with official information for contacting the party responsible for bringing the donation drop-off boxes into compliance with applicable provisions of state and local laws and regulations. 
(b)  Procedures. Donation drop-off boxes shall be permitted only in accordance with the following standards and procedures: 
(1)  Donation drop-off boxes shall not be allowed in any residential, industrial or agricultural zoning district. 
(2)  Donation drop-off boxes are permitted only on properties that contain a primary permitted use. 
(3)  Donation drop-off boxes are limited to two per property and shall be clearly marked with the names and telephone numbers of the sponsoring organization and/or charity receiving benefit. Only entities or organizations that have a tax status under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, as amended, are eligible. Proof of such tax status must accompany an application for a permit to include a letter of determination from the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) indicating valid 501(c)(3) tax status. 
(4)  Donation drop-off boxes are subject to the issuance of a donation drop-off box permit and which will only be given upon receipt of written authorization of the property owner or their local legal representative. 
(5)  Donation drop-off boxes shall meet ADA regulations and shall not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular circulation, nor be located in public rights-of-way, required building setbacks, landscape areas, drive aisles, parking spaces, fire lanes, loading zones, buffers, traffic sight lines or any other location that may cause hazardous conditions, constitute a threat to the public safety, or create a condition detrimental to surrounding land uses. 
(6)  Each donation drop-off box shall have a firmly closing lid and shall have a footprint of no more than five feet by five feet and be no greater than six feet in height. 
(7)  Donation drop-off boxes may be constructed of painted metal, rubber, wood, or plastic and shall be properly maintained in a safe and good condition. 
(8)  Donation drop-off boxes shall be clearly marked to identify the specific items and materials requested to be left for donation, the name of the operator or owners of the donation container, the entity responsible for maintenance of the drop-off box and removal of materials from the box and a telephone number where the owner, operator or agent of the owner or operator may be reached at any time. The box shall display a notice stating that no items or materials shall be left outside of the donation drop-off box as well as a notice that shall read " Not for refuse disposal. Liquids are prohibited. Do not use for garbage . 
(9)  Occupation of parking spaces by donation drop-off boxes shall not reduce the number of available parking spaces below the minimum number required for the site. 
(10)  All donated items must be collected and stored in the donation drop-off box. Donated items or materials shall not be left outside of donation drop-off boxes and the area around each box shall be maintained by the owner or operator, or the property owner free of litter. 
(11)  In addition to the above referenced requirements and procedures, donation drop- off boxes that accept used clothing (exclusively or in part) shall adhere to the following minimum regulations pertaining: 
a.  Minimum pickup shall be at least two times per week. 
b.  The containers must be sealed and covered with swinging lids that automatically close. They must regularly be disinfected with an effective germicide. 
(12)  The application fee for each donation box shall be $100.00. 
(c)  Conflicts, severability and effective date. 
(1)  All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this section are hereby repealed. 
(2)  If any section, clause, sentence or phrase of this section is held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, then said holding shall in no way effect the validity of the remaining portions of this section. 
(3)  This section shall become effective immediately upon its adoption by the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 08-2014, 11-3-2014) 
Sec. 115-96. - Peachtree Industrial Blvd. - Holcomb Bridge Rd. (PIB-HBR) Overlay. 
(a)  Title. This section shall be known as the "Peachtree Industrial Blvd.-Holcomb Bridge Rd. Overlay Ordinance." 
(b)  Purpose. To create an overlay ordinance that will enhance the entry to the city from Peachtree Industrial Boulevard along Holcomb Bridge Road utilizing design standards and land use controls that will provide a transition from the more urban character of the Holcomb Bridge Rd. corridor into the historic areas of the city while maintaining opportunity for growth and economic vibrancy. In addition the overlay will: 
(1)  Encourage the revitalization of older office and commercial areas into pedestrian-oriented developments that provide a complementary mix of uses, including residential options, within convenient walking distance. 
(2)  Encourage efficient land use and redevelopment plans forming a live-work-play environment that offers employees and residents the opportunity to fulfill their daily activities with minimal use of single-occupant automobiles. 
(3)  Allow and encourage development densities and land use intensities that will allow for making productive use of alternative transportation modes such as bus transit, ridesharing, bicycling, and walking. 
(4)  Encourage formation of a well designed, pedestrian-friendly activity center with high-density mixed use development that increases choices for living environments. 
(5)  Allow flexibility in development standards in order to encourage the design of innovative development projects that set high standards for landscaping, greenspace, urban design, and public amenities. 
(6)  Promote a distinct, unified theme that will reinforce the branding of the city and improve the market attractiveness of the area for investments from the private and public sectors. 
(7)  Provide appropriate incentives to encourage reinvestment and renewal necessary to realize the potential of the Peachtree Industrial/Holcomb Bridge character area, consistent with the city comprehensive plan. 
(8)  Provide for connectivity of streets and sidewalks for improved vehicular and pedestrian circulation and reduce the dependence on automobile uses by increasing the ease of movement and opportunities for alternative modes of travel. 
(c)  Extent. The overlay district will extend from the center line of Holcomb Ridge Road to either side of the road from Peachtree Industrial Blvd. to the intersection with Queen's Court as shown in the accompanying map. 

(d)  Use regulations . The following uses and regulations shall apply. 
(1)  The requirements of the Norcross Architectural and Site Design Standards will apply. 
(2)  Prohibited uses. 
a.  Adult entertainment. 
b.  Automotive and/or truck body repair, alteration, customization, fabrication, and/or restoration and full service and self service car washes. 
c.  Boat sales establishments. 
d.  Building, electrical, or plumbing contractors, with the exception of those businesses performing office and administrative functions only. 
e.  Building material sales with outdoor storage. 
f.  Equipment rental, sales, or service (including heavy equipment, farm equipment, bulldozers, backhoes forklifts, cranes, etc.). 
g.  Emissions inspection stations. 
h.  Extended stay hotels. 
i.  Funeral homes, mausoleums, and crematories. 
j.  Heavy equipment and farm equipment sales and service, and truck rental. 
k.  Lawnmower repair shops. 
l.  Log-splitting and storage lots. 
m.  Manufactured homes. 
n.  Mobile home or mobile building leasing or sales lots. 
o.  Machine or welding shops. 
p.  Mini-warehouse facilities. 
q.  New and used automobile sales and/or rental along with any auto brokerage uses. 
r.  Pawnshops; title pawn; check cashing as carried out by nondepository institutions, including industrial loan institutions making loans of $20,000.00 or less, which are not state, national or federal banks. 
s.  Pest control businesses that store toxic chemicals on site. 
t.  Recovered materials processing. 
u.  Motels that provide outside entries to individual units. 
v.  Self-service laundries that are principal uses. 
w.  Tattoo parlors. 
x.  Taxidermists. 
y.  Yard trimmings composting. 
(3)  Auto related uses will abide by the following conditions: 
a.  Gasoline service station pump islands shall have a minimum setback of 60 feet from any street right-of-way or street easement. Unenclosed canopies shall have a minimum setback of 50 feet from any street right-of-way or street easement. 
(4)  No development within the overlay will be allowed more than one parking bay in front of the building with a two-way drive aisle on the street frontage. 
(5)  All properties will have a 20 foot deep landscape area with a minimum of a five-foot width sidewalk along the right of way of the adjacent street. 
(e)  Development guidelines . 
(1)  Multifamily dwellings . 
a.  Minimum building height: two floors/stories. 
b.  Ground floor residential units that face a street shall have entrances with a stoop or porch between the sidewalk and building facade. 
c.  If located in a mixed-use building, the following standards apply to the residential portion of the building: 
1.  Residential portion shall have at least two entrances/exit ways to the ground floor that are separate from the entrances/exit ways used by occupants of nonresidential portions of the building. 
2.  Primary entrance for the residential portion of the building shall be clearly visible from the street and shall face the street. If a building fronts more than one street, the primary entrance shall face the street with the highest classification. 
d.  Buildings containing multifamily dwellings shall be constructed in substantial conformity with the district guidelines. 
e.  Multifamily dwellings shall be subject to approval of a special use permit and shall be part of a mixed-use development that contains no more than 200 multifamily dwellings. 
(2)  Mixed-use buildings . 
a.  Ground floor commercial uses located in a mixed-use building shall have entrances opening directly onto the sidewalk adjacent to the street or to a common area connected to the street. 
b.  No more than 70 percent of the gross floor area of a mixed-use project may consist of multifamily residential uses. 
(3)  Parking structures . 
a.  Aboveground decks of parking structures shall be designed so that the only openings at street level are those to accommodate vehicle entrance and pedestrian access to the structure. Any openings for ventilation, service, or emergency access located on the first floor level in the building facade must be decorative and must be an integral part of the overall building design or screened from view with landscaping that is at least ten feet in height. 
b.  The balance of the street frontage of the aboveground decks of a parking structure shall be occupied by retail/office space or designed with exterior materials, structural elements, and external openings having proportions similar to those of upper floors of occupied buildings. 

External openings shall be screened with decorative elements, such as grill-work, brick, or louvers. 
c.  Aboveground decks of parking structures that have a total length or width of 250 feet or more shall provide a lighted and signed ten-foot-wide pedestrian arcade passing completely through the parking structure near the midpoint of the longest side and connecting with other sidewalks leading to adjacent buildings and to the surrounding streets. 
(4)  Outdoor seating . Outdoor seating for restaurant service is permitted in the district provided that such seating meets all of the following conditions: 
a.  All outdoor seating facilities shall not obstruct a six-foot wide clear zone reserved for pedestrian passage along the public sidewalk. 
b.  Outdoor seating areas shall be approved by the Fire Marshal and shall not obstruct fire exit ways. 
(5)  Building services . 
a.  Off-street loading and servicing areas shall be located to the rear of all buildings or screened from public view by a combination of opaque walls, fences and landscaping. Walls and fences shall be constructed of materials and colors that are compatible with those of the principal building facade. 
b.  Access ways and loading areas used for delivery trucks, service vehicles, and driveway and loading areas for garbage trucks shall provide safe means of ingress and egress from public streets such that delivery vehicles and garbage trucks are not required to back into streets classified as boulevards, thoroughfares, or avenues. 
c.  All access ways and loading areas shall provide a minimum horizontal and vertical clearance of 14 feet at all points. 
d.  Dumpsters shall not be located in any required front yard. Dumpsters shall be placed on a concrete pad of sufficient size and strength to support service vehicles without failure. Dumpsters that would be visible from a public street or from abutting or adjacent property shall be completely screened from such visibility by an opaque wall that is a minimum of six feet in height, but not less than the height of the dumpster. Service access shall be via an opaque metal gate. 
e.  Mechanical equipment located at ground level and roof level shall be screened from view from all streets and public rights-of-way with screening walls or landscaping. 
f.  Screening walls for dumpsters, loading docks, and mechanical equipment shall be constructed of materials that are compatible with those of the principal building facade. 
(6)  Transit passenger shelters . Transit passenger shelters and related access areas shall: 
a.  Be in a location approved by Gwinnett Transit System; and 
b.  Include a canopy, hard surface floor, signs, and landscaping that is approved by the Gwinnett Transit System and is in accordance with the City of Norcross Guidelines. 
(7)  Access easements and interparcel access . Inter-parcel access, joint driveways, cross access drives and cross access easements shall be provided, as follows, except where the Director of Community Development determines that they are not feasible due to topographic or other constraints: 
a.  Abutting non-residential or mixed use developments on major thoroughfares, boulevards or avenues shall provide shall provide cross access drive and sidewalks to allow circulation between sites. 
b.  Where joint driveways and cross access easements are established the building sites shall incorporate the following: 
1.  Continuous access drives connecting all parcels along the street frontage; 
2.  A two-way travel isle of a minimum 20-foot width with a design speed of 15 mph to accommodate automobiles and service vehicles; and 
3.  Driveway aprons, stub outs, and other design features to show where the abutting properties will connect into the inter parcel access system. 
(8)  Connectivity . 
a.  Interconnected network . It is the intent of this section that the public access ways, walkways, transportation facilities, and improvements in the district contribute to an interconnected and continuous network providing convenient vehicular and pedestrian access to abutting properties. The design of developments and related public improvements shall provide for maximum connections for autos, pedestrians, bicycles, and public transportation to offsite and on-site attractions, such as concentrations of employment, shopping, housing and community services, public parking, parks, and public facilities. 
b.  Vehicular connectivity . 
1.  Streets shall be constructed to create an interconnected system of grid-patterned streets. 
2.  No street may be longer than 600 feet without an intersection with another street. 
3.  Culs-de-sac are prohibited, except where approved following review and approval by the Director of Community Development due to unusual site conditions such as steep topography, streams, lakes, floodplains, wetlands or stream crossings, safety hazards, or other unusual property development or access constraints. 
4.  Right-of-way and design of the new streets shall meet applicable city requirements. Each new street shall connect at least two other streets. 
5.  Access to the new streets shall not be gated. 
c.  Pedestrian connectivity . 
1.  Sidewalks and other pedestrian walkways within a development shall be constructed of materials that distinguish them from paved surfaces used by motorized vehicles. 
2.  Safe, convenient, and continuous pedestrian walkways shall be provided: 
(i)  Between building entrances for all buildings in the same block. 
(ii)  Along both sides of the street frontage of all streets. 
(iii)  Through parking lots and parking structures at regular intervals connecting to building entrances and the public sidewalks on surrounding streets. 
(f)  Applicability . 
(1)  Relationship to underlying zoning district provisions. The (PIB-HBR) Overlay is an overlay zone. The land use regulations applicable to the underlying zoning classifications remain in full force and effect except where superseded herein. Where there is a provision not expressed in the underlying zoning classification, or where a provision hereof is in conflict with the underlying zoning classification, the provision of this (PIB-HBR) Overlay shall be controlling. 
(2)  Except as provided in subsection (6)c. of this section, the provisions of this section shall apply to all parcels of land and rights-of-way within the boundaries of the (PIB-HBR) Overlay provided in subsection (6)d. of this section. 
(3)  The provisions of this (PIB-HBR) Overlay apply to all applications for land disturbance permits, plan review, plat approval, sign permits and building permits for all property within the boundaries of the (PIB-HBR) Overlay. 
(4)  Concept plan reviews, plat approvals, land disturbance permits, and building permits for each parcel located within this (PIB-HBR) Overlay shall meet all applicable requirements of this chapter, as amended, and all city development regulations, except where, and to the extent that, the requirements of this section provide otherwise. In case of a conflict between the provisions of this section and any other city ordinance, the provisions of this section shall govern. 
(5)  Change in use. 
a.  A change in use may be initiated by an application for a certificate of occupancy, business license, building permit, development permit, change of occupancy or any actual change in use on the property, whether initiated by a formal application or otherwise. 
b.  A change in use that is authorized as a matter of right by the underlying zoning classification to another use authorized as a matter of right by the underlying zoning classification shall be permitted without invoking the (PIB-HBR) Overlay requirements; and the exception set forth in subsection (6)b. shall apply to future development activity authorized by the underlying zoning classification. 
c.  Any change in use to a use permitted by the (PIB-HBR) Overlay that is not a use authorized by the underlying zoning classification as a matter of right shall mandate that all future development for the affected parcel shall be in accordance with the (PIB-HBR) Overlay and not the underlying zoning classification, and the exception set forth in subsection (6)b. shall not apply to future development activity. 
d.  Any change in use permitted by subsection (5)c. shall require the owner of the property to execute an affidavit approved by the Director of the Community Development and Planning Department which shall commit that all future development of the affected property shall be in accordance with the (PIB-HBR) Overlay and not with the underlying zoning classification, and acknowledging that the exception set forth in subsection (6)b. is forever waived for all future development activity on the affected parcel. 
(6)  Exemptions. 
a.  Development activity for which the Director has received a valid and complete application for a building permit, development permit, or land disturbance permit prior to the enactment of this section shall be exempt from this section to the extent of property covered by such permit or application. 
b.  Development activity at the site and/or exterior of any building or structure which is valued at 15 percent or less than the current county appraised value of the property. The cumulative impact of improvement allowed under this exemption may not exceed the 15 percent improvement allowance within a three-year period. This exception shall not apply for a change in use permitted by the (PIB-HBR) Overlay that is not authorized by the underlying zoning classification as set forth in subsections (5)c. and (5)d. above. 
c.  Development activity that is strictly interior to an existing building or structure. 
d.  Variances from all the provisions of this section, shall be subject to the provisions of article IV of this chapter, as amended. 
e.  No development activity made exempt from the requirements of this section shall be entitled to any of the increases in density or gross floor area afforded by this section. 
(g)  Procedures . 
(1)  Development application requirements . 
a.  Preapplication conference . Prior to preparation of a concept plan or land disturbance permit application, the applicant shall schedule a preapplication conference with the Director of the Community Development and Planning Department or his assign. The purpose of the preapplication conference is to formally discuss the intent of the application and to review with staff the requirements of the district. 
b.  Concept plan . At least 15 days prior to filing an application for a land disturbance permit within the district, the applicant shall submit a proposed concept plan to the Director. The concept plan application shall consist of the following: 
1.  Conceptual site plan . The conceptual site plan shall be submitted on approved media at a scale of 1:100 or greater, with the following information: 
(i)  Building footprints, including existing and proposed buildings. 
(ii)  Parking locations and number of spaces. 
(iii)  Locations of vehicular access and circulation systems. 
(iv)  Location, extent and type of public amenities. 
(v)  New and existing streets and curb cuts. 
(vi)  Locations of sidewalks, trails, and paths. 
(vii)  Proposed phasing, if applicable. 
(viii)  Other information identified by the Director in the pre-application conference. 
2.  Statement of intent . A concept plan in the district shall include a written statement of intent explaining how the proposed development will meet the standards of this section. The written statement shall include: 
(i)  The number of acres of the site and how it is divided among land uses. 
(ii)  The gross floor area of the site and how it is divided by use. 
(iii)  The floor area ratio of the proposed development. 
(iv)  The number of dwelling units, by type. 
(v)  The residential density in dwelling units per net acres. 
(vi)  The height of all buildings in stories and feet above average grade. 
(vii)  The common area acreage and percent of the total site area that qualifies as common area. 
(viii)  The proposed methods of ownership and maintenance of common area. 
(ix)  The amenities provided in exchange for bonuses in gross floor area or floor area ratio, if applicable. 
(x)  Other information identified by the Director in the pre-application conference. 
(2)  Review and approval of concept plan . 
a.  The Director shall review the concept plan application, if applicable, with respect to conformity with the provisions of this section and other applicable provisions of this chapter and the development regulations. 
b.  A review meeting shall be scheduled with the applicant within ten working days of submission of the concept plan. 
c.  Within 20 working days following receipt of a completed application, the Director will complete the review of the concept plan. The Director may approve the concept plan, approve with comments or conditions, or disapprove the concept plan. If the Director approves with comments or conditions or disapproves the concept plan, he shall issue written explanations, comments and/or revisions to the applicant. 
d.  Upon approval of the concept plan the following steps will be taken for final approval of the development plan: 
1.  The concept plan will be submitted to the Planning and Zoning Board for review and recommendation for action by the Mayor and Council. 
2.  Subsequent to the Planning and Zoning Board review the Concept Plan will be submitted to the Mayor and Council for review and approval. 
3.  Having obtained zoning approval the project may be undertaken through the site development and subdivision platting process, if applicable, contained in the development regulations. Projects in the district may be constructed as a single phase, or may be constructed in multiple phases, in accordance with the approved concept plan. 
(3)  Modification of approved concept plan . 
a.  Minor modifications . Within the district, the Director is authorized to approve minor changes in any previously approved concept plan, subject to the limitations in this section, within ten working days of a completed submittal. 
b.  Contents . Minor modifications to an approved concept plan for a concept plan in the district may include, but are not limited to: 
1.  Changes to the location of permitted uses provided such changes do not materially affect the development concepts or nature of the approved development. 
2.  Minor shifting of the location of streets, public or private ways, utility easements, parks, or other public open spaces, or other incidental features of the plan, provided that such changes meet all of the following: 
(i)  Do not increase densities. 
(ii)  Do not change the outside boundaries of the development tract. 
(iii)  Do not affect the form of ownership, control or maintenance of common areas. 
c.  Major modifications . 
1.  Any modification of an approved concept plan that is requested by an applicant/developer that does not qualify as a minor modification shall be a major modification. 
2.  A major modification to an approved concept plan within the district shall be reviewed by the Director and shall conform to all the applicable standards and requirements of this section and other applicable ordinances of the city. A major modification shall constitute a new concept plan application and shall be subject to all the requirements of subsection (2), review and approval of concept plan, of this section. 
(4)  Site development application . Prior to application for approval of construction plans, the developer shall prepare a site development plan as provided in the city development regulations. 
a.  Contents of application . In addition to the information required for site development plans each site development plan application in the district shall be accompanied by the following documents: 
1.  Projects over 100,000 square feet of gross floor area or with an estimated trip generation of more than 1,800 TPD shall submit a traffic study meeting the standards of section 105-300 of the City Code. 
2.  All projects shall submit a multi-modal access plan. The multi-modal access plan shall show connections from the system of streets, alleys, sidewalks, and multi-use paths shown in the conceptual transportation plan to the entrances of all occupied buildings within the subject property. Convenient pedestrian ways shall be shown from sidewalks along streets to each building entrance, including designated pedestrian access routes across parking lots and between adjacent buildings within the same development. Where an existing or planned public transportation station or stop is within 1,250 feet (straight line distance) from any boundary of the subject property, the access plan shall show how pedestrians may travel safely and conveniently from such station or stop to the entrance of buildings on the subject property. Where an existing or planned multi-use path is located within 500 feet of the subject property, the access plan shall show how safe, continuous, and convenient bicycle access may be provided to the subject property. 
3.  Submit a shared parking analysis for use of shared parking, if applicable. The shared parking analysis shall meet the requirements of the Director. 
b.  Review of multi-modal access plan, traffic impact study, and shared parking analysis . Concurrent with review of the site development plan, as applicable, the Director shall review the traffic study, multi-modal access plan, and shared parking analysis, if required. Such review shall assess the consistency of these documents with the applicable City of Norcross Redevelopment Area District Design Guidelines and conformity with each of the standards and requirements of this section. 
c.  Certificate of development plans approval . Issuance of a certificate of development plans approval shall be contingent upon the Director's approval of the site plan, traffic study, and multi-modal access plan, as well as the shared parking analysis and certificate of density bonus allocation, if applicable. 
d.  Permitting . For property within this the district, the Director shall have sole authority to issue or withhold site plan approval, land disturbance permits, development permits and building permits subject to the development's conformity with the requirements of this chapter, and development regulations, as applicable. 
(5)  Changes to overlay district and tier boundaries . Changes to the overlay district and tier boundaries are zoning map amendments. No change in the boundary of the district or to the boundaries of a tier within the district shall be authorized, except by the Mayor and City Council, pursuant to procedures in this chapter, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 01-2015 , 1-5-2015; Ord. No. 14-2016 , § I, 12-5-2016; Ord. No. 09-2018 , § 2, 8-6-2018) 
Secs. 115-97—115-114. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - EXCEPTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS 

Sec. 115-115. - Walls and fences. 
Walls and fences shall be permitted in any zoning district and are not subject to setback requirements, except as provided for in this section. 
(1)  In a residential zoning district, the following provisions shall apply: 
a.  No wall or fence shall exceed eight feet in height within a side yard or rear yard. 
b.  No wall or fence that extends into the front yard shall exceed four feet in height, except that any gate or gatepost within the wall or fence shall not exceed six feet in height. 
c.  No wall or fence constructed of woven wire or metal fabric (e.g., chainlink, hog wire or barbed wire) shall extend into a front yard, except that woven wire or metal fabric fences may extend into a front yard when the property contains a minimum of three acres. 
d.  Any wall or fence which extends into the front yard on property containing less than three acres shall be ornamental or decorative and may be constructed of brick, stone, wood, stucco, wrought iron or split rail; provided that no wall or fence shall be constructed of exposed concrete block, tires, junk or other discarded materials. 
Sample Images of Decorative Fencing 

 
These images are presented as a guide for selection of a decorative fence. 
e.  Any subdivision entrance wall or fence shall not exceed ten feet in height and shall be subject to the approval of the Community Development Director after the submission of a landscape plan and an architectural elevation. 
(2)  In a nonresidential district, the following provisions shall apply: 
a.  Any fence or wall to be located in the C3, Central business district shall be subject to the approval of the Community Development Director pursuant to the provisions of section 115-85(d). 
b.  No fence or wall shall be allowed in any front yard. 
(Code 1979, § 8-4-61; Code 1998, § 106-116; Ord. No. 06-2002, § 106-116, 3-4-2002; Ord. No. 03-2003, § 106-116, 3-3-2003; Ord. No. 07-2004, 6-7-2004; Ord. No. 05-2016 , § I, 7-5-2016) 
Sec. 115-116. - Substandard lots of record. 
Any lot of record existing at the time of the adoption or amendment of this chapter, that has an area or width that is less than is required by this chapter, may be used, subject to the following exceptions and modifications. 
(1)  Adjoining lots. When two or more adjoining lots of record with continuous frontage are in one ownership at any time after the adoption or amendment of this chapter and such lots, individually, have an area or width that is less than is required by this chapter, then such contiguous lots shall be considered as a single lot or several lots of the minimum width and area required in the zoning district in which they are located. 
(2)  Individual lot not meeting minimum lot size requirements. Except as set forth in subsection (1) of this section, in any zoning district in which one-family dwellings are permitted, any lot of record existing at the time of the adoption or amendment of this chapter which has an area, width or depth less than that required by this chapter may be used as a building site for a one-family dwelling. In the case of such a lot, when it is not possible to provide the required side yards and at the same time build a minimum width one-family dwelling, the Zoning Board of Appeals is hereby authorized to grant a variance reducing the side yard requirements for such lot the minimum amount necessary for a reasonable dwelling, but in no case shall each of the side yards be less than five feet in width. 
(Code 1979, § 8-4-63; Code 1998, § 106-117; Ord. No. 06-2002, § 106-117, 3-4-2002) 
Sec. 115-117. - Exceptions to front yard requirements. 
(a)  The front yard requirements of this chapter shall not apply on any lot where the average depth of the front yards of existing buildings on adjoining lots located wholly or in part within 100 feet on each side of such lot within the same block and zoning district and fronting on the same side of the street is either greater or less than the minimum required front yard depth. 
(b)  If the average depth of the front yards is greater than the required minimum front yard depth, the depth of the front yard of such lot shall be the average of the front yards of such buildings but need not be greater than 150 percent of the required front yard depth. 
(c)  If the average depth of the front yards is less than the required minimum front yard depth, the depth of the front yard of such lot may be less than the required front yard depth but shall not be less than the average of the front yards of such buildings. 
(Code 1979, § 8-4-64; Code 1998, § 106-118; Ord. No. 06-2002, § 106-118, 3-4-2002) 
Sec. 115-118. - Temporary buildings. 
A temporary modular or mobile building or buildings for use in connection with a construction project of land subdivision development shall be permitted on the land of the project during the construction period. Temporary modular or mobile buildings used in conjunction with a special event and authorized to be located on public property shall be permitted during the event for no more than three days. 
(Code 1979, § 8-4-65; Code 1998, § 106-119; Ord. No. 06-2002, § 106-119, 3-4-2002; Ord. No. 16-2004, § 106-119, 12-6-2004) 
Secs. 115-119—115-149. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - OFF-STREET AUTOMOBILE PARKING AND LOADING 

Sec. 115-150. - Spaces required. 
Off-street automobile parking and loading and unloading spaces shall be provided, as specified in this chapter, for uses and structures hereafter established. Any building or use that is subsequently enlarged shall meet the off-street parking and loading and unloading space requirements of this chapter for the addition made. 
(Code 1979, § 8-4-71; Code 1998, § 106-146; Ord. No. 06-2002, § 106-146, 3-4-2002) 
Sec. 115-151. - Plan and design standards. 
The following are required plan and design standards for off-street parking: 
(1)  Required area for each parking space. Each parking space shall not be less than nine feet wide and 19 feet deep or 17½ feet deep with 1½-foot overhang. The Community Development Director may grant an administrative variance to permit up to 40 percent of the parking spaces to be eight feet wide and 15 feet deep to accommodate compact cars where, in his opinion, the intent of the parking ordinance can be achieved and equal performance obtained by granting a variance. Adequate interior driveways shall connect each parking space with the public right-of-way. 
(2)  Interior driveways. Interior driveways when used with 90-degree angle parking shall be at least 22 feet wide; when used with 60-degree angle parking, at least 12 feet wide with one-way traffic; when used with parallel parking or where there is no parking, at least ten feet wide for one-way traffic and at least 20 feet wide for two-way traffic. 
(3)  Surfacing, drainage and lighting. All areas intended to be used for off-street parking and driveways shall be properly drained and surfaced with material suitable to control drainage and dust problems. In commercial and multifamily districts, any off-street parking area for five or more vehicles shall be paved with asphalt or concrete material. If the off-street parking facilities are used at night, they shall be properly illuminated for the safety of pedestrians, vehicles and for security. The lighting shall be designed so as not to reflect into or cause unnecessary glare in any residential district and shall provide a minimum luminescence of one footcandle at pavement level. Plans for the surfacing, drainage and lighting of driveways and off-street parking areas for five or more vehicles shall be submitted to the Community Development Director for review and written approval. In any residential district, the parking of any vehicle in the front yard or in front of the principal building line is prohibited except on a hard-surfaced or gravel driveway or in a carport or garage. Not more than 35 percent of this required front yard area shall be used for parking under any circumstance. Surfacing, drainage and lighting. All areas intended to be used for off-street parking and driveways shall be properly surfaced with asphalt, concrete (pervious or impervious), or other impervious material, to facilitate adequate stormwater management. In the case of properties zoned R100, R75, R65, and RMD, gravel to a depth of no less than three inches will be acceptable, so long as the driveway and parking area are established utilizing a border designed to contain the gravel material. 
a.  In commercial and multifamily districts, if the off-street parking facilities are used at night, they shall be properly illuminated for the safety of pedestrians, vehicles and for security. The lighting shall be designed so as not to reflect into or cause unnecessary glare in any residential district and shall provide a minimum luminescence of one footcandle at pavement level. Plans for the surfacing, drainage and lighting of driveways and off-street parking areas for four or more vehicles shall be submitted to the Community Development Director for review and written approval. 
b.  In any residential district, the parking of any vehicle is prohibited except on an improved asphalt, concrete (pervious or impervious), or other impervious material, to facilitate adequate stormwater management, or other hard-surfaced driveway or parking pad, or in a carport or enclosed garage with an improved surface. In the case of properties zoned R100, R75, R65, and RMD, gravel to a depth of no less than three inches will be acceptable, so long as the driveway and parking area are established utilizing a border designed to contain the gravel material. Not more than 35 percent of any residentially-zoned lot shall be designated for driveways and exterior parking under any circumstance. Lots developed as of the day of this article passage with driveways and exterior parking areas that comprise more than 35 percent of the total lot area are entitled to exist as legal nonconforming lots. 
(4)  Location of required off-street parking spaces on other property. If the required automobile off-street parking spaces cannot reasonably be provided on the same lot on which the principal use is located, such spaces may be provided on other off-street property lying not more than 400 feet from the main entrance to the principal use. In this situation, the applicant shall submit with his application for a building permit or an occupancy permit an instrument duly executed and acknowledged, which accepts as a condition for the issuance of a building permit or an occupancy permit the permanent availability of such off-street parking spaces to serve his principal use. 
(5)  Sharing of required off-street parking spaces. One-half of the off-street parking spaces required by a use whose peak attendance will be at night or on Sundays may be shared with a use that will be closed at night or on Sundays. 
(Code 1979, § 8-4-72; Code 1998, § 106-147; Ord. No. 1-95, 2-6-1995; Ord. No. 16-96, 8-5-1996; Ord. No. 06-2002, § 106-147, 3-4-2002; Ord. No. 11-2008, § 106-147, 5-5-2008) 
Sec. 115-152. - Minimum number of spaces required. 
The following are the minimum number of off-street parking spaces required. For uses not specifically listed, the off-street parking requirements shall be those of the most similar use as determined by the Community Development Director. 
(1)  Automobile sales and service. Automobile sales and service: One space for each 150 square feet of gross floor area. 
(2)  Churches. Churches: One space for each four seats in the main auditorium. 
(3)  Food stores. Food stores: One space per 200 square feet of gross floor area. 
(4)  Funeral parlors. Funeral parlors: One space for each three fixed seats and one space for each 25 square feet of floor area available for the accommodation of movable seats in the largest assembly room. 
(5)  Gasoline service station. Gasoline service station: Three spaces for each service bay, with a minimum of ten spaces provided. 
(6)  Hospitals, nursing homes and similar institutions. Hospitals, nursing homes and similar institutions: One space for each two beds. 
(7)  Industrial plants. Industrial plants: One space for each 2,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
(8)  Lodges and clubs. Lodges and clubs: One space for each 100 square feet of gross floor area. 
(9)  Motels and hotels. Motels and hotels: One and one-quarter spaces per unit. 
(10)  Offices. Offices: One space for each 300 square feet of gross floor area. 
(11)  Places of public assembly without fixed seating. Places of public assembly without fixed seating: One space for each 25 square feet of floor area available for the accommodation of movable seats in the largest assembly room. 
(12)  Places of public assembly, fixed seating. Places of public assembly with fixed seating: Places of public assembly with fixed seating: One space for each three seats. 
(13)  Recreation centers, private. Recreation centers, private: One space per five members but not less than 20 spaces except that golf courses shall require a minimum of 20 spaces per nine holes. 
(14)  Recreation centers, public. Recreation centers, public: A minimum of 20 spaces except that golf courses shall require a minimum of 20 spaces per nine holes. 
(15)  Residences. Residences: Three spaces for each dwelling unit. 
(16)  Restaurants, night clubs, taverns, etc. Restaurants, night clubs, taverns and similar establishments serving food or beverages and providing patron use area: One space for each 75 square feet of gross floor area. 
(17)  Restaurants, drive-in, without patron use areas. Restaurants, drive-in, without area provided for patron use: One space per 100 square feet of gross floor area, but not less than ten spaces. 
(18)  Retail business. Retail business, including general business, commercial or personal service establishments and shopping centers catering to retail trade, but not including offices or food stores. One space for each 200 square feet of gross floor area. 
(19)  Roominghouses and boardinghouses. Roominghouses and boardinghouses: One space for each two bedrooms. 
(20)  Schools. Schools, public or private elementary and day care centers: Two spaces per classroom. 
(21)  Schools, high. Schools, high, public or private: Five spaces per classroom. 
(22)  Schools, college, trade, etc. Schools, college, trade and vocational: Ten spaces per classroom. 
(23)  Wholesale and warehousing. Wholesale and warehousing: One space per 200 square feet of gross floor area devoted to sale or display plus one space per 300 square feet of gross floor area devoted to office, plus one space per 2,000 square feet of gross storage area. 
(24)  Telephone marketing. Telephone marketing (telemarketing) enterprises: One space for each 50 square feet of gross floor area. 
(25)  Bus station. Bus station: One space for each motor carrier and one space for each 150 square feet of gross floor area. 
(26)  Bus terminal. Bus terminal: One space for each 150 square feet of gross floor area used for ticketing and passengers in addition to the requirement of section 115-154. 
(Code 1979, § 8-4-73; Code 1998, § 106-148; Ord. No. 21-96, 10-7-1996; Ord. No. 06-2002, § 106-148, 3-4-2002) 
Sec. 115-153. - Plan and design standards for loading and unloading spaces. 
The following are the plan and design standards for off-street loading and unloading spaces: 
(1)  Off-street loading and unloading spaces shall have access from an alley or, if there is no alley, from a public street. 
(2)  The off-street loading and unloading space shall be so located that it causes a minimum of interference with the free movement of vehicles and pedestrians over a street, sidewalk or alley. 
(Code 1979, § 8-8-74; Code 1998, § 106-149; Ord. No. 06-2002, § 106-149, 3-4-2002; Ord. No. 16-2004, § 106-149, 12-6-2004) 
Sec. 115-154. - Minimum size and number of loading and unloading spaces required. 
The minimum number and size of off-street loading and unloading spaces required are as follows: 
(1)  For the purpose of this section, an off-street loading and unloading space shall have the minimum dimensions of 12 feet by 40 feet by 14 feet of overhead clearance. 
(2)  The minimum required number of such spaces are as follows: Retail business, office, wholesale, industrial, governmental, and institutional uses, including public assembly places, hospitals and educational institutions, are required to have one space for the first 25,000 square feet of total floor area or fractional part thereof. For anything in excess of 25,000 square feet, such uses shall provide loading spaces according to the following schedule: 

 
(Code 1979, § 8-4-75; Code 1998, § 106-150; Ord. No. 06-2002, § 106-150, 3-4-2002; Ord. No. 16-2004, § 106-150, 12-6-2004) 
Sec. 115-155. - Administrative variance. 
In instances where an applicant shows specified and valid reasons why the requirements of section 115-152 or 115-154 cannot reasonably be met, and where a reduction of not more than ten percent in such requirements will not adversely affect the spirit or intent of this article, the Director of Community Development Department may administratively grant such reduction. 
(Ord. No. 16-2004, § 106-151, 12-6-2004) 
Sec. 115-156. - Business vehicle parking. 
(a)  In commercial zoning districts, delivery/service vehicles and vehicles displaying advertising must be parked within the side or rear yard and may not be parked within the front yard, except vehicles parked temporarily while making a delivery, providing a service, or purchasing goods or services. 
(b)  In all residential districts, the parking of any business vehicle (other than an automobile, pick-up or panel truck used to provide daily transportation to and from work or a business vehicle parked temporarily while making a delivery or providing a service) and any vehicle with a carrying capacity of more than 1½ tons is prohibited except when the following provisions apply: 
(1)  Such vehicle may park within a fully enclosed structure that meets all other criteria of the zoning district and the city development regulations. 
(2)  Such vehicle may park on the side or to the rear of the primary residential structure on the lot provided that the lot is five acres or larger, but in no case may be located closer than 100 feet from any property line. 
(3)  Such vehicle is used for the primary purpose of transporting children to and from state licensed or accredited elementary, middle or high schools provided such vehicle is parked off any public thoroughfare, on an all-weather surface, and in the side or rear yard. 
(Ord. No. 16-2004, § 106-152, 12-6-2004) 
Sec. 115-157. - Residential parking management. 
The following regulations govern the off-street parking, stopping and standing of vehicles and trailers within the city limits: 
(1)  In each residentially zoned area, no more than four vehicles, including trailers, per dwelling unit shall be parked, stopped, standing or stored on any parcel of land. A waiver can be requested when the residents can prove that the number of cars does not exceed the number of licensed drivers in the home and the car is operable, or when the vehicle is vintage (25 years old or older). Waivers are subject to review and approved by the Community Development Director. There is no fee for this review. 
a.  All vehicles and trailers of any kind found parked, stopped, standing or stored in residential areas that require licenses, emission stickers, tags, titles, tax payment receipts, or registration with state or federal agencies, must properly display all required certifications for operation in the state or they shall be cited as abatable nuisances under city ordinance and state law; and, if applicable, shall otherwise be cited for other registration or display compliance failures. 
b.  Each residentially zoned parcel of land may have additional vehicles, including trailers, parked, stopped, standing or stored, so long as they are located in a safely erected and maintained enclosed shelter, not visible from the public right-of-way or adjoining properties, where the entire floor area under the roof of the enclosed shelter is made of concrete, asphalt, gravel or other improved surface. 
c.  Vehicles prohibited within residential zones include limousines, flatbed trucks, dump trucks, tow trucks, transport wreckers, tandem axle trucks, cab-on chassis trucks, tractor trailers, wheeled attachments or trailers, buses, earth moving machinery, semitrailers, and any other vehicle over 23-feet long, seven-feet high, or seven-feet wide. 
(2)  Airplanes, helicopters, air balloons, gliders, ultra light air vehicles, hang gliders, and/or every other device designed for air travel are prohibited from parking, standing, stopping or being stored outside of a storage building in any residentially zoned area at any time. 
(3)  Ships, boats, pontoons, personal watercraft, jet skis, canoes, kayaks, paddle boats and any other devices designed for water travel, hereafter referred to as "watercraft," may only be located and/or stored in a residentially zoned area when: 
a.  There are no more than two watercraft parked, stopped, or standing on each residential parcel of land; and located on an improved surface in a side or rear yard only; except that 
b.  All watercraft may be located in a completely enclosed and safely erected and maintained enclosed shelter which meets the standards set forth in this section as well as section 115-38. 
Watercraft alone do not count against the four vehicles and trailers allowed in this section. 
(4)  Recreational vehicles (RVs), travel trailers, campers, and all other similar type vehicles, both driven and towable, may only be located and/or stored in a residentially zoned area when: 
a.  There are no more than two such vehicles parked, stopped, or standing on each residential parcel of land; and the vehicle is located on an improved surface in a side or rear yard only; except that 
b.  All recreational vehicles, travel trailers, campers and all similar-type vehicles may be located in a completely enclosed and safely erected and maintained enclosed shelter which meets the standards set forth in this section as well as section 106-41. 
(5)  Waivers. Residents subject to these parking management regulations may apply for a waiver under limited circumstances. Waivers will be reviewed and approved or denied by the Community Development Director. The following limited circumstances may request a waiver: 
a.  Proof that each additional vehicle is needed for a licensed driver living at the residence. Each vehicle must be operable; or 
b.  Each additional vehicle is vintage (25 years old or older). 
(6)  Penalties. Any person found to be in violation of any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-11. 
(Ord. No. 11-2008, § 106-151, 5-5-2008) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 11-2008, adopted 5-5-2008, purported to add the above section to the zoning chapter as section 106-151. However, section 106-151 already existed in the zoning chapter. Therefore, the provision added to the zoning chapter by Ord. No. 11-2008 was numbered as section 106-157 at the discretion of the editor. 
Secs. 115-158—115-182. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - SIGN REGULATIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 16-2018 , § I, adopted October 1, 2018, repealed art. VI, §§115-183—115-200 in its entirety and enacted a new art. VI as set out herein. The former art. VI pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 08-2010, adopted May 3, 2010; Ord. No. 17-2011, adopted October 3, 2011; Ord. No. 16-2012, adopted June 4, 2012; Ord. No. 22-2012, adopted September 4, 2012; Ord. No. 03-2013, adopted March 4, 2013; and Ord. No. 04-2015 , adopted May 4, 2015. 

Sec. 115-183. - Purpose and findings. 
The Mayor and Council find that signs provide an important medium through which individuals may convey a variety of messages. However, left completely unregulated, signs can become a threat to public safety as a traffic hazard and detriment to property values and the city's overall public welfare as an aesthetic nuisance. The purpose of this article is to balance the need to protect the public safety and welfare, the need for a well-maintained and attractive community, and the need for adequate identification, communication, and advertising. These regulations are further intended to: 
(1)  Allow businesses, institutions, and people to exercise their right to free speech by displaying messages on a sign, and to allow audiences to receive such information; 
(2)  Enhance the economy and the business and industry of the City by promoting the reasonable, orderly, and effective display of signs and thereby encourage increased communication with the public; 
(3)  Ensure that signs are designed, constructed, installed and maintained according to minimum standards to safeguard life, health, property, and public welfare; 
(4)  Reflect and support the desired ambience and development patterns of the various zoning districts and promote an attractive built environment; 
(5)  Allow for adequate and effective signs whose dimensional characteristics further the interests of public safety and the needs of the motorist, where signs are viewed from a public right-of-way; 
(6)  Promote the stated purposes of the city ordinance, as amended, which are expressly incorporated herein; and 
(7)  Promote the stated purposes of the standard building code, as adopted and modified by the city, which are expressly incorporated herein. 
(Ord. No. 16-2018 , § I, 10-1-2018) 
Sec. 115-184. - Scope. 
The regulations of this article dictate the types, location and physical standards of signs that are permissible for specified uses, subject to the sign permit procedures of the city. The regulations of this article shall be in addition to any required provisions of the Georgia Code and the applicable Building Code administered by the city related to the construction and maintenance of signs. 
The regulations of this article shall: 
(1)  Govern and control the erection, enlargement, expansion, alteration, operation, maintenance and relocation of any sign that is visible from any public right-of-way or public or private common open space. 
(2)  Govern the removal of signs determined to be physically unsafe or which create a safety hazard to the public. 
(Ord. No. 16-2018 , § I, 10-1-2018) 
Sec. 115-185. - Definitions. 
(a)  Freestanding signs . Signs not attached to a building, including the following: 
(1)  Accessory ground sign . A small, less than six square feet in area, permanently affixed sign which is wholly independent of a building for support, and which is accessory and subordinate to a primary ground sign. 
(2)  Pole sign. A permanent freestanding sign supported by one or more uprights, poles, or braces placed in or upon the ground surface and not attached to any building. 
(3)  Ground sign . A permanent freestanding sign, other than a pole sign not attached to a building, which is placed upon or supported by the ground independently of any other structure. Such sign may also be known as a monument sign. A sign that is placed on two posts, where there is no more than one foot of distance between the base of the sign at grade and the bottom of the sign shall be considered a ground sign for the purposes of this article. 
(4)  Subdivision entrance sign . A ground sign placed at the entrance of a platted subdivision. The subdivision can be for any type of development, including residential, commercial, or industrial. 
(b)  Building signs (see graphics below). Signs attached to a building, including the following: 
(1)  Accessory building sign . A small, less than six square feet in area, permanently affixed sign to a building for support, and which is accessory and subordinate to a primary building sign. 
(2)  Awning sign . A building sign that is mounted or painted on or attached to an awning or canopy and does not project vertically above or horizontally beyond the physical dimensions of such awning or canopy. 
(3)  Projecting sign . A building sign which projects more than 18 inches from, and is supported by, a wall of a building. 
(4)  Wall sign. A building sign that is attached directly to a building wall and which does not extend more than 18 inches from nor above the roof line or beyond the limits of the outside wall, with the exposed face of the sign in a plane parallel to the building wall. 
(5)  Window sign. A building sign affixed to, in contact with, or inside a window; installed for purposes of viewing from outside the premises. This does not include merchandise located in a window. 

(c)  Temporary signs . A sign which is neither permanently anchored to the ground nor permanently affixed to a structure, nor mounted on a chassis, and intended for a limited period of display, including the following: 
(1)  Banner sign. A temporary sign constructed of canvas, plastic, fabric or similar lightweight, non-rigid material that can be mounted to a structure with cord, rope, cable, or a similar method. 
(2)  Flag, pennant or other moving or animated sign. Any temporary sign or part of such sign that changes physical position by any movement or rotation that gives the visual impression of such movement or rotation. 
(3)  Yard sign . Any temporary sign placed on the ground or attached to a supporting structure, posts, or poles, that is not attached to any building. 
(d)  Miscellaneous sign terms. 
(1)  Accessory sign . A small sign, less than six square feet in sign area, permanently affixed either to a building for support, or freestanding, and which is accessory and subordinate to other signs on the lot. 
(2)  Awning . A structure made of cloth, metal, or other material affixed to a building in such a manner that the structure may be raised or retracted to a flat position against the building, but not including a canopy or marquee. 
(3)  Canopy . A structure other than an awning made of cloth, metal or other material that may be totally or partially attached to a building for the purpose of providing shelter to patrons or automobiles, or as a decorative feature on a building wall. A canopy is not a completely enclosed structure and does not rise, nor is it capable of retraction. 
(4)  Changeable copy sign . A sign designed so that the characters, letters or illustrations can be changed or rearranged without altering the face or the surface of the sign; also known as a reader board, if the copy is manually changed, or electronic message board, if remotely changed by computer. 
(5)  Clear sight triangle. The triangular area formed by a diagonal line connecting two points located on intersecting lines of a right-of-way, easement of access, or pavement edge of an access drive, each point being 20 feet from the intersecting lines. 
(6)  Clearance (of a sign) . The smallest average vertical distance between the grade of where the sign is attached and the lowest point of any sign, including framework and embellishments, extending over that grade. (Compare: "Height") 
(7)  Electronic message board (EMB). A form of changeable copy sign that is electrically activated and whose variable message or graphic presentation capability can be electronically programmed by computer from a remote location. EMBs typically use light emitting diodes (LEDs) as a lighting source. 
(8)  Facade . That portion of an enclosed building facing the principal dedicated street or that wall of a building through which there is primary access for customers. Where more than one business occupies the same building, the facade for each business shall be that portion of the building occupied by the business which faces the street, or which provides the primary access. 
(9)  Face change . The removal or replacement of an existing surface display panel where the remaining structural frame is not changed. The changing of as message on a changeable copy sign is not considered a face change. 
(10)  Flashing sign . A sign that uses an intermittent, moving or flashing light source to attract attention. 
(11)  Frontage, building . Total lineal feet of enclosed building length along the facade that fronts the principal dedicated street, or the facade that contains the main entrance to the building. 
(12)  Frontage, secondary . The street which the developer selects to be the secondary access to the development. 
(13)  Frontage, street or lot . Total lineal feet of right-of-way or easement of access along the front yard of a lot. 
(14)  Height (of a sign) . The vertical distance measured from the highest point of the sign, including decorative embellishments, to the average surface grade where the sign is attached. (Compare: "Clearance") 
(15)  Illuminated sign . A sign either internally or externally illuminated. 
(16)  Maintenance . The cleaning, painting, repair, or replacement of defective parts of a sign in a manner that does not alter the basic copy, design or structure of the sign. 
(17)  Marquee . Any fixed hood (other than a canopy or awning), which is supported solely by the building to which it is attached, consisting of metal or other incombustible material and which included a sign or other message. The location of marquees shall be restricted to the main entrance to a building. 
(18)  Nonconforming sign . Any sign which was lawfully erected in compliance with applicable regulations in force at the time and maintained prior to the effective date of this zoning resolution, and which fails to conform to all applicable standards and restrictions of this resolution. 
(19)  Oversized sign . A ground sign which exceeds 30 feet in sign height or 300 square feet of sign surface area. 
(20)  Portable sign . A sign not permanently anchored or secured to either a building or the ground, but designed to be anchored or secured to a trailer, vehicle (where the primary purpose is to convey a message) or frame capable of being moved from place to place. 
(21)  Reader board . Form of changeable copy sign designed so that the characters, letters or illustrations can be manually changed or rearranged without altering the face or the surface of the sign 
(22)  Roof sign . A sign that is mounted or painted on the roof of a building, or that is wholly dependent upon a building for support and that project above the highest point of a building with a flat roof, the eave line of a building with gambrel, gable, mansard, or hip roof. 
(23)  Sign . Any object, device, or structure, or part thereof, situated outdoors or indoors and intended to be visible from a public street right-of-way or public or private common area which is used to convey a message, advertise, identify, display, direct, or attract attention to an object, person, institution, organization, business, product, service, event or location by any means, including words, letters, figures, designs, symbols, fixtures, colors, illumination, or projected images. Signs do not include the flag or emblem of any nation, organization or nations, state, city, or any fraternal, religious or civic organizations; or works of art. 
(24)  Sign animation . The use of movement or some element thereof, to depict action or create a special effect or scene. 
(25)  Sign structure or support . Any structure that supports or is capable of supporting a sign, including decorative cover. 
(26)  Snipe sign . A sign for which a permit has not been obtained which is attached to a public utility pole, light pole, service pole or supports for another sign or placed within the right-of-way. 
(27)  Surface display area. All solid surface areas of a sign, including air space surrounded by a solid surface of a sign. Sign area means the smallest square, rectangle, triangle, circle, or combination thereof, which encompasses the entire sign, inclusive of any border and trim but excluding the base, apron, supports, and other structural members. 
(28)  Vehicle sign . Signs on vehicles or trailers visible from the public right-of-way where the primary purpose of the vehicle or boat is to display a sign. 
(29)  Visible . Capable of being seen, whether or not legible, without visual aid by a person of normal acuity from a public right-of-way, or public or private common open space. 
(30)  Zoning district use category. A categorization of zoning districts by the land uses allowed in each for the purposes of this sign article. The categories are as follows: 
a.  Single-family residential . R-100, R-75, R-65, including developments built under the provisions of the CSO overlay. 
b.  Multi-family residential . RM, RMD, RM6, RM8, RM10. 
c.  Office . O-I. 
d.  Commercial . C1, C2, C3. 
e.  Industrial . M1, M2, ODW. 
f.  Mixed-use . DCD, or mixed used developments built under the provisions of the RAOD or PIB-HBR overlays. 
(Ord. No. 16-2018 , § I, 10-1-2018) 
Sec. 115-186. - Signs requiring a permit. 
(a)  Unless expressly exempted in section 115-187, no sign shall be erected, enlarged, expanded, altered, relocated or reconstructed on private or public property unless a sign permit, showing compliance of the sign with the provisions of this article, shall have first been issued by the Community Development Director. 
(b)  Existing signs which conform to the provisions of this article that would be required to obtain a permit under the regulations of this article must register with the city within 90 days of the effective date of Ord. No. 16-2018 . The information provided for registration will be the same information required in a permit application under section 115-189. No permit fee will be required for the registration of existing signs. 
(c)  Each nonconforming sign shall be registered within 90 days of the enactment date of Ord. No. 16-2018 from by the owner, and if it is determined that such registered nonconforming sign was legally erected under the prior requirements, then a sign permit shall be issued to the sign owner. If the owner of a nonconforming sign fails to register such sign within 90 days from the enactment of Ord. No. 16-2018 , it shall be deemed a violation of this article, subject to citation in the recorder's court of the city. 
(Ord. No. 16-2018 , § I, 10-1-2018) 
Sec. 115-187. - Signs exempt from having a permit. 
The following signs and sign-related activities shall be exempt from the provisions of this article and shall not require a sign permit. All signs in this section, unless otherwise stated below, shall be setback a minimum of ten feet from the right-of-way, easement of access, or edge of pavement, whichever is the greater setback, and five feet from all other property lines. 
(1)  Routine maintenance . Routine sign maintenance includes cleaning, re-painting, replacing lighting elements, ballasts, and electrical components, and changing of lettering or parts of signs designed to be regularly changed. 
(2)  Face changes . Signs shall be allowed sign face changes that are non-structural only. Further modifications may be subject to the provisions of section 115-193, Nonconforming or noncomplying signs. 
(3)  Copy changes . The change of a message on any changeable copy sign or any variable message sign may occur without a permit. 
(4 )  Small non-illuminated temporary freestanding signs (excluding banners, which are regulated under section 115-194). For each residential or nonresidential lot, the quantity of these signs shall be limited to either one sign that is 16 square feet in area or any number of signs whose total combined area totals 16 square feet, such as four signs of four square feet in area each. These signs shall not be located within the public street right-of-way and shall be no closer than ten feet to the back of the curb of a public roadway. 
(5)  Traffic or government signs . Any signs installed by the city, county, state, federal government or an authorized transit agency. 
(6)  ADA required signs . Any signs installed to meet the requirements of the Americans with Disabilities (ADA) Act. 
(Ord. No. 16-2018 , § I, 10-1-2018) 
Sec. 115-188. - Signs specifically prohibited. 
The following signs, in addition to all other signs not expressly permitted by this article, are prohibited in all zoning districts and shall not be erected, or maintained: 
(1)  Signs that are structurally unsound, unsafe, or hazardous to traffic or pedestrians. 
(2)  Roof signs. 
(3)  Signs that move or give the appearance of moving, including sky dancers, pennants, streamers, or banners in excess of 32 square feet. 
(4)  Streamers, inflatable objects, and gas filled devices, other than permitted temporary signs. 
(5)  Flashing signs and signs containing any flashing or running lights, strobe lights, or lights creating an illusion of movement. 
(6)  Signs which imitate or may be easily confused with official traffic and government signs. 
(7)  Portable signs, except as permitted in section 115-199, and vehicle signs. 
(8)  Multi-faced "V"-shaped signs with angles exceeding 60 degrees in diameter. 
(9)  Snipe signs. 
(10)  Signs mechanically rotating at greater than six revolutions per minute. 
(11)  Any sign placed or erected on property without the permission of the property owner. 
(12)  Signs which are obscene as defined by O.C.G.A § 16-12-80. 
(13)  Signs which emit or utilize in any manner any sound capable of being detected on any traveled road or highway by a person with normal hearing abilities. 
(14)  Signs which interfere with road or highway visibility or obstruct or otherwise interfere with the safe and orderly movement of traffic or which otherwise pose a hazard to traffic due to structural deficiencies in the structure of such signs. 
(15)  Signs which obstruct any fire escape, any means of egress or ventilation or shall prevent free passage from one part of a roof to any other part, as well as signs attached to any fire escape. 
(16)  Signs which do not conform to applicable building or electrical codes. 
(17)  Exterior exposed electrical signs including neon or LED used to attract attention such as outlining a building or building feature. 
(18)  Dilapidated or neglected signs. 
(Ord. No. 16-2018 , § I, 10-1-2018) 
Sec. 115-189. - Application information. 
Applications for sign permits required by this article shall be filed by the sign owner or the owner's agent upon official forms with the Community Development Department. 
(1)  The application shall describe and provide the information requested on the sign permit application and as stipulated by this article including, but not limited to, the following information: 
a.  The street address of the property upon which the sign is to be located and a plat map of the property which bears an indication of the proposed location of the sign. In the absence of a street address, a method of location acceptable to the Community Development Department shall be used. 
b.  The width of the face of the building, suite, or length of road frontage at the proposed location, as applicable. 
c.  The name and address of the owner of the real property upon which the subject sign is to be located. 
d.  An owner affidavit demonstrating owner consent, or the owner's agent consent, granting permission for the placement or maintenance of the sign. 
e.  Name, address, email address, phone number, proof of insurance, and business license number of the sign contractor. 
f.  The type of sign to be erected, the area of the sign, the height of the sign, the shape of the sign, and an explanation of how the sign is to be mounted or erected. 
g.  Identification of any existing signage on the property, and dimensioned size. 
h.  In the case of an oversized sign application, the distances as set forth in section 115-197, oversized signs, must be provided. 
i.  The size of the parcel on which the sign is to be placed. 
j.  A dimensioned drawing of the proposed signage, including: height, width, construction materials, source of illumination, colors, and placement on the structure or position on the lot. Such drawing shall be of sufficient detail and accuracy to permit an informed review. 
(2)  A separate building permit is required for monument signs over four feet in height and oversized signs. 
(Ord. No. 16-2018 , § I, 10-1-2018) 
Sec. 115-190. - Sign permit application—Time for consideration. 
(a)  The city shall process all sign permit applications within 30 business days of the city's actual receipt of a completed sign permit application and a sign permit fee. 
(b)  The sign permit fee shall be established by the Mayor and Council. 
(c)  The Community Development Director or designee shall give notice to the applicant of a decision of the city by electronic means, by hand delivery, or by mailing a notice by certified mail with return receipt requested. Delivery will be mailed to the email address or mail address on the sign permit application on or before the thirtieth business day after the city's receipt of the completed application. 
(1)  If mailed, the notice shall be deemed to have been given upon the date of mailing in conformity with this section. 
(2)  If the city fails to act within the 30-day prescribed period, the permit shall be deemed to have been granted. 
(Ord. No. 16-2018 , § I, 10-1-2018) 
Sec. 115-191. - Application—Denial and revocation. 
(a)  Procedure . The city shall deny sign permits to applicants that submit applications for signs that do not comply with the provisions of this article, incomplete applications, and applications containing any false material statements. 
(1)  Violation of any provision of this article and any other applicable federal or state law or city ordinance shall be grounds for revoking a permit granted by the city for the erection of a sign. 
(2)  If it is determined that a sign permit was issued pursuant to an incomplete application or an application containing a false material statement, or that a permit has been erroneously issued in violation of this article, the Community Development Department Director shall revoke the permit. 
(3)  If the Community Development Department Director denies or revokes a permit, the reasons for the denial or revocation of the permit shall be stated in writing. 
(4)  Any application denied and later resubmitted shall be deemed to have been submitted on the date of resubmission, instead of the date of the original submission. 
(5)  A modified application to rectify dimension or design considerations shall be considered a continuation of the original sign application, unless the applicant has constructed or installed the sign which was denied. 
(6)  No permit shall be denied or revoked, except for due cause. The term "due cause" means the violation of the provision of this article, state or federal law, or the submission of an incomplete application or an application containing false material statements. 
(7)  If a sign application is denied, a new sign application may be filed addressing the reasons for the denial, and such application will require a new sign application review fee. 
(b)  Appeals . In the event an applicant, property owner, or designated representative whose permit has been denied or revoked is dissatisfied with the decision of the Community Development Director, the applicant has the right to request a public hearing before the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
(1)  The applicant shall be given ten days to file a request for an appeal to the Zoning Board of Appeals after receipt of the denial or revocation notice from the city. 
(2)  When a timely appeal has been filed, the city shall advertise the appeal giving notice of the time and place of such hearing in the official organ of the city at least 15 days prior to the Zoning Board of Appeals next scheduled hearing. 
(3)  The date may be rescheduled by agreement of the city. 
(4)  At the hearing any party may appear in person or by agent or attorney. 
(5)  In the event an applicant, property owner or designated representative whose permit has been denied or revoked is dissatisfied with the decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals, the applicant, property owner or designated representative may appeal the decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals by filing a petition for writ of certiorari to the superior court of the county in the manner provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 16-2018 , § I, 10-1-2018) 
Sec. 115-192. - Sign permit—Expiration. 
A sign permit shall become null and void if the sign for which the permit was issued has not been completed, erected and installed within six months after the date of issuance of the permit. 
(1)  No refunds will be made for permit fees paid for permits that expired due to the failure to erect a completed permitted sign within the prescribed period. 
(2)  If at a later time an individual desires to erect a sign at the same location, a new application must be processed and another fee paid in accordance with the fee schedule applicable at that time. 
(Ord. No. 16-2018 , § I, 10-1-2018) 
Sec. 115-193. - Nonconforming or noncomplying signs. 
Signs existing on or before the effective date of Ord. No. 16-2018 that do not conform to the standards in this article are considered nonconforming and shall be subject to the provisions of this section. 
(1)  Grandfathered signs. In all use districts, signs which on the effective date of Ord. No. 16-2018 become nonconforming, with respect to the requirements set forth in this article, may continue in existence so long as the nonconforming sign is not enlarged, altered, modified, improved or rebuilt beyond that existing as of the effective date of Ord. No. 16-2018 . 
(2)  Existing signs which were legally erected which have become nonconforming and do not meet the setback requirements of this article due to a road widening project may be moved to meet the setback requirements of this article but shall not be increased in size, shape or changed in any manner except as to meet the requirements of this article; provided that: 
a.  This subsection shall not allow the relocation of any sign for which the value has been paid to the owner by any government or government agency in conjunction with a road widening project. 
b.  No sign shall be relocated pursuant to this subsection before the sign owner provides the Director with a signed copy of the purchase contract or condemnation documents showing transfer of the owner's land for road widening. 
c.  In all use districts, signs which are prohibited shall be removed by the owner. Upon failure to comply with requirements of this division, the Community Development Director may cause the removal of such signs at the expense of the owners. These prohibited signs include: 
1.  Illegally erected or maintained with respect to prior ordinances, 
2.  Made of paper, cloth, or nondurable materials, 
3.  Located in the public right-of-way. 
d.  A nonconforming sign shall not be replaced by another nonconforming sign. 
e.  Minor repairs and maintenance of nonconforming signs such as electrical repairs or lettering repairs shall be allowed. However, no structural repairs or changes in the size or shape of the sign shall be permitted except to make the sign comply with the requirements of this division. Signs damaged by fire or acts of God may be restored to their original condition. 
f.  Existing signs visible from interstate highways that were legally erected which would become nonconforming as a result of these regulations will be allowed to remain until purchased by the state department of transportation or the city, provided that the sign owner meets the requirements of state laws, rules and regulations governing such signs. 
g.  Existing signs on the property of newly annexed territory that were legally erected under the county ordinance which would become nonconforming under this section upon annexation by the city will be allowed to remain. Such signs shall be registered with the city within 90 days of being annexed by the city. 
(Ord. No. 16-2018 , § I, 10-1-2018) 
Sec. 115-194. - Temporary signs. 
(a)  The following types of signs or devices shall be allowed by issue of a temporary sign permit: 
(1)  Flags or banners beyond the limits allowed in section 115-195 (flag section). 
a.  Banners are limited to 32 square feet in size area and may be double sided. 
b.  The location and means of mounting must be clearly depicted on the temporary sign permit application. 
(2)  Signs associated with a temporary outdoor activity or temporary outdoor retail sales and display events, as regulated in chapter 8, article IX, of the Norcross Municipal Code. 
(b)  Temporary signage is limited to a period not exceeding 15 consecutive days. 
(c)  The 15-day limitation on temporary signage associated with a permitted temporary outdoor activity shall be waived to allow temporary signage to run concurrently only with the permitted term and duration of the specific temporary outdoor activity as stipulated in subsection 8-318(g)(1) of the this Code, subject to Community Development Director approval. 
(d)  A fee as established by the City Council and posted by the Community Development Department shall be charged for each temporary sign. 
(e)  The city shall be exempted from temporary sign regulation and fees including, but not limited to: size, placement and duration of display when displaying signs. 
(Ord. No. 16-2018 , § I, 10-1-2018) 
Sec. 115-195. - Flags. 
(a)  All flags shall be displayed on purpose-built, professionally fabricated flagpoles, which may be vertical or mast-arm flagpoles. 
(1)  In nonresidential districts, flagpoles shall not exceed the allowed height provided for a structure or building in the applicable zoning district or 50 feet, whichever is lower. 
(2)  The flagpoles in residential districts shall not exceed 25 feet in height or the height of the primary structure on the lot, whichever is less. 
(b)  Flag dimensions. 
(1)  The maximum dimensions of any flag shall be proportional to the flagpole height. 
(2)  The hoist side of the flag shall not exceed 20 percent of the vertical height of the flagpole. 
(3)  In addition, flags are subject to the following limitations: 

 
(c)  Each lot or parcel shall be allowed a maximum of three flagpoles. 
(d)  A maximum of two flags shall be allowed per flagpole. 
(e)  A vertical flagpole must be set back from all property boundaries a distance which is at least equal to the height of the flagpole. 
(f)  Flags and flagpoles shall be maintained in good repair, and to the extent applicable shall be in compliance with the building code. Flagpoles with broken halyards shall not be used and flags which are torn or frayed shall not be displayed. 
(g)  On officially designated county, state, or federal holidays, there shall be no maximum flag size or number or other limitations on display. 
(h)  This section shall not be construed to restrict the right to display eligible flags as banners or noncommercial signage, as provided elsewhere in this article. 
(Ord. No. 16-2018 , § I, 10-1-2018) 
Sec. 115-196. - General standards. 
Unless expressly exempted by section 115-187 (Signs exempt from having a permit), all signs within the city shall conform to the following general standards. 
(1)  Illumination . 
a.  Location and design of light source . No sign shall give off light which glares, blinds or has any other such adverse effect on traffic or adjacent properties. The light from an illuminated sign shall be established in such a way that no direct light is cast upon adjacent properties and roadways. 
b.  Level of illumination. In no event shall the illumination of any sign exceed 50 foot candles at the sign face. 
(2)  Height . 
a.  Height of freestanding signs. Height of sign shall be measured from the grade level of the center line of the adjacent street to which the parcel on which the sign is located. The maximum height of any freestanding sign is determined by the zoning district it is located in as listed in the following table. 

 
b.  Height and placement of building signs. 
1.  Building signs shall be located within the limits of the outside wall of the building. 
2.  Marquee, awning, or projecting signs shall be designed to have a minimum clearance height of eight and one-half feet above grade. 
(3)  Minimum setback . 
a.  The closest part of any sign shall be setback a minimum of ten feet from edge of pavement. 
b.  The side yard setback for a sign in a non-residential district adjoining a single family residential district shall be setback a minimum of 25 feet from the adjoining residential district. 
c.  With the exception of accessory freestanding signs at driveways, all signs must be located outside of any clear sight triangle. 
(4)  Sign maintenance . The owner of a sign shall be responsible to maintain such sign, including its illumination sources, in full compliance with this article and all applicable laws, in a safe, secure, clean and orderly condition and in working order at all times. 
(5)  Architectural features . Signs shall be designed to be compatible with the general style, color and architectural elements of the building to which it serves. 
(6)  Ground sign base. 
a.  All ground signs shall be monument in style and have a sign base that matches the width of the copy area and support. 
b.  All ground signs are to be constructed with a base constructed of stone, brick, or other architecturally compatible solid and durable base material. 
c.  The sign shall be securely connected to the base. 
d.  The sign base shall be of a color that is compatible with the principal structure on the lot which the sign is located. 
(7)  Reader boards. A reader board may be incorporated within any freestanding sign but shall constitute no more than 50 percent of the area of any freestanding sign. 
(8)  Window signs. 
a.  Window signs are considered "building signs" and are permitted, but shall not cover more than 20 percent of the window. 
b.  Window signs are considered separate from the square footage allocation for wall signs. 
c.  Hand-written window signage is prohibited. 
(9)  Accessory signs. 
a.  Planned commercial centers, mixed use developments, multifamily developments, and any standalone commercial use with drive through services may have additional accessory signage subject to approval of a uniform sign plan. 
b.  The total sign area of accessory ground signs on a lot are not included in the calculations of total sign area for freestanding signs on a lot, but they may not exceed that total. 
c.  Accessory building signs are included in the calculations of total sign area for building signs. 
(10)  Convenience stores and service stations with pump islands. Convenience stores and service stations with pump islands may have additional accessory signage outside the approval of a uniform sign plan, if they meet the following limitations: 
a.  No more than two signs per canopy face with a maximum of eight square feet per sign. 
b.  Spreader bars (signs located under canopy over pumps islands) shall be limited to no more than two signs per pump, not to exceed four square feet per sign. 
c.  Accessory car wash, if a separate drive-through car wash building is on site, two additional wall signs may be allowed not to exceed sixteen square feet each. 
(11)  Allocation of sign area and number of signs by land use. 
a.  The following table specifies the maximum limits of sign area for each zoning district use category in the absence of an approved Uniform Sign Plan, see section 115-202. Note the provisions for accessory signs in subsections 115-196 (9) and (10). 

 
1.  If the property owner selects a subdivision entrance sign, no other individual permanent freestanding signs shall be permitted on the lot. One monument entrance sign is permitted per street entrance. 
2.  Temporary signage square footage requirement indicates the total permitted square footage on the lot, both temporary yard signs and temporary building signs. 
b.  The following table specifies the number of signs greater than 16 square feet in size permitted for each zoning district use category per lot: 

 
(Ord. No. 16-2018 , § I, 10-1-2018) 
Sec. 115-197. - Oversized signs. 
Oversized signs located within 660 feet of streets that are part of the interstate or primary highway systems shall be regulated pursuant Georgia State Statutes (O.C.G.A. §§ 32-6-70—32-6-97) and Georgia Department of Transportation (GDOT) Rules and Policies Chapter 672-1, 672-6—672-7 and 672-14 and the following requirements. 
(1)  Location . Any property located within 660 feet of Interstate Highway 85 may contain one oversized sign if the sign is setback at least 75 feet from all buildings, structures, and property lines. 
(2)  Sign area . The sign area of any oversized sign shall not exceed 600 square feet. The height of the sign area of any oversized sign shall not exceed 12 feet, and the length of the sign area of any oversized sign shall not exceed 50 feet, with or without trim. 
(3)  Illumination . All illuminated oversized signs shall use base LED, mounted fluorescent or mercury vapor lights and shall be activated by photoelectric cells. Additional lighting, including but not limited to neon, animation and running lights, is prohibited. 
(4)  Height . 
a.  Oversized signs shall not exceed 30 feet in height. Two oversized signs in the same location, back-to-back or in a "V" formation shall be the same height above the interstate surface. 
b.  All oversized signs on property adjacent to the Interstate Highway 85 shall be a minimum of 14 feet above the adjacent interstate pavement measuring from the lowest portion of the sign face. 
(5)  Extrusions prohibited . Extrusions beyond the face of any oversized sign, excluding aprons, are prohibited. 
(6)  Location and number of signs. 
a.  Oversized signs are only allowed in the M-1 or M-2 zoning districts. 
b.  Only one oversized sign shall be allowed per lot. 
c.  No oversized sign shall be placed on any lot which contains any other freestanding sign. 
d.  Oversized signs shall be no less than 1,000 feet apart measuring from the two closest points and only one sign face shall be allowed to face the same direction per location. This allows back-to-back or "V" formation signs, but prohibits two signs (side-by-side or over and under) facing the same direction. 
(Ord. No. 16-2018 , § I, 10-1-2018) 
Sec. 115-198. - Sign measurement. 
(a)  Area of a freestanding sign. 
(1)  The area of a freestanding sign shall be determined by computing the visible surface display area including all solid surface areas, including air space surrounded by surface display area, and architectural or design features. 
(2)  The width of a sign face shall be in line with the width of the base of a freestanding ground sign. 

(b)  Area of building signs. 
(1)  The area of a building sign shall be determined by computing the visible surface display area, including all text and graphics, which are completely enclosed by a frame or graphic design. 
(2)  In the case of individually mounted letters, where there is not a defined sign background, the area of the sign shall be the area that is measured by taking the largest horizontal width multiplied by the largest vertical height of the sign as identified in the graphics below. 

(Ord. No. 16-2018 , § I, 10-1-2018) 
Sec. 115-199. - Vehicle signage. 
Vehicle signs viewed from a public road or public or private common areas with the primary purpose of providing signage not otherwise allowed by this article are not permitted in the front yard of a principal building. Vehicle signs include those attached to or placed on a vehicle or trailer. Vehicles or trailers shall not be parked continuously in one location to be used primarily as additional signage. This does not apply to a vehicle parked at a driver's residence and used as the primary means of transportation to and from his or her place of employment or vehicles commonly used for delivery or work purposes of the associated business, and parked temporarily for immediate loading and unloading. 
(Ord. No. 16-2018 , § I, 10-1-2018) 
Sec. 115-200. - Signs permitted in single-family residential districts. 
(a)  Other than residential subdivision signs allowed under section 115-201, parcels located in residential zoning districts shall not contain signs having an aggregate sign area greater than 16 square feet. 
(b)  No individual sign shall exceed six square feet in sign area in a residential zoning district. 
(c)  No sign in a residential district shall have a height of greater than four feet above the grade level of the center line of the adjacent street to which the parcel on which the sign is located. 
(d)  Signs meeting the standards of this section are exempt from permitting requirements. 
(Ord. No. 16-2018 , § I, 10-1-2018) 
Sec. 115-201. - Residential subdivision signs. 
(a)  Platted residential subdivisions consisting of more than two parcels may erect one monument sign at each entrance to the subdivision. Such sign shall not exceed a height of four feet above the grade level of the center line of the adjacent street and shall not have a sign area greater than 25 square feet. Such entrance signs shall not count toward the maximum allowable signage on a residential parcel. 
(b)  Homeowners association recreation facility sign. In a platted residential subdivision, each lot that contains a building or recreation facility used for the common enjoyment of the members of a homeowners association is permitted one permanent ground sign per public road frontage with a maximum sign area of 64 square feet and a maximum copy area of 32 square feet. 
(Ord. No. 16-2018 , § I, 10-1-2018) 
Sec. 115-202. - Uniform sign plan. 
(a)  A uniform sign plan is required for any planned commercial, mixed-use or multifamily, development, before any signs may be erected on the property. 
(b)  The uniform sign plan shall govern the placement and design of all signs within the planned development as to their location, materials, size, letter style, and color. 
(c)  A uniform sign plan shall be submitted and approved as follows: 
(1)  The uniform sign plan shall consist of such drawings and specifications as may be required to clearly illustrate the location, materials, size, letter style, and color of all and every sign to be placed as freestanding and building signs within the development. 
(2)  The uniform sign plan is to be submitted to the Director. The uniform sign plan shall be approved upon a finding by the Director that: 
a.  The plan provides that signs of a similar type and function within the development shall have a consistency of size, lettering style, color scheme, and construction materials so as to present a unified design concept while respecting the differences between tenant types and occupancies. 
b.  The signs proposed in the uniform sign plan shall comply with the requirements of this article, such as number, location, and size restrictions. 
(d)  All tenants of the planned commercial development, whether an owner, lessee, subtenant, purchaser, or other occupant, shall comply with the approved uniform sign plan. 
(Ord. No. 16-2018 , § I, 10-1-2018) 
Sec. 115-203. - Signs in the Norcross historic district. 
In order to provide historical continuity in the geographic area within the city which appears on the U.S. (national) and local registers of historic places and which is known as the Norcross Historic District, all signs located within the district shall be governed by the following provisions: 
(1)  Historic character . A historical district sign, including lighting, should be in keeping with the turn-of-the-century architecture generally represented in the historic district. 
(2)  Review references . In reviewing signs within the historic district, the Community Development Department may require adherence to approved design studies or historic inventories of the Norcross Historic District. 
(3)  Prohibited signs in the historic district . Subject to the grandfather clause provision set forth in subsection 115-193(1), the following signs shall not be allowed within the Norcross Historic District: 
a.  Roof-mounted signs. 
b.  Oversized signs. 
c.  Neon signs and other internally lighted signs, with the exception of an internal window sign not to exceed 20 percent of the total glazed area of windows and doors. 
d.  Electronic message boards, or other signs exhibiting motion and electronic text changes. 
(Ord. No. 16-2018 , § I, 10-1-2018) 
Sec. 115-204. - Electronic message boards. 
(a)  Location. Electronic message boards are permitted only in non-residential zoning districts, with the exception of subsection 115-204(b), or under the requirements of an approved uniform sign plan. 
(b)  Within residentially zoned areas, electronic message boards may be used by elementary and secondary public and private schools; churches and other nonprofit and governmental buildings provided the signs meet the following criteria: 
(1)  Must be set back 150 feet from a residential dwelling unit, unless the residential use is fully screened from the sign unit in which case the distance may be reduced at the discretion of the director of planning and development. 
(2)  The signs must be programmed to be turned off between 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(c)  Sign types to utilize electronic message boards. Electronic messaging may be an element of a monument, freestanding, or window sign. 
(d)  Duration of display. 
(1)  Any electronic message displayed shall remain unchanged for a minimum of 15 minutes. 
(2)  The following display types are prohibited: 
a.  Animation is prohibited; 
b.  Flashing, blinking, fade in, fade out or scrolling text is prohibited; and 
c.  Video images are prohibited. 
(e)  Intensity of light. 
(1)  The electronic message board shall come equipped with an automatic dimming photocell, which automatically adjusts the display's brightness based on ambient light conditions. 
(2)  The brightness level shall not increase by more than 0.3 foot candles (or 3.23 lumens per square meter or lux), over ambient lighting levels, as measured using a foot candle meter at a pre-set distance. 
(3)  The procedure and distances for measurement of brightness shall be as established by the International Sign Association's "Recommend Night- time Brightness Levels for On-Premise Electronic Message Centers." 
(f)  Default control. 
(1)  Electronic message boards shall be equipped to freeze the display in one position if a malfunction occurs. 
(2)  Electronic message boards must also be equipped with a means to immediately discontinue the display if it malfunctions. 
(3)  The electronic message board's owner must immediately stop the display when notified by the Community Development Director that the sign is not complying with the standards of this article. 
(Ord. No. 16-2018 , § I, 10-1-2018) 
Sec. 115-205. - Signs within the redevelopment area overlay district (RAOD). 
(a)  One shared sign, which shall be of a monument type, is permitted per frontage for multiple-tenant developments in the RAOD. (See example in figure A.9.5 of the district guidelines, which are not set out herein, but are available for inspection in the offices of the city) No more than one such monument sign shall be allowed per entrance. Maximum size and minimum setbacks shall be in accordance with section 115-196. 
(b)  Signage for individual establishments within a multi-tenant building or development shall be limited to wall signs, awning signs, canopy signs, projecting signs, and suspended signs. Cumulative sign face area for all signage applied for under this section shall be the lesser of 50 square feet or two and one-half square feet per linear foot of frontage of an individual building, unit, or tenant space. One projecting and one suspended sign shall be allowed per individual establishment within a multi-tenant building or development, not to exceed 25 square feet in area and maintain a minimum clearance of eight feet six inches. (See figures A.9.1 through A.9.4 of the district guidelines.) 
(c)  Signage for a single building or single development shall be limited to wall signs, awning signs, canopy signs, projecting signs, and suspended signs. Cumulative sign face area for all signage applied for under this section shall be the lesser of 100 square feet or two and one-half square feet per linear foot of frontage of an individual building, unit, or tenant space. One projecting and one suspended sign shall be allowed per individual establishment within a multi-tenant building or development, not to exceed 25 square feet in area and maintain a minimum clearance of eight feet six inches. (See figures A.9.1 through A.9.4 of the district guidelines.) 
(d)  Buildings that provide a secondary entrance for customers or residents on the rear or side of the building are allowed one wall sign, awning sign, canopy sign, projecting sign, or suspended sign per side or rear entrance in addition to all other signs that would otherwise be permitted. The total area of all signs permitted by this subsection shall not exceed 32 square feet per side or rear entrance. 
(e)  Each building, use or tenant shall be allowed window signs not to exceed ten percent of the total window area of any facade containing the window sign. 
(f)  The lowest point of a projecting sign, suspended sign, awning sign, or canopy sign must be a minimum of eight feet, six inches above the sidewalk or ground elevation beneath it. 
(g)  Signs located more than 20 feet above the finished floor level are prohibited. 
(h)  Accessory signs that are up to four feet in height and up to three square feet in area are permitted. The cumulative area of incidental signs shall be limited to a total of 12 square feet per building tenant and shall not be included in the calculations of total sign area allowed. 
(i)  The following types of signs are prohibited: 
(1)  Oversized signs. 
(2)  Internally illuminated signs. 
(3)  Neon signs. 
(4)  Signs using LED panels. 
(5)  Day-glow signs. 
(6)  Multi-faced signs. 
(7)  Signs which rotate or otherwise feature movement. 
(Ord. No. 16-2018 , § I, 10-1-2018) 
Sec. 115-206. - Severability and substitution clause. 
In the event any section, subsection, sentence, part or word of this article is declared or adjudged to be invalidated or unconstitutional, such declaration or adjudication shall not affect the validity or enforceability of the remaining portions of this article, which shall remain in full force and effect as if such portion so declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional were not originally part of this article. The City Council declares that it would have enacted the remaining parts of this article if it had known that such portion thereof would be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional. Notwithstanding any provision, standard, or regulation in this article to the contrary, a noncommercial message may be substituted, in whole or in part, for any commercial message on any sign allowed pursuant to this article. If a noncommercial message is substituted, the sign must still comply with the provisions, standards, and regulations of this article applicable to the original sign prior to any substitution. The purpose of this provision is to prevent any inadvertent favoring of commercial speech or messages over noncommercial speech or messages. 
(Ord. No. 16-2018 , § I, 10-1-2018) 
Sec. 115-207. - Effective date. 
The effective date of this article shall be October 1, 2018. All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed. 
(Ord. No. 16-2018 , § I, 10-1-2018) 
Secs. 115-208—115-219. - Reserved 
ARTICLE VII. - STANDARDS FOR TELECOMMUNICATIONS ANTENNAS AND TOWERS 

Sec. 115-220. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alternative tower structure means manmade trees, clock towers, bell steeples, lightpoles, and similar alternative-design mounting structures. 
Antenna means any exterior apparatus designed for telephonic radio, or television communication through the sending of electromagnetic waves. 
FAA means the Federal Aviation Administration. 
FCC means the Federal Communications Commission. 
Grandfathered towers and antennas has the meaning set forth in section 115-221(d). 
Height means, when referring to a tower or other structure, the distance measured from ground level to the highest point on the tower or other structure, even if said highest point is an antenna. 
Tower means any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas, including self-supported lattice towers, guy towers, or monopole towers. The term "tower" includes radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common-carrier towers, and cellular telephone towers. 
(Code 1998, § 106-206; Ord. No. 13-96, § 8-4-91, 5-6-1996; Ord. No. 06-2002, § 106-206, 3-4-2002) 
Sec. 115-221. - Applicability. 
(a)  District height limitations. Except as set forth in subsection (c) of this section, the requirements set forth in this article shall govern the location of towers that exceed, and antennas that are installed at a height in excess of, the height limitations specified for each zoning district in which towers and antennas are permitted. 
(b)  Governmental exemption. The provisions of this article shall not apply to governmental facilities and structures. Private facilities and structures proposed for placement on governmentally owned property shall not be exempt. 
(c)  Amateur radio; receive-only antennas. This article shall not govern any tower, or the installation of any antenna, that is under 75 feet in height and is owned and operated by a federally licensed amateur radio station operator or is used exclusively as a receive-only antenna. Amateur radio towers in excess of 75 feet may be located in any zoning district and need only comply with section 115-225 to the extent required by section 115-225(a)(2) and (3), (b), (c), (e)(l) and (2), and (f) only to the extent that an anti-climbing device will be required. 
(d)  Grandfathered towers and antennas. Any tower or antenna existing prior to January 1, 2008, shall not be required to meet the requirements of this chapter, other than the requirements of section 115-222(e) and (f). Any such existing towers or antennas that fail to meet the requirements of this article shall be referred to in this article as grandfathered towers or grandfathered antennas. The provisions applicable to nonconforming uses set forth in section 115-13 shall apply to grandfathered towers and grandfathered antennas. 
(Code 1998, § 106-207; Ord. No. 13-96, § 8-4-92, 5-6-1996; Ord. No. 06-2002, § 106-207, 3-4-2002; Ord. No. 02-2008, 2-4-2008) 
Sec. 115-222. - General guidelines and requirements. 
(a)  Purpose; goals. The purpose of this article is to establish guidelines for the siting of towers and antennas. The goals of this article are to: 
(1)  Encourage the location of towers in nonresidential areas and minimize the total number of towers throughout the community; 
(2)  Encourage strongly the joint use of new and existing tower sites; 
(3)  Encourage users of towers and antennas to locate them, to the extent possible, in areas where the adverse impact on the community is minimal; 
(4)  Encourage users of towers and antennas to configure them in a way that minimizes the adverse visual impact of the towers and antennas; and 
(5)  Enhance the ability of the providers of telecommunications services to provide such services to the community quickly, effectively, and efficiently. 
(b)  Principal or accessory use. Antennas and towers may be considered either principal or accessory uses. A different existing use or an existing structure on the same lot shall not preclude the installation of an antenna or tower on such lot. For purposes of determining whether the installation of a tower or antenna complies with district development regula-tions including, but not limited to, setback requirements, lot-coverage requirements, and other such requirements, the dimensions of the entire lot shall control, even though the antennas or towers may be located on leased parcels within such lots. 
(c)  Inventory of existing sites. Each applicant for an administrative approval or a special use permit shall provide to the Community Development Department an inventory of its existing towers, including specific information about the location, height, and design of each tower. The Community Development Department may share such information with other applicants applying for administrative approvals or special use permits under this article or other organizations seeking to locate antennas within the jurisdiction of the Mayor and Council. 
(d)  Aesthetics; lighting. The guidelines set forth in this subsection, towers, and the installation of all antennas, governed by this article; provided, however, that the Mayor and Council may waive these requirements if, in its sole discretion, it determines that the goals of this article are better served thereby. 
(1)  Towers shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish, or subject to any applicable standards of the FAA, be painted sky blue or gray, so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness. 
(2)  At a tower site, the design of the buildings and related structures shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening, and landscaping that will blend the tower facilities to the natural setting and built environment. 
(3)  If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment must be of a neutral color that is identical to, or closely compatible with, the color of the supporting structure so as to make the antenna and related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible. 
(4)  Towers shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by the FAA or other applicable authority. If lighting is required, the governing authority may review the available lighting alternatives and approve the design that would cause the least disturbance to the surrounding views. 
(e)  Federal requirements. All towers must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, and any other agency of the federal government with the authority to regulate towers and antennas. If such standards and regulations are changed, then the owners of the towers and antennas are governed by this chapter shall bring such towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and regulations. 
(f)  Building codes; safety standards. To ensure the structural integrity of towers, the owner of a tower shall ensure that it is maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable local building codes and the applicable standards for towers that are published by the Electronic Industries Association, as amended from time to time. 
(Code 1998, § 106-208; Ord. No. 13-96, § 8-4-93, 5-6-1996; Ord. No. 06-2002, § 106-208, 3-4-2002) 
Sec. 115-223. - Permitted uses. 
New towers shall be allowed only in M1, Light industry district, and C2, General business district, by special use permit under this article including the procedures set forth in sections 115-225 and 115-315. 
(Code 1998, § 106-209; Ord. No. 13-96, § 8-4-94, 5-6-1996; Ord. No. 06-2002, § 106-209, 3-4-2002) 
Sec. 115-224. - Administrative approvals. 
The Community Development Department head may administratively approve the installation of an antenna on any existing tower or structure (such as a building, sign, light pole, watertower, or other freestanding nonresidential structure) whether or not the structure or tower is grandfathered so long as the additional structure adds no more than 20 feet to the height of the existing tower or structure. This administrative approval process may include any related equipment structures. 
(Code 1998, § 106-210; Ord. No. 13-96, § 8-4-95, 5-6-1996; Ord. No. 06-2002, § 106-210, 3-4-2002) 
Sec. 115-225. - Special use permits. 
(a)  General. The following provisions shall govern the issuance of special use permits: 
(1)  A special use permit is required for the installation and construction of a tower or antenna in the M1 and C2 zoning districts. 
(2)  In granting a special use permit, the Mayor and Council may impose zoning conditions to the extent the Mayor and Council concludes such conditions are necessary to buffer or otherwise minimize any adverse effect of the proposed tower on adjoining properties. 
(3)  Any information of an engineering nature that the applicant submits, whether civil, mechanical, or electrical shall be certified by a licensed professional engineer. 
(b)  Site plan. Each applicant requesting a special use permit under this article shall submit a scaled site plan and a scaled elevation view and other supporting drawings, calculations, and other documentation, signed and sealed by appropriate professional engineers, showing the location and dimensions of all improvements, including information concerning topography, radio frequency coverage, tower height requirements, setbacks, drives, parking, fencing, landscaping, adjacent uses, and other information the city determines is necessary to assess compliance with this article. 
(c)  Factors considered in granting special use permits. The Mayor and Council shall consider the following factors in determining whether to issue a special use permit, although the Mayor and Council may waive or reduce the burden on the applicant of one or more of these criteria, if, in the sole discretion of the Mayor and Council, the goals of this article are better served thereby: 
(1)  Height of the proposed tower; 
(2)  Proximity of the tower to residential structures and residential district boundaries; 
(3)  Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties; 
(4)  Surrounding topography; 
(5)  Surrounding tree coverage and foliage; 
(6)  Design of the tower, with particular reference to design characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual obtrusiveness; and 
(7)  Availability of suitable existing towers and other structures as discussed in subsection (d) of this section. 
(d)  Availability of suitable existing towers or other structures. No new tower shall be permitted unless the applicant demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of the Mayor and Council that no existing tower or structure can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna. Evidence submitted to demonstrate that no existing tower or structure can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna may consist of any of the following: 
(1)  No existing towers or structures are located within the geographic area required to meet applicant's engineering requirements. 
(2)  Existing towers or structures are not of sufficient height to meet applicant's engineering requirements. 
(3)  Existing towers or structures do not have sufficient structural strength to support applicant's proposed antenna and related equipment. 
(4)  The applicant's proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic interference with the antenna on the existing towers or structures, or the antenna on the existing towers or structures would cause interference with the applicant's proposed antenna. 
(5)  The fees or costs required to share an existing tower or structure or to adapt an existing tower or structure for sharing are unreasonable. Costs exceeding new tower development are presumed unreasonable. 
(6)  Property owners or owners of existing towers or structures are unwilling to accommodate reasonably the applicant's needs. 
(7)  The applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting factors that render existing towers and structures unsuitable. 
(e)  Setbacks and separation. The following setbacks and separation requirements shall apply to all towers and antennas for which a special use permit is required; provided, however, that the Mayor and Council may, in its sole discretion, reduce the standard setbacks and separation requirements if the goals of this article would be better served thereby. 
(1)  Towers must be set back a distance equal to the height of the tower from any offsite residential structure. 
(2)  Towers, guys, and accessory facilities must satisfy the minimum district yard setback requirements. 
(3)  Towers over 90 feet in height shall not be located within 1,000 feet from any existing tower that is over 90 feet in height. 
(f)  Security fencing. Towers shall be enclosed by security fencing not less than six feet in height and shall be equipped with an appropriate anticlimbing device; provided, however, that the Mayor and Council may, in its sole discretion, waive such requirements, as it deems appropriate. 
(g)  Landscaping. The following guidelines shall govern the landscaping surrounding towers for which a special use permit is required; provided, however, that the Mayor and Council may, in its sole discretion, waive such requirements if the goals of this article would be better served thereby. 
(1)  Tower facilities shall be landscaped with a buffer of plant materials that effectively screens the view of the tower compound from adjacent residential property. The standard buffer shall consist of a landscaped strip at least four feet wide outside the perimeter of the compound. 
(2)  In locations where the visual impact of the tower would be minimal, the landscaping requirement may be reduced or waived altogether. 
(3)  Existing mature tree growth and natural land forms on the site shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible. In some cases, such as towers sited on large, wooded lots, natural growth around the property perimeter may be a sufficient buffer. 
(Code 1998, § 106-211; Ord. No. 13-96, § 8-4-96, 5-6-1996; Ord. No. 06-2002, § 106-211, 3-4-2002) 
Sec. 115-226. - Removal of abandoned antennas and towers. 
Any antenna or tower that is not operated for a continuous period of 12 months shall be considered abandoned, and the owner of such antenna or tower shall remove same within 90 days of receipt of notice from the Mayor and Council notifying the owner of such abandonment. If there are two or more users of a single tower, then this provision shall not become effective until all users cease using the tower. 
(Code 1998, § 106-212; Ord. No. 13-96, § 8-4-97, 5-6-1996; Ord. No. 06-2002, § 106-212, 3-4-2002) 
Secs. 115-227—115-245. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT, PENALTIES AND REMEDIES 

Sec. 115-246. - Zoning enforcement officer. 
It shall be the duty of the Community Development Director or his delegated representative, including the city Code Enforcement Officer, and he is hereby given the authority, to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1979, § 8-4-101; Code 1998, § 106-241; Ord. No. 06-2002, § 106-241, 3-4-2002) 
Sec. 115-247. - Building permit required. 
No building or other structure shall be erected, moved, added to or structurally altered without a building permit issued by the Building Official. No building permit shall be issued except in conformance with the provisions of this chapter and the provisions set out under the "Planning and Land Development Code" subpart of this Code. 
(Code 1979, § 8-4-102; Code 1998, § 106-242; Ord. No. 06-2002, § 106-242, 3-4-2002) 
Sec. 115-248. - Certificate of occupancy required. 
(a)  A certificate of occupancy issued by the Building Official is required in advance of the use or occupancy of: 
(1)  Any lot or a change in the use thereof; and 
(2)  A building hereafter erected or a change in the use of an existing building. 
(b)  No certificate of occupancy shall be issued unless the lot or building or structure complies with all the provisions of this chapter and the provisions set out under the Planning and Land Development Code subpart of this Code. 
(c)  A record of all certificates of occupancy shall be kept on file in the office of the Building Official and a copy shall be furnished, on request, to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the building or land involved. 
(Code 1979, § 8-4-103; Code 1998, § 106-243; Ord. No. 06-2002, § 106-243, 3-4-2002) 
Sec. 115-249. - Penalties for violation. 
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined as provided in section 1-11. Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1979, § 8-4-104; Code 1998, § 106-244; Ord. No. 06-2002, § 106-244, 3-4-2002) 
Sec. 115-250. - Remedies. 
If any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained or if any building, structure or land is used in violation of this chapter, the City Council, the Building Official or any adjacent or other property owner who would be damaged by the violation, in addition to other remedies, may institute injunction, mandamus or other appropriate action or proceeding to stop the violation in the case of such building, structure or land use. 
(Code 1979, § 8-4-105; Code 1998, § 106-245; Ord. No. 06-2002, § 106-245, 3-4-2002) 
Secs. 115-251—115-278. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - PROCEDURES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 19-2018 , § I, adopted December 3, 2018, amended the Code by repealing Articles IX and X, §§ 115-279—115-288 and §§ 115-310—115-316 and enacting a new Art. IX to read as set out herein. Former Articles IX and X pertained to Zoning Board of Appeals and Amendments, and derived from Code 1979, §§ 8-4-111—8-4-120 and 8-4-131—8-4-135; Code 1998, §§ 106-271—106-280 and 106-306—106-310, 106-312; Ord. No. 19-98, adopted Dec. 7, 1998; Ord. No. 06-2002, §§ 106-271—106-280 and §§ 106-306, 106-309, 106-310, 106-312, adopted March 4, 2002; Ord. No. 16-2004, § 106-308, adopted Dec. 6, 2004; Ord. No. 10-2008, § 106-306, adopted May 5, 2008; Ord. No. 21-2008, § 106-273, adopted Aug. 4, 2008; and Ord. No. 26-2008, § 106-307, adopted Nov. 3, 2008. 

Sec. 115-279. - Administration and legislative bodies. 
The provisions of this Zoning Ordinance shall be administered by the Community Development Department, in association with and in support of the Planning and Zoning Board, Zoning Board of Appeals, and Mayor and City Council, as described herein. 
(Ord. No. 19-2018 , § I, 12-3-2018) 
Sec. 115-280. - Zoning and Comprehensive Plan amendments and procedures. 
(a)  Zoning and Comprehensive Plan Amendment Procedure. 
(1)  The Zoning Ordinance, including the Official Zoning Maps, and the Comprehensive Plan may be amended from time to time by the Mayor and City Council, but no zoning or comprehensive plan text or map amendment shall become effective unless it shall have been proposed by or shall have first been submitted to the Planning and Zoning Board for review, a report and recommendation. 
(2)  If the Planning and Zoning Board fails to submit a report to the City Council within 30 days of its first meeting after it has received an amendment request complete in all respects, it shall be deemed to have given a recommendation of "no comment" on the proposed amendment. However, the Planning and Zoning Board and the applicant for an amendment may jointly agree to an extension of the 30-day period. 
(b)  Public hearing required. 
(1)  Before the Planning and Zoning Board submits a report to City Council, or the Mayor and City Council enacts an amendment, they shall each hold a public hearing thereon. 
(2)  At least 15 but not more than 45 days prior to the date of each such hearing, the Planning and Zoning Board or the Mayor and City Council (as the case may be) shall cause to be published within a newspaper of general circulation within the territorial boundaries of the City of Norcross, a notice of the hearing. The notice shall state the time, place and purpose of the hearing. 
(3)  If a proposed amendment is for the rezoning of property and the rezoning is initiated by a party other than the Planning and Zoning Board or the Mayor and City Council, or the rezoning involves a change in the zoning classification of 25 or fewer parcels of land, then: 
a.  The notice, in addition to the requirements of section 115-280(b)(2), above, shall include the location of the property, the present zoning classification of the property, and the proposed zoning classification of the property; and 
b.  A sign containing the information for notice in this section 115-280(b) shall be placed in a conspicuous location on the property not less than 15 days prior to the date of each hearing. 
(c)  Rules of procedure; meetings; minutes, records. 
(1)  The Planning and Zoning Board and the City Council hereby adopt the following policies and rules of procedure to govern calling and conducting their hearings. 
(2)  Meetings and hearings of the Planning and Zoning Board shall be at the call of the Chairperson and at such other times as the members of the Planning and Zoning Board may determine. The Chairperson or, in his or her absence, the Vice-Chairperson, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses by subpoena. Meetings and hearings of the City Council shall be at the call of the Mayor or as otherwise provided by law. The Mayor or, in his or her absence, the Mayor Pro Tem, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses by subpoena. 
(3)  The Planning and Zoning Board and the City Council shall keep minutes of their proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact. The Planning and Zoning Board and the City Council shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the Office of the City Clerk and shall be a public record. 
(4)  All individuals present at a public hearing shall be allowed to voice their opinions at a hearing unless there is a spokesperson representing a particular individual. The Planning and Zoning Board and the City Council shall allow a minimum time period at hearings on proposed zoning or comprehensive plan decisions for presentation of data, evidence, and opinion by proponents of each decision and an equal minimum time period for presentation by opponents of each proposed decision, such minimum time period shall be no less than 10 minutes per side. The presiding official shall have the right to limit the maximum amount of time for the presentation of data, evidence, and opinion by proponents and opponents of each decision, provided the maximum time for such presentations is the same for proponents and opponents. 
(5)  Applications shall be considered in the order of filing unless such would work a hardship to the applicant and such consideration is approved by the presiding officer. 
(6)  All public hearings shall be conducted in accordance with the Georgia Open Meetings Law (O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 et seq.). 
(7)  It is declared the intention of the Mayor and Council that this section shall constitute policies and procedures required under O.C.G.A. § 36-66-5, and policies and procedures shall be printed, and copies thereof shall be available for distribution to the general public by the Community Development Director. 
(d)  Initiation of amendments. Applications for amendment of the text or maps of the Zoning Ordinance, or the comprehensive plan may be initiated by resolution of the Mayor and City Council, or by motion of the Planning and Zoning Board, or by petition of any property owner addressed to the Mayor and City Council. In the case of a petition of any property owner for the rezoning of property or comprehensive map change of property, such petition shall be submitted by the owner of record of said property, the owner's agent or by a contract purchaser with the owner's written consent. 
(e)  Limitation on permits related to zoning map amendments. Once a zoning map amendment is initiated by the Mayor and City Council, no application for a clearing, grubbing, grading, septic tank, building, development or other similar permit, or for a variance or special use permit for the affected property shall be accepted for processing or acted upon until final action is taken by the Mayor and City Council on the proposed map amendment. Provided, however, that if the Mayor and City Council do not take final action on the proposed map amendment within six months from the date of initiation, permit, variance and special use permit applications shall again be accepted and reviewed pursuant to existing zoning. And, further provided that such permit applications shall be accepted during the map amendment process if the proposed use is authorized under the same conditions in both the existing and proposed zoning district. 
(f)  Consistency with comprehensive plan character areas. Any applicant seeking to rezone property to a classification that is inconsistent with the adopted comprehensive plan must first obtain approval of an amendment to the comprehensive plan from the Mayor and City Council. The comprehensive plan shall be amended according to a schedule approved by the Mayor and City Council. However, exceptions may be granted by the Mayor and City Council in between the regular review cycle in cases of demonstrated hardship, or in cases of large-scale developments that may provide special economic benefits to the community. Requests for exceptions shall be subject to approval by Mayor and City Council during a Mayor and City Council meeting. 
(g)  Standards governing the exercise of zoning power. The Mayor and City Council find that the following standards are relevant in balancing the interest in promoting the public health, safety, morality, or general welfare against the right to the unrestricted use of property and shall govern the exercise of zoning power: 
(1)  Whether the zoning proposal will permit a use that is suitable in view of the use and development of adjacent and nearby property; 
(2)  Whether the zoning proposal will adversely affect the existing use or usability of adjacent or nearby property; 
(3)  Whether the property to be affected by the zoning proposal has a reasonable economic use as currently zoned; 
(4)  Whether the zoning proposal will result in a use which will or could cause an excessive or burdensome use of existing streets, transportation facilities, utilities, or schools; 
(5)  Whether the zoning proposal is in conformity with the policy and intent of the Comprehensive Plan; and 
(6)  Whether there are other existing or changing conditions affecting the use and development of the property which give supporting grounds for either approval or disapproval of the zoning proposal. 
It is declared the intention of the Mayor and Council that this section shall constitute the standards required under O.C.G.A. § 36-66-5, and such standards shall be printed, and copies thereof shall be available for distribution to the general public by the Community Development Director. 
(h)  Standards and factors governing review of proposed amendments to the Comprehensive Plan. The following standards and factors are found to be relevant for evaluating applications for amendments to the comprehensive plan and shall govern the review of all proposed amendments to the comprehensive plan: 
(1)  Whether the proposed land use change will permit uses that are suitable in consideration of the use and development of adjacent and nearby property or properties. 
(2)  Whether the proposed land use change will adversely affect the existing use or usability of adjacent or nearby property or properties. 
(3)  Whether the proposed land use change will result in uses which will or could cause excessive or burdensome use of existing streets, transportation facilities, utilities, or schools. 
(4)  Whether the amendment is consistent with the written policies in the comprehensive plan text and any applicable small areas studies. 
(5)  Whether there are potential impacts on property or properties in an adjoining governmental jurisdiction, in cases of proposed changes near municipal boundary lines. 
(6)  Whether there are other existing or changing conditions affecting the use and development of the affected land areas which support either approval or denial of the proposed land use change. 
(7)  Whether there will be an impact on historic buildings, sites, districts or archaeological resources resulting from the proposed change 
(i)  Impact analysis. If a proposed amendment is for the rezoning of property and involves a change in the zoning classification or is for a comprehensive plan amendment, then: 
(1)  The initiating party, if a party other than the Mayor and City Council or the Planning and Zoning Board, shall be required to file, with its application for amendment, a written, documented analysis of the impact of the proposed amendment with respect to each of the matters enumerated in section 115-280(g), or section 115-280(h), as applicable. Such a proposal and analysis shall be a public record. 
(2)  The Community Development Department shall, with respect to each such proposal, investigate and make a recommendation with respect to each of the matters enumerated in section 115-280(g), or section 115-280(h), as applicable. The Community Development Department shall make a written record of its investigation and recommendations, and this record shall be a public record. 
(3)  The Planning and Zoning Board shall, with respect to each such proposal, investigate and make a recommendation with respect to each of the matters enumerated in section 115-280(g) or section 115-280(h), as applicable. The Planning and Zoning Board shall make a written record of its investigation and recommendations, and this record shall be a public record. 
(j)  Action by Mayor and City Council. Following its public hearing the Mayor and City Council may: 
(1)  Approve, by ordinance, the proposed amendment as presented; 
(2)  Approve, by ordinance, the proposed amendment with conditions; 
(3)  Approve, by ordinance, a similar or less intense use (including special uses), with or without conditions, if the proposed amendment is for the rezoning of property; 
(4)  Deny the proposed amendment in whole or in part; 
(5)  Refer, by motion, the matter back to the Planning and Zoning Board for reconsideration; 
(6)  By motion, table final action to a future regularly scheduled business session or public hearing, or table the final action indefinitely. 
(k)  Plans and other documents showing proposed use and impact required. An application for an amendment to create or extend a Zoning District shall be accompanied by a sketch plan at scale and such other surveys, plans, elevations or additional information as the Community Development Director and this ordinance may require, showing the proposed development and its impact on natural and built systems. Additional information may include without limitation traffic studies, lighting plans, environmental analyses, utility studies, and drainage studies. 
(l)  Change in conditions of zoning. Requests to change the conditions of an approved rezoning shall be subject to the same application, review and approval process as a new application, including the payment of relevant fees. 
(m)  Actions to be taken if plans are not implemented within specified time limits. 
(1)  For any zoning map amendment for which the Mayor and City Council or the Planning and Zoning Board is not the applicant, and upon which property no development permit, building permit, or certificate of occupancy has been issued within 12 months of the date of approval of said amendment, the Mayor and City Council may review the zoning district classification of the property and determine whether it shall be continued or initiated for rezoning. 
(2)  Such properties shall first be reviewed by the Planning and Zoning Board, which shall make such findings and recommendations to the Mayor and City Council as it deems appropriate, and the final decision on a rezoning shall be made by Mayor and City Council. 
(3)  The procedure to be following for the rezoning of such properties described in this subsection (m) shall be the same as other rezoning initiated by the Planning and Zoning Board or the Mayor and City Council, and notice of such application, shall be given to the property owner of record. 
(Ord. No. 19-2018 , § I, 12-3-2018) 
Sec. 115-281. - Special use permits. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of a special use permit is to provide a process for review of a use that is generally compatible with the use characteristics of a zoning district, but requires individual review of its location, design, height, intensity, configuration and public facility impact to determine the appropriateness of the use for any particular site and its compatibility with adjacent uses. 
(b)  Authority. The Mayor and City Council shall take final action on applications for special use permits in accordance with the procedures, standards and limitations of the Zoning Ordinance. In order to accommodate these special uses, the special use permit allows the Mayor and City Council to approve a special use on a particular parcel without changing the general zoning district. Such approval shall be subject to the requirements set forth in this Zoning Ordinance and any additional conditions deemed necessary to ensure the compatibility of the special use with the surrounding properties. The special use permit shall not be used for securing early zoning for conceptual proposals which may not be undertaken for some time. 
(c)  Special use permit procedure. The application, notice and review process for a special use permit shall be the same as those contained in section 115-280(g), herein. In addition to the information and/or site plans which are required to be submitted for the proposed development, additional information deemed necessary by the Community Development Director to evaluate a proposed use and its relationship to the surrounding area shall be submitted, including but not limited to square footage of the structure, number of parking spaces, days of operation, and number of employees. 
(d)  Analysis of the Community Development Department staff and recommendation. The staff analysis and recommendation on each application for a special use permit shall follow the same procedures as those contained in section 115-280(g), herein. In the review process, particular emphasis shall be given to the evaluation of the characteristics of the proposed use in relationship to neighboring properties and the compatibility of the proposed use with its surroundings. 
(e)  Public hearing required. The public hearing process, impact analysis and application of the Standards Governing the Exercise of Zoning Power for a special use permit shall be the same as those contained in section 115-280, herein. 
(f)  Action by the Mayor and City Council. When considering a special use permit application, and in addition to Standards Governing the Exercise of Zoning Power, the Mayor and City Council shall consider the policies and objectives of the Comprehensive Plan, particularly in relationship to the proposed site and surrounding area, and shall consider the potential adverse impacts on the surrounding area, especially in regards to but not limited to traffic, storm drainage, land values and compatibility of land use activities. Following its public hearing the Mayor and City Council may: 
(1)  Approve, by ordinance, the proposed special use as presented; 
(2)  Approve, by ordinance, the proposed special use with conditions; 
(3)  Deny the proposed special use in whole or in part; 
(4)  Refer, by motion, the matter back to the Planning and Zoning Board for reconsideration; 
(5)  By motion, table final action to a future regularly scheduled business session or public hearing, or table the final action indefinitely. 
(g)  Special uses within a residential district. An application for a special use permit in a residential zoning district where the proposed special use is proposed to operate in a dwelling or as an accessory use to a dwelling is subject to the following additional requirements: 
(1)  The special use permit shall be valid for no more than an initial two-year period. Upon or before the expiration of the special use permit, the owner shall make application to renew the special use permit if continuance is desired. As part of a special use permit renewal, the Mayor and City Council may waive any subsequent time limitation. 
(2)  The special use shall operate within the dwelling on the property or, if approved by the Mayor and City Council, in an accessory structure. 
(3)  The exterior character of the dwelling shall be preserved in its residential state and there shall be no outside evidence of the operation of the special use to the neighborhood, except for any accessory structure approved by the Mayor and City Council. 
(4)  The owner of the property or business shall occupy the property and shall operate any business associated with the special use. 
(5)  The owner of the property shall submit with the application a signed statement in which he/she agrees that the special use permit, if approved, shall automatically terminate in the event that the property is sold, transferred, or otherwise conveyed to any other party; or the business which operates the special use is sold, transferred, otherwise conveyed or discontinued; or if the special use ceases to operate for a period of 90 days or more. The owner shall also agree to notify the Community Development Director in writing upon the occurrence of any of these events. 
(6)  In addition to the information and/or site plans required, the owner of the property shall submit with the application for a Special Use Permit information regarding the ownership of any business associated with the use, the experience and background qualifications related to the operation of said business, prior similar businesses operated, applicable State of Georgia certifications, licenses and like information. 
(h)  Voluntary termination of a special use permit. The owner of the property approved for a special use permit may voluntarily request termination of the special use permit by notifying the Community Development Director in writing. The Community Development Director shall notify the Mayor and City Council through the Planning and Zoning Board of voluntary terminations as they occur and shall change the official zoning maps to reflect any voluntary terminations. The approval of a special use permit for a specific use which may be operated by a lessee under a private agreement with a lessor in any zoning district shall not obligate the Mayor and City Council to be responsible for or be required to resolve any disputes which may arise out of the voluntary termination of the special use permit by the property owner. 
(i)  Change in conditions or modification of a special use permit. Requests to change the conditions or any other modification of an approved special use permit shall be subject to the same application, notice, review and approval process as a new application, including the payment of relevant fees. 
(j)  Development of an approved special use. 
(1)  The issuance of a special use permit shall only constitute approval of the proposed use, and development of the use shall not be carried out until the applicant has secured all other permits and approvals required. The Community Development Department shall not issue a certificate of occupancy for the specific use unless all requirements and conditions of the special use permit have been fulfilled by the owner of the property. 
(2)  If an application is approved and a special use permit is granted, all conditions which may have been attached to the approval are binding on the property. All subsequent development and use of the property shall be in accordance with the approved plan and conditions. Once established, the special use shall be in continuous operation. Upon discovery that the operation of the special use has or had ceased for a period of 90 days or more and the owner of the property has not requested voluntary termination of the special use permit, the Community Development Director may forward a report to the Mayor and City Council through the Planning and Zoning Board which may recommend that action be taken to terminate the special use permit from the property. 
(k)  Compliance with special use permit requirements. The Community Development Director shall have the right to periodically examine the operation of the specific use to determine compliance with the requirements and any conditions of a special use permit. If the Community Development Director determines that the requirements and conditions are being violated, a written notice shall be issued by hand-delivery, by electronic mail with delivery and read receipts requested to the owner's e-mail address of record, or by certified mail return receipt requested to the owner of the property outlining the nature of the violation and giving the owner of the property a maximum of ten days to come into compliance. If such notice is e-mailed or mailed to the owner, the notice shall be deemed to have been given upon the date of sending. The notice shall also state that the owner has the right to appeal the determination of the Community Development Director to the Zoning Board of Appeals. If after ten days the violations continue to exist, the Community Development Director shall forward a report to the Mayor and City Council through the Planning and Zoning Board, which report may recommend that action be taken to remove or terminate the special use permit from the property, or to exercise all other rights of enforcement permitted by law. The Mayor and City Council may stay their proceedings on such a report from the Director pending resolution of any timely appeal to the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
(l)  Actions to be taken if plans of property owner are not implemented within specified time limits. The special use for which a special use permit is granted shall commence operations or construction within 12 months of the date of approval by the Mayor and City Council. If, at the end of this 12-month period, the Community Development Director determines that active efforts are not proceeding toward operation or construction, a report may be forwarded to the Mayor and City Council through the Planning and Zoning Board which may recommend that action be taken to remove or terminate the special use permit from the property. 
(m)  Appeal of a special use permit decision. Any person, persons or entities jointly or severally aggrieved by any decision of the Mayor and City Council regarding a special use permit application or regarding any other action of the Mayor and City Council regarding a special use permit, including action to terminate such a permit, may take an appeal to the Superior Court of the County. The appeal shall be limited to the proceedings and record of the Mayor and City Council. Any appeal must be filed within 30 days of the decision of the Mayor and City Council, and upon failure of such appeal, the decision of the Mayor and City Council shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 19-2018 , § I, 12-3-2018) 
Sec. 115-282. - Conditional approvals. 
(a)  In adopting an amendment to the Official Zoning Map, or approving a special use permit, the Mayor and City Council may impose special conditions which they deem necessary in order to make the requested action acceptable and consistent with the purposes of the district(s) involved and to further the goals and objectives of the Comprehensive Plan. 
(b)  Such conditions may consist of (but are not limited to): 
(1)  Restrictions as to what land uses or activities shall be permitted; 
(2)  Permitted hours of operation; 
(3)  Setback requirements from any lot line; 
(4)  Specified or prohibited locations for buildings, parking, loading or storage areas or other land uses; 
(5)  Maximum building heights or other dimensions; 
(6)  Architectural style, or exterior treatments; 
(7)  Driveway curb cut restrictions, or inter-parcel access requirements; 
(8)  Landscaping or planted areas which may include the location, type and maintenance of plant materials; 
(9)  Preservation of existing trees or other vegetation; 
(10)  Fences, walls, berms, or other buffering provisions or protective measures; 
(11)  Special measures to alleviate undesirable views, light, glare, noise, dust or odor; 
(12)  A requirement that the existing building(s) be removed or retained, or a limitation on exterior modifications of existing buildings; 
(13)  Special drainage or erosion provisions; 
(14)  A requirement that developers must build according to the site plans as adopted; 
(15)  Any other requirement that the Mayor and City Council may deem appropriate and necessary as a condition of rezoning or issuance of a special use permit. 
(c)  Such conditions shall: 
(1)  Only be valid if they are included in the motion approving the amendment or special use permit for adoption; 
(2)  Be recorded in the Resolution of the Mayor and City Council if enacted pursuant to an amendment of the text of the Zoning Ordinance or the Official Zoning Maps. 
(3)  Be continually in effect, or for the period of time specified in the amendment or special use permit. 
(4)  Be required of the property owner and all subsequent owners as a condition of their use of the property. 
(5)  Be interpreted and continually enforced by the Community Development Director in the same manner as any other provision of this Zoning Ordinance. 
(d)  Violations of conditions. Notwithstanding any other remedies available in this Zoning Ordinance and under local and state law, violations of conditions imposed pursuant to this section shall be handled in accordance with the enforcement and penalties provisions of this Zoning Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 19-2018 , § I, 12-3-2018) 
Sec. 115-283. - Withdrawal of application. 
(a)  Once an application for an amendment to the Official Zoning Map or an application for a variance or an application for a special use permit has been made, the applicant may withdraw such application without prejudice only within ten days of the first public hearing. 
(b)  An application may not be withdrawn by an applicant or property owner under any circumstance after the official withdrawal deadline. Once past the published withdrawal deadline, all applications shall be considered by the Mayor and City Council or Zoning Board of Appeals, as appropriate, and shall receive final action, unless having been administratively withdrawn for cause by the Community Development Department. 
(Ord. No. 19-2018 , § I, 12-3-2018) 
Sec. 115-284. - Lapse of time requirement for reapplication. 
The following shall apply to the reapplication for a zoning map amendment, variance or special use permit. 
(a)  No application or reapplication for any zoning map amendment affecting the same land or any portion thereof shall be acted upon within 12 months from the date of last action by the Mayor and City Council that defeated a previous rezoning application unless such 12-month period is waived by the Mayor and City Council, and in no case may such an application or reapplication be reconsidered in less than six months from the date of last action by the Mayor and City Council that defeated a previous rezoning application. 
(b)  No application or reapplication for the same type of variance or special use permit affecting the same land or any portion thereof shall be acted upon within 12 months from the date of last action by the Mayor and City Council or Zoning Board of Appeals, as appropriate, that defeated a previous variance or special use perming application unless such 12 month period is waived by the Mayor and City Council or Zoning Board of Appeals, as appropriate, and in no case may such an application or reapplication be reconsidered in less than six months from the date of last action by the Mayor and City Council or Zoning Board of Appeals, as appropriate, that defeated a previous variance or special use permit application. 
(c)  Administrative variances, as outlined in section 115-290, shall not be subject to this time lapse requirement. 
(Ord. No. 19-2018 , § I, 12-3-2018) 
Sec. 115-285. - Zoning board of appeals. 
(a)  Membership and appointment. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall consist of five members who reside within the corporate limits of the city. The members shall be recommended by the Mayor and appointed by the City Council. No member of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall simultaneously hold any employment or elected office within the City Government which is inconsistent with his or her duties on the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
(b)  Terms of office. 
(1)  The term of office of each member of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be for four years, or thereafter until his successor is appointed and qualified. Members may be reappointed. Any vacancy in the membership shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as the initial appointment. 
(2)  Members shall be removable for cause by the Mayor and City Council upon written charges and standards and after a public hearing. 
(3)  Any member of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be disqualified to act upon a matter in which the member has a financial or property interest. 
(c)  Officers. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall elect one of its members as Chairperson and a second one as Vice-Chairperson. The Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson shall serve for one year or until reelected or until successors are elected. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall appoint a Secretary who may be an employee of the city or of the Planning and Zoning Board. 
(d)  Rules of procedure; meetings; minutes, records. 
(1)  The Zoning Board of Appeals hereby adopts the following policies and rules of procedure to govern calling and conducting its hearings. 
(2)  Meetings and hearings of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be at the call of the Chairman and at such other times as the members of the Zoning Board of Appeals may determine. The Chairman or, in his absence, the Vice-Chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses by subpoena. 
(3)  The Zoning Board of Appeals shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the Office of the City Clerk and shall be a public record. 
(4)  All individuals present at a public hearing shall be allowed to voice their opinions at a hearing unless there is a spokesperson representing a particular individual. The Zoning Board of Appeal shall allow a minimum time period at hearings on proposed zoning decisions for presentation of data, evidence, and opinion by proponents of each zoning decision and an equal minimum time period for presentation by opponents of each proposed zoning decision, such minimum time period shall be no less than ten minutes per side. The presiding official shall have the right to limit the maximum amount of time for the presentation of data, evidence, and opinion by proponents and opponents of each zoning decision, provided the maximum time for such presentations is the same for proponents and opponents. 
(5)  Applications shall be considered in the order of filing unless such would work a hardship to the applicant and such consideration is approved by the presiding officer. 
(6)  All public hearings shall be conducted in accordance with the Georgia Open Meetings Law (O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 e t seq. ). 
(7)  It is declared the intention of the Mayor and Council that this section shall constitute policies and procedures required under O.C.G.A. § 36-66-5, and policies and procedures shall be printed and copies thereof shall be available for distribution to the general public by the Community Development Director. 
(e)  Powers of the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
(1)  The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the following powers: 
a.  To hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the Community Development Director in the enforcement, administration or interpretation of this Zoning Ordinance. 
b.  To authorize, upon appeal in specific cases, such variances from the terms of Zoning Ordinance as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the Zoning Ordinance will, in an individual case, result in unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of the Zoning Ordinance shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured and substantial justice done. Such variances may be granted in such individual cases of unnecessary hardship upon a finding by the Zoning Board of Appeals relative to these standards: 
i.  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular property in question because of its size, shape, or topography; 
ii.  The application of Zoning Ordinance to this particular piece of property would create an unnecessary hardship; 
iii.  Such conditions are peculiar to the particular piece of property involved; 
iv.  Such conditions are not the result of any actions of the property owner; 
v.  Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public good nor impair the purposes or intent of the Zoning Ordinance. 
vi.  No variance may be granted for a use of land or building or structure that is prohibited by the Zoning Ordinance or which would result in a greater intensity of development on a property than would otherwise be allowed if no variance were involved. 
c.  The following limitations shall apply to the exercise of the powers granted to the Zoning Board of Appeals: 
i.  Economic considerations may be taken into consideration as a hardship but shall not, of themselves, be the sole criteria upon which the board of appeals may grant a variance. 
ii.  No relief may be granted or action taken under the terms of this section unless such relief can be granted without substantial detriment to the public. No relief that substantially changes the intent and purpose of the current City Comprehensive Plan and the zoning map or this chapter may be granted. 
iii.  For purposes of this section, the term "hardship" means the proposed use of the property and associated structures are not allowed by this chapter or its amendments and no other reasonable alternate use exists for the property. The request for a variance must be based upon the criteria that a physical condition, unique to the particular land, structure or building demands such a variance. If such unique condition exists, a variance may be granted. 
(2)  In exercising the above powers, the Zoning Board of Appeals may, in conformity with the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance, reverse decisions or determinations from which the appeal is taken and, to that end, shall have all the powers of the Community Development Director from whom the appeal is taken and may issue or revoke or direct the issuance or revocation of a building or other permit. 
(Ord. No. 19-2018 , § I, 12-3-2018) 
Sec. 115-286. - Appeals to the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
(a)  Appeals to the Zoning Board of Appeals may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any official of the city affected by any decision of the Community Development Director. 
(1)  Such appeal shall be taken within 30 days after the decision appealed from by filing with the Community Development Director and with the Zoning Board of Appeals a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. 
(2)  The Director shall forthwith transmit to the Zoning Board of Appeals all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
(b)  An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the Community Development Director certifies to the Zoning Board of Appeals that, by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such a case, proceedings shall not be stayed other than by the Zoning Board of Appeals or by a restraining order granted by a court of record on application, and notice to the Community Development Director for good cause shown. 
(Ord. No. 19-2018 , § I, 12-3-2018) 
Sec. 115-287. - Variances to the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
(a)  Authority. Unless otherwise provided for in the Zoning Ordinance, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall have authority to grant variances from the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance, in accordance with the standards and procedures as set forth in this section. 
(b)  Purpose. The purpose of a variance is to provide a mechanism when, owing to special conditions, the strict application of the Zoning Ordinance would impose on a landowner exceptional and undue hardship that can be mitigated without conferring on the applicant special privilege. 
(c)  Initiation. A written petition for a variance is to be initiated by the owner(s) of the subject property or the authorized agent(s) of the owner(s) of the property for which relief is sought. Applications shall be filed on forms provided by the Community Development Department and shall not be considered accepted unless complete in every respect. Application fees shall be as established by the Mayor and City Council. 
(d)  Application procedures. An application for a variance shall be filed with the Community Development Department, accompanied by a non-refundable fee, as established from time to time by the Mayor and City Council, to defray the actual cost of processing the application. The application shall be in such form and shall contain at a minimum the following information and documentation: 
(1)  Name, address, telephone number, fax number and email address of owner(s) and applicant, if not owner. 
(2)  Legal description, street address, lot number and subdivision name, if any, of the property that is the subject of the application. 
(3)  The size of the subject property. 
(4)  The purpose for the requested variance, and a statement of the intended development of the property if the variance is granted. 
(5)  The specific provision of the Zoning Ordinance from which a variance is requested. 
(6)  A statement explaining how the proposed variance is consistent with the general spirit and intent of the Zoning Ordinance and Comprehensive Plan. 
(7)  A statement addressing the applicable standards for a variance from section 115-287(g). 
(e)  Staff report. The staff of the Community Development Department shall conduct a site inspection and shall prepare an analysis of each application for variance. The staff report shall be presented in written form to the Zoning Board of Appeals at least seven days prior to the scheduled hearing date. 
(f)  Public hearing procedures. 
(1)  Before the Zoning Board of Appeals acts upon an application for a Variance, it shall hold a public hearing thereon. 
(2)  The notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published at least 15 days prior to the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation within the territorial boundaries of the City of Norcross. At the hearing any party may appear in person or by agent or attorney. 
(3)  In addition, the Community Development Department shall at least 15 days prior to the hearing erect in a conspicuous place on the property involved a sign which shall contain information as to the variance applied for and the time and place of hearing. 
(g)  Standards for granting variances. 
(1)  Granting variances. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall not grant a variance unless evidence is presented supporting conclusions that the variance meets each of the following standards and criteria: 
a.  Arises from a condition that is unique and peculiar to the land, structures and buildings involved. 
b.  Is necessary because the particular physical surroundings, the size, shape or topographical condition of the specific property involved would result in unnecessary hardship for the owner, lessee or occupants; as distinguished from a mere inconvenience, if the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance are literally enforced. 
c.  The condition requiring the requested relief is not ordinarily found in properties of the same zoning district as the subject property. 
d.  The condition is created by the regulations of the Zoning Ordinance and not by an action or actions of the property owner or the applicant. 
e.  The granting of the variance will not impair or injure other property or improvements in the neighborhood in which the subject property is located, nor impair an adequate supply of light or air to adjacent property, substantially increase the congestion in the public streets, increase the danger of fire, create a hazard to air navigation, endanger the public safety or substantially diminish or impair property values within the neighborhood. 
f.  The variance granted is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of the land, building or structures. 
g.  The variance desired will not be opposed to the general spirit and intent of the Zoning Ordinance or the purpose and intent of the Comprehensive Plan. 
These standards and criteria shall be printed on forms prepared by the Community Development Director and copies thereof shall be available for distribution to the general public. 
(2)  No variance shall be authorized to: 
a.  Allow a structure or use not authorized in the applicable zoning district or a density of development that is not authorized within such district. 
b.  Allow any variance that conflicts with or changes any requirement enacted as a condition of zoning or of a special use permit by the Mayor and City Council. 
c.  Reduce, waive or modify in any manner the minimum lot area established by the Mayor and City Council through a special condition of approval. 
d.  Permit the expansion or enlargement of any non-conforming use of land, non-conforming use of land and buildings in combination, non-conforming use of land and structures in combination, or non-conforming use requiring a special use permit. 
e.  Permit the re-establishment of any non-conforming use of land, non-conforming use of land and buildings in combination, non-conforming use of land and structures in combination, or non-conforming use requiring a special use permit where such use has lapsed. 
(3)  The Zoning Board of Appeals may attach reasonable conditions to a variance when necessary to prevent or minimize adverse impacts upon property or the environment. 
(Ord. No. 19-2018 , § I, 12-3-2018) 
Sec. 115-288. - Burden of proof in appeals and variances. 
(a)  Requirements. It shall be the responsibility of an applicant seeking an appeal or a variance to present facts and evidence to explain how the proposed appeal or variance is consistent with the general spirit and intent of the Zoning Ordinance. 
(b)  Review. It is the duty of the Zoning Board of Appeals to review such facts and evidence in light of the intent of Zoning Ordinance to balance the public health, safety, morality and general welfare against the injury to a specific applicant that would result from the strict application of the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance on the applicant's property. 
(Ord. No. 19-2018 , § I, 12-3-2018) 
Sec. 115-289. - Appeals of decisions of the zoning board of appeals. 
Any person or persons severally or jointly aggrieved by any decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals may present an appeal to the Superior Court. Such an appeal to the Superior Court shall be via Writ of Certiorari as specified in the Official Code of Georgia, except, however, that the appeal shall be filed within 30 days from the date of the decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals. Upon failure to file the appeal within 30 days, the decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 19-2018 , § I, 12-3-2018) 
Sec. 115-290. - Administrative variances. 
(a)  Power to grant administrative variances. The Director shall have the power to grant administrative variances (except for density and use variances) from the development standards as established in the Zoning Ordinance where, in his/her opinion, the intent of the ordinance can be achieved, and equal performance obtained by granting an administrative variance. 
(b)  Limitations on administrative variances. The authority to grant such administrative variances shall be limited to variances from the following requirements: 
(1)  Front yard or yard adjacent to public street - variance not to exceed ten feet. 
(2)  Side yard - variance not to exceed five feet. 
(3)  Rear yard - variance not to exceed ten feet. 
(4)  Height - variance up to but not exceeding ten feet, provided that no increase in the height for a sign or fence may be granted nor may the variance result in an increase in the number of stories than would otherwise be allowed under the applicable zoning district. 
(5)  Buffers - the dimensions or screening treatment of a buffer as required the Zoning Ordinance may be reduced by no more than 50 percent where the Comprehensive Plan recommends a more compatible land use on the neighboring property than that for which said property is actually zoned, or in other situations where the intent of the required buffer can be equally or otherwise achieved; provided, however, that no buffer required as a condition of zoning shall be modified. 
(6)  Reduction in parking spaces - As per the provisions of section 115-156, of Article V. Off-Street Automobile Parking and Loading, and section 115-93 RAOD, Redevelopment Area Overlay District. 
(7)  Demarcation of parking spaces - parking spaces may be left unmarked, provided all of the following conditions are present: 
a.  The parking lot must be designated to serve only a multi-family residential project which is designed and intended for rental occupancy. 
b.  The parking lots must be designed in relation to the internal circulation system such that the areas reserved for parking are easily identified and clearly distinct from the interior driveways because of their location, design, orientation, or configuration, such as in parking areas with a single interior driveway having parking spaces located perpendicular to and along the sides of the access driveway, allowing the curbing to delineate the exterior dimension of the single parking bay. 
c.  Approval for the elimination of the striping has been obtained by the applicant in writing from the City Engineer. 
(c)  Application procedures. 
(1)  Application form and documentation. The application for an administrative variance shall be in such a form and contain such information and documentation as shall be prescribed by the Community Development Department, but shall contain at least the following: 
a.  Name and address of the applicant. 
b.  Legal description of the subject property. 
c.  Size of the subject property. 
d.  A statement of the hardship imposed on the applicant by the Zoning Ordinance and a statement of why the administrative variance will not be materially detrimental or injurious to other property or improvements in the neighborhood in which the subject property is located. 
e.  A notarized letter of consent for proposed administrative variance from adjoining property owners, if required. 
f.  A non-refundable application fee shall accompany the application, as established from time to time by the Mayor and City Council, to defray the actual cost of processing the application. 
(2)  Standards for issuance of administrative variances. In deciding whether to grant an application for an administrative variance, the Director of the Community Development Department shall consider all of the applicable standards provided in the Zoning Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 19-2018 , § I, 12-3-2018) 
ARTICLE X. - RESERVED[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 19-2018 , § I, adopted Dec.3, 2018, repealed Art. X, §s; 115-310—115-316, and amended said provisions to be codified in Art. IX. 

Secs. 115-291—115-335. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS 

Sec. 115-336. - Conflict with other laws. 
Whenever the regulations of this chapter require a greater lot width or depth or size of yard or impose other more restrictive standards than are required in or under any other statute or covenants, the requirements of this chapter shall govern. Whenever the provisions of any other statute or covenants require more restrictive standards than those of this chapter, the provisions of such statutes or covenants shall govern. 
(Code 1979, § 8-4-141; Code 1998, § 106-336; Ord. No. 06-2002, § 106-336, 3-4-2002) 
Sec. 115-337. - Effective date. 
This chapter shall take effect and shall be in force from and after the date of its adoption, the public welfare demanding it. 
(Code 1979, § 8-4-144; Code 1998, § 106-339; Ord. No. 06-2002, § 106-339, 3-4-2002) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1979 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1979 Code which are included herein. Sections of the 1979 Code not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1989 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1989 Code, as updated through Ordinance No. 26-2008, adopted November 3, 2008, which are included herein. Sections of the 1989 Code, as updated, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances which are included herein. Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to Georgia state law. 

 