Title 2 - REVENUE AND TAXATION [1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Cross reference— Finance generally, Ch. 1-8. 
CHAPTER 2-1. - AD VALOREM TAXES Sec. 2-1-1. Authority to levy; purpose. Sec. 2-1-2. Annual levy; property subject to tax; millage rate. Sec. 2-1-3. Annual returns. Sec. 2-1-4. Collection and payment generally. 
Sec. 2-1-1. - Authority to levy; purpose.     As authorized by charter, and acts amendatory thereof, and for support and maintenance of the government of Athens-Clarke County, as ordinary and current expenses, the taxes described in this chapter are hereby levied and assessed, and the following described persons and property shall be subject to the taxes hereinafter prescribed. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1) 
Sec. 2-1-2. - Annual levy; property subject to tax; millage rate.     An annual ad valorem tax is hereby levied upon all real and personal property within Athens-Clarke County not exempt from taxation under state law. The millage rate therefor shall be established by ordinance of the mayor and commission of Athens-Clarke County. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1; Ord. of 7-2-96, § 1; Ord. of 7-6-99, § 1) 
Sec. 2-1-3. - Annual returns.     Every person owning property in Athens-Clarke County on the first day of January of each year shall make a written return to the officer designated by law to accept such return in accordance with the applicable laws of the state and Athens-Clarke County and the rules and regulations applicable to making tax returns to Athens-Clarke County. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1) 
Sec. 2-1-4. - Collection and payment generally.     All ad valorem taxes on tangible property, excluding automobiles, shall be paid in one installment during each calendar year. Such installment is due and payable October twentieth. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1) 
CHAPTER 2-2. - FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS TAX Sec. 2-2-1. Levied. Sec. 2-2-2. Georiga gross receipts defined. Sec. 2-2-3. Filing of return. Sec. 2-2-4. Due date. Sec. 2-2-5. Violations, penalties and interest. Sec. 2-2-6. Examination of records. 
Sec. 2-2-1. - Levied.     Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93, there is hereby levied for the year 1997, and for each year thereafter, an annual business license tax upon state and national banking associations at the rate of twenty-five-hundredths of one percent (0.25%) of the Georgia gross receipts of such institutions as defined in this chapter. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, the minimum amount of business license tax due from any depository financial institutions shall be $1,000.00 per year. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1; Ord. of 10-7-97, § 1) 
Sec. 2-2-2. - Georgia gross receipts defined. (1)  For purposes of this chapter, "Georgia gross receipts" means gross receipts as determined under paragraph (2) of this subsection, unless the taxpayer conducts business both within and outside this state, in which case "Georgia gross receipts" means gross receipts as determined under paragraph (2) of this subsection multiplied by the taxpayer's Georgia gross receipts factor determined under paragraph (3) of subsection (d) of O.C.G.A. § 48-7-31 for the year in which such gross receipts are measured. (2)  For purposes of this Code section, "gross receipts" means the total amount of revenue generated from the sources itemized in this paragraph and in paragraph (3) of this subsection during the calendar year immediately preceding the date on which the tax authorized by this Code section shall be due. Before determining gross receipts, there shall be deducted: (a)  An amount equal to the amount of interest paid on all liabilities for the period; (b)  An amount equal to income derived from the authorized activities of any domestic international banking facility operating pursuant to O.C.G.A., article 5A of chapter 1 of title 7, the "Domestic International Banking Facility Act"; (c)  An amount equal to any income arising from the conduct of a banking business with persons or entities located outside of the United States, its territories or possessions; and (d)  To the extent that any deductions are made pursuant to subparagraphs (b) and (c) of this paragraph, any deductions taken under subparagraph (a) of this paragraph shall be reduced by the same proportion that the deductions in subparagraphs (b) and (c) of this paragraph bear to the gross receipts of the depository financial institution as calculated before making any deductions pursuant to subparagraphs (a) through (c) of this paragraph. (3)  Items to be included in the calculation of gross receipts with respect to banks are as follows: (a)  Interest and fees on loans, less any interest collected on those portions of loans sold and serviced for others; (b)  Interest on balances with other depository financial institutions; (c)  Interest on federal or correspondent funds sold and securities purchased under agreements to resell; (d)  Interest on other bonds, notes, and debentures, excluding interest on obligations of the State of Georgia or its political subdivisions and obligations of the United States; (e)  Dividends on stocks; (f)  Income from direct lease financing; (g)  Income from fiduciary activities; (h)  Service charges on deposit accounts; (i)  Other service charges, commissions, and fees; and (j)  Other income. (4)  Items to be included in the calculation of gross receipts with respect to savings and loan associations are as follows: (a)  Interest on mortgage loans less any interest collected on those portions of loans sold and serviced for others; (b)  Interest on mortgages, participations, or mortgage-backed securities; (c)  Interest on real estate sold on contract; (d)  Discounts on mortgage loans purchased; (e)  Interest on other loans, excluding interest on obligations of the State of Georgia or its political subdivisions and obligations of the United States; (f)  Interest and dividends on investments and deposits; (g)  Loan fees; (h)  Loan servicing fees; (i)  Other fees and charges; (j)  Gross income from real estate owned operations; (k)  Net income from office building operations; (l)  Gross income from real estate held for investment; (m)  Net income from service corporations and subsidiaries; (n)  Miscellaneous operating income; (o)  Profit on sale of real estate owned operations, investment securities, loans and other assets; and (p)  Miscellaneous nonoperating income. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1; Ord. of 10-7-97, § 2) 
Sec. 2-2-3. - Filing of return.     Each depository financial institution within Athens-Clarke County shall file a return of its Georgia gross receipts with the finance department by March first of the year following the year in which such gross receipts are measured. Such return shall be in the same manner and in the form prescribed by the State Revenue Commissioner based on the allocation method set forth in subsection (d) of O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. The return shall provide the same information necessary to determine the portion of the taxpayer's total Georgia gross receipts to be allocated to each taxing jurisdiction in which such institution has a place of business. The tax levied pursuant to section 2-2-1 shall be assessed and collected based upon the information provided in such return. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1; Ord. of 10-7-97, § 3) 
Sec. 2-2-4. - Due date.     The due date of taxes levied by section 2-2-1 shall be April first of each year. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1) 
Sec. 2-2-5. - Violations, penalties and interest. (a)  If any financial institution fails to make a return, the finance director shall make an estimate of the amount of the total receipts which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period or periods in respect to that period a return was not made and shall be based upon any information which is or may come into the possession of the Unified Government of Athens-Clarke County. The finance director shall give written notice of any estimate made under the provisions of this section. (b)  All taxes imposed by this chapter that are not paid by the due date shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month or part of a month from the due date until paid and a penalty of ten percent of the unpaid tax. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1) 
Sec. 2-2-6. - Examination of records.     The finance director or designee shall have the right to examine, inspect, and review all books and records of financial institutions required to collect the tax imposed by this chapter. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1) 
CHAPTER 2-3. - HOTEL-MOTEL EXCISE TAX Sec. 2-3-1. Definitions. Sec. 2-3-2. Penalties. Sec. 2-3-3. Administration generally. Sec. 2-3-4. Imposed; rate. Sec. 2-3-5. Collection generally. Sec. 2-3-6. Exemptions. Sec. 2-3-7. Registration of operator. Sec. 2-3-8. Payment; returns; collection fees; penalties and interest for late payments. Sec. 2-3-9. Determination of deficiency of amount. Sec. 2-3-10. Determination upon failure to file return. Sec. 2-3-11. Overpayment. Sec. 2-3-12. Purchasers or successors of business. Sec. 2-3-13. Legal action to collect. Sec. 2-3-14. Proceeds of the tax. 
Sec. 2-3-1. - Definitions.     For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:     Due date: From the twentieth day after the close of the monthly period for which tax is to be computed.     Guest room: A room occupied or intended, arranged or designed for occupancy, by one or more occupants for the purpose of living quarters or residential use.     Hotel: A hotel, motel, inn, lodge, tourist camp, tourist cabin, or any other place in which rooms, lodgings or accommodations are regularly furnished for value.     Monthly period: The calendar months of any year.     Occupancy: The use or possession or the right to the use or possession of any room or apartment in a hotel or the right to the use or possession of the furnishings or to the services and accommodations accompanying the use and possession of the room.     Occupant: Any person who, for a consideration, uses, possesses, or has the right to use or possess any room in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license to use or other agreement or otherwise.     Operator: Any person operating a hotel in Athens-Clarke County, including, but not limited to, the owner or proprietor of such premises, lessee, sublease, lender in possession, licensee or any other person otherwise operating such hotel.     Permanent resident: Any occupant of a given date who has or shall have occupied or has or shall have the right of occupancy of any guest room in a hotel for more than 30 consecutive days next preceding such date.     Person: An individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint-stock company, corporation, nonprofit corporation or cooperative nonprofit membership, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate or any other group or combination acting as a unit, the plural as well as the singular number excepting the United States of America, the state and any political subdivision thereof of either, upon which Athens-Clarke County is without power to impose the tax herein provided.     Rent: The consideration received for occupancy valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property or services of any kind or nature and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the operator to the occupant, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever.     Return: Any return filed or required to be filed as provided in this chapter.     Tax: The tax imposed by this chapter. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1; Ord. of 11-3-2009, § 1) 
Sec. 2-3-2. - Penalties. (a)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in section 1-1-5. Each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such person and shall be punished accordingly. Any operator or other person who fails to register as required herein or to furnish any return required to be made or who fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the director of finance or who renders a false or fraudulent return shall be deemed guilty of any offense and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as aforesaid. (b)  Any person who fails to pay any taxes due under this chapter shall not be permitted to renew his or her business license or alcoholic beverage license until all such taxes have been paid in full. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1) 
Sec. 2-3-3. - Administration generally. (a)  The director of finance shall administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter for the collection of the tax imposed by this chapter. (b)  Every operator renting guest rooms in Athens-Clarke County to a person shall keep such records, receipts, invoices and other pertinent papers in such form as the director of finance may require. (c)  The director of finance, or designee, may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any operator renting guest rooms to a person and any operator liable for the tax in order to verify the accuracy of any return made or, if no return is made by the operator, to ascertain the amount required to be paid. (d)  In the administration of the provisions of this chapter, the finance director may require the filing of reports by any persons or class of persons having in such person's or persons' possession or custody information relating to rentals of guest rooms which are subject to the tax. The reports shall be filed with the director of finance when required by such director and shall set forth the rental charged for each occupancy, the date or dates of occupancy, and such other information as the director of finance may require. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1) 
Sec. 2-3-4. - Imposed; rate.     There shall be paid a tax of seven percent of the rent for every occupancy of a guest room in a hotel in Athens-Clarke County. The tax imposed by this chapter shall be paid upon any occupancy on and after January 1, 1998, although such occupancy is had pursuant to a contract, lease or other arrangement made prior to such date. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1; Ord. of 11-4-97, § 1) 
Sec. 2-3-5. - Collection generally.     Every operator maintaining a place of business in Athens-Clarke County as provided in section 2-3-4 and renting guest rooms in Athens-Clarke County not exempted under section 2-3-6 shall collect a tax of seven percent on the amount of rent from the occupant. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1; Ord. of 11-4-97, § 2) 
Sec. 2-3-6. - Exemptions. No tax pursuant to this chapter shall be imposed upon the following: (1)  Permanent residents; (2)  Georgia state or local government officials or employees while traveling on official business and using guest rooms furnished for a period of one or more days; (3)  Persons who certify they are staying in a guest room as a result of the destruction of their home or residence by fire or other casualty; (4)  Persons using a meeting room or other such facilities; or (5)  Persons using a guest room provided without charge. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1; Ord. of 11-3-2009, § 2) 
Sec. 2-3-7. - Registration of operator.     Every person engaging or about to engage in business as an operator of a hotel in Athens-Clarke County shall immediately register with the director of finance on a form provided by the same. The privilege of registration after the imposition of the tax shall not relieve any person from the obligation of payment or collection of tax on and after the date of imposition thereof, regardless of registration. The registration shall set forth the name under which such person transacts business or intends to transact business, the location of his or her places of business, and such other information which would facilitate the collection of the tax as the director of finance may require. The registration shall be signed by the owner if a natural person; in case of ownership by an association or partnership, by a member or partner; in the case of ownership by a corporation, by an officer. The director of finance shall, after such registration, issue without charge a certificate of authority to each operator to collect the tax from the occupant. A separate registration shall be required for each place of business of an operator. Each certificate shall state the name and location of the business to which it is applicable. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1) 
Sec. 2-3-8. - Payment; returns; collection fees; penalties and interest for late payments. (a)  All amounts of such taxes shall be due and payable to the director of finance monthly on or before the twentieth date of every month next succeeding each respective monthly period. (b)  On or before the twentieth day of the month following each monthly period, a return for the preceding monthly period shall be filed with the director of finance showing the gross rent, rent from permanent and exempt residents, taxable rents, amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the related period, and such other information as may be required by the director of finance. (c)  Payments received after the twentieth date of the month shall be assessed a penalty of ten percent of the amount due but not less than $100.00 and interest at the rate of one percent per month or any part thereof. (d)  The operator collecting the tax shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and payment of the amount due, if such amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be the same rate authorized for deductions from the state sales and use tax under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-50. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1) 
Sec. 2-3-9. - Determination of deficiency of amount. (a)  If the director of finance is not satisfied with the return or returns of the tax or the amount of the tax required to be paid to Athens-Clarke County by any person, he or she may compute and determine the amount to be paid upon the basis of any information within his or her possession or that may come into his or her possession. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one or more monthly periods. (b)  The amount of the determination shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month or fraction thereof from the due date of the taxes. (c)  The director of finance, or designee, shall give to the operator written notice of his or her determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail, such service shall be addressed to the operator at his address as its appears in the records of the director of finance. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by the addressee. (d)  Except in the case of failure to make a return, every notice of a deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the twentieth day of the calendar month following the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period should last expire. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1; Ord. of 3-2-93, § 1) 
Sec. 2-3-10. - Determination upon failure to file return. (a)  If any person fails to make a return, the director of finance shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the person or, as the case may be, of the amount of the total rentals in Athens-Clarke County which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period or periods in respect to which the person failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information which is or may come into the possession of the director of finance. Written notice shall be given in the manner prescribed in section 2-3-9(c). (b)  The amount of the determination shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month or fraction thereof from the twentieth day of the month of any portion thereof should have been returned, until the date of payment. In addition, a penalty of ten percent of the determination, but not less than $100.00, shall also be assessed for failure to file a return. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1; Ord. of 3-2-93, § 2) 
Sec. 2-3-11. - Overpayment.     Whenever the amount of any tax or interest has been paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by Athens-Clarke County under this chapter, it may be offset by the director of finance. If the operator or person determines that he or she has overpaid or paid more than once, which fact has not been determined by the director of finance, he or she will have three years from the date of payment to file a claim in writing stating the specific ground upon which the claim is founded. The claim shall be audited. If the claim is approved by the director of finance, the excess amount paid Athens-Clarke County may be credited on any amounts then due and payable from the persons by whom it was paid or his or her administrators or executors. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1) 
Sec. 2-3-12. - Purchasers or successors of business. (a)  If any operator liable for any amount under this chapter sells out his business or quits the business, his successors or assigns shall withhold sufficient of the purchase price to cover the amount until the former owner produces a receipt from the director of finance showing that he has been paid or a certificate stating that no amount is due. (b)  If the purchaser of a business fails to withhold funds from the purchase price as required, he or she shall be personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld by him to the extent of the purchase price. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1) 
Sec. 2-3-13. - Legal action to collect.     At any time within three years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and payable and at any time within three years after the delinquency of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected, the director of finance may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction in the name of Athens-Clarke County to collect the amount delinquent, together with interest, court fees, filing fees, attorney's fees and other legal fees incident thereto. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1) 
Sec. 2-3-14. - Proceeds of the tax.     The proceeds of this tax shall be used in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(a)(4.2). (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1; Ord. of 11-4-97, § 3) 
CHAPTER 2-4. - DOWNTOWN ATHENS DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY Sec. 2-4-1. Levy of tax, authority. Sec. 2-4-2. Exemptions. Sec. 2-4-3. Use of taxes collected. 
Sec. 2-4-1. - Levy of tax, authority.     Under the authority of the act creating the Downtown Athens Development Authority (Ga. Law 1977, p.3533), there is hereby levied and assessed on the real property in the downtown Athens area, as defined in the act, an annual tax upon the value of such real estate as fixed by the tax digest of Athens-Clarke County. The millage rate therefor shall be as established each year by ordinance of the mayor and commission of Athens-Clarke County. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1; Ord. of 7-2-96, § 1; Ord. of 7-6-99, § 1) 
Sec. 2-4-2. - Exemptions.     No taxes levied under this chapter for the Downtown Athens Development Authority shall be levied against property occupied by the owner exclusively as a residence or property used exclusively for church and educational purposes. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1) 
Sec. 2-4-3. - Use of taxes collected.     Such taxes as shall result from the levy in this chapter and shall be collected by the mayor and commission of Athens-Clarke County shall be kept in a special fund or funds and shall be used only for the uses allowed under the act creating the Downtown Athens Development Authority. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1; Ord. of 7-2-96, § 1; Ord. of 7-6-99, § 1) 
CHAPTER 2-5. - SALES AND USE TAX Sec. 2-5-1. Sales and use tax. 
Sec. 2-5-1. - Sales and use tax.     A sales and use tax is hereby imposed on behalf of Athens-Clarke County at the rate of one percent, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-8-82 and other applicable provisions of law. (Ord. 1-5-93, § 1) 
CHAPTER 2-6. - REVENUE GENERALLY Sec. 2-6-1. Return check charge. 
Sec. 2-6-1. - Return check charge.     There shall be a service charge of $20.00 on each check returned to Athens-Clarke County after having been dishonored for any reason by the payor's bank. (Ord. 1-5-93, § 1) 
CHAPTER 2-7. - EXCISE TAX ON THE RENTAL OF MOTOR VEHICLE Sec. 2-7-1. Levy of tax. Sec. 2-7-2. Rate. Sec. 2-7-3. Definitions. Sec. 2-7-4. Customer liable for payment of tax. Sec. 2-7-5. Return payment of tax. Sec. 2-7-6. Collection fee. Sec. 2-7-7. Penalties. Sec. 2-7-8. Execution and FIFA. Sec. 2-7-9. Condition for doing business. Sec. 2-7-10. Examination of records authorized. Sec. 2-7-11. Use of tax proceeds. Sec. 2-7-12. Annual audit requirement. Sec. 2-7-13. Termination of authority to levy the tax. 
Sec. 2-7-1. - Levy of tax.     Pursuant to Title 48, Chapter 13, Article 5 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated (O.C.G.A. § 48-13-90 et seq.), authorizing each county and municipality in the State of Georgia to impose, levy, and collect an excise tax upon certain rental motor vehicles, there is hereby levied an excise tax on the charges to the public for such automotive vehicle rentals from locations within Athens-Clarke County; provided, however, that the tax shall not be levied upon the fees or charges for vehicle rentals when such charges for vehicle rentals are excluded as provided in section 2-7-3 ("Definitions") of this chapter.     The rental motor vehicle tax shall be levied and the resulting revenues shall be used pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 48-13-93, subparagraph (a)(2), for the purpose of promoting industry, trade, commerce, and tourism; for the provision of convention, trade, sports, and recreational facilities; and for public safety purposes, as described more particularly in section 2-7-11 ("Use of Tax Proceeds") of this chapter. (Ord. of 6-12-2001, § 1) 
Sec. 2-7-2. - Rate.     The rental motor vehicle tax rate shall be three percent of taxable charges to the public for rental of motor vehicles within Athens-Clarke County. (Ord. of 6-12-2001, § 1) 
Sec. 2-7-3. - Definitions.     The following words and terms shall have the meanings shown below when used in this chapter: (a)  Rental motor vehicle means a motor vehicle designed to carry ten or fewer passengers and used primarily for the transportation of persons that is rented or leased without a driver regardless of whether such vehicle is licensed in this state. (b)  Taxable charges are the total charges received by a rental motor vehicle business for the rental or lease of a motor vehicle for 31 or fewer consecutive days, including the total cash and nonmonetary consideration for the rental or lease including, but not limited to, charges based on time or mileage and charges for insurance coverage or collision damage waiver, but excluding all charges for motor fuel taxes and sales taxes. Taxable charges shall not include rental charges associated with the rental or lease of a rental motor vehicle if either: (1) the customer picks up the rental motor vehicle outside this state and returns it in this state; or (2) the customer picks up the rental motor vehicle in this state and returns it outside this state. (c)  Taxable event: Rental charges collected by a rental motor vehicle business when such charge constitutes a taxable event for purposes of sales and use tax under O.C.G.A. Title 48, Chapter 8, Article 1, shall be deemed a taxable event for purposes of this chapter. The tax levied hereunder shall be imposed only at the time when and place where a customer pays sales tax with respect to the rental charge. (d)  A rental motor vehicle business is a person or any other legal entity which owns or leases five or more rental motor vehicles and which regularly rents or leases such vehicles to the public for value. (Ord. of 6-12-2001, § 1) 
Sec. 2-7-4. - Customer liable for payment of tax.     A customer who pays a rental charge that is subject to a tax levied pursuant to this chapter shall be liable for the tax. The tax shall be paid by the customer to the rental motor vehicle business, and shall be a debt of the customer to the rental motor vehicle business until it is paid and shall be recoverable at law in the same manner as authorized for the recovery of other debts. (Ord. of 6-12-2001, § 1) 
Sec. 2-7-5. - Return payment of tax.     The rental motor vehicle business collecting the tax shall remit the tax to the finance department of Athens-Clarke County, and the tax remitted shall be a credit against the tax imposed on the rental motor vehicle business. Every rental motor vehicle business subject to a tax levied pursuant to this chapter shall be liable for the tax at the applicable rate on the rental charges actually collected or the amount of taxes collected from the customers, whichever is greater.     Each rental motor vehicle business collecting said tax shall on or before the twentieth day of each month transmit to the finance department a return showing the total automotive rental charges collected during the preceding calendar month, the amounts of the various exclusions as provided by this chapter, and the tax amount due. Said rental motor vehicle business shall remit the tax to the finance department with its monthly tax return. Such return shall be submitted on a form prescribed by the director of finance. (Ord. of 6-12-2001, § 1) 
Sec. 2-7-6. - Collection fee.     Each rental motor vehicle business collecting the tax levied by this chapter shall be allowed a collection fee of three percent of the tax due. Such collection fee shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction from the tax amount due, provided that the amount due is not delinquent at the time of payment, and provided further that no other Athens-Clarke County taxes, fees, or assessments are delinquent. (Ord. of 6-12-2001, § 1) 
Sec. 2-7-7. - Penalties.     When any person liable hereunder fails to make a return or pay the full amount of the required tax, a penalty shall be added to the tax in the amount of $25.00 or ten percent, whichever is greater, if the failure is for not more than 30 days, plus one percent penalty interest for each additional 30 days or portion thereof during which the failure continues; provided, however, that if such failure is due to providential cause shown to the satisfaction of the finance director in affidavit form attached to the return and remittance is within 10 days of the due date, such returns may be accepted exclusive of penalties and interest. In the case of a false or fraudulent return or the failure to file a return where willful intent exists to defraud Athens-Clarke County of any tax due herein, a specific penalty of fifty percent of the tax due shall be assessed. All penalties and interest imposed herein shall be payable and collectible by the finance department in the manner as if they were a part of the tax imposed. (Ord. of 6-12-2001, § 1) 
Sec. 2-7-8. - Execution and FIFA.     In any case where a person or firm liable for paying rental motor vehicle taxes as provided herein fails to do so, the finance director shall be authorized to determine the amount of taxes due using the best information available, either by return filed or by other means, and to execute and record one or more FIFAs for such unpaid taxes. Any FIFA so executed and recorded shall constitute a lien on the real property of the facility for which the tax is due, and such portion of any other real property owned by said person or firm as may be required to satisfy the total amount due in taxes and penalties. (Ord. of 6-12-2001, § 1) 
Sec. 2-7-9. - Condition for doing business.     Payment of rental motor vehicle taxes as provided by this chapter is a condition for doing business within Athens-Clarke County, and failure to pay the tax shall be grounds for revocation of occupation tax certificate. (Ord. of 6-12-2001, § 1) 
Sec. 2-7-10. - Examination of records authorized.     For the purpose of ascertaining the correctness of any return required to be filed by this chapter, or to determine the amount of taxes due, any authorized representative of Athens-Clarke County shall have free and complete access at all reasonable times to any books, papers, records, or other information bearing upon said return or taxes due. (Ord. of 6-12-2001, § 1) 
Sec. 2-7-11. - Use of tax proceeds.     Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-93, subparagraph (a)(2), this chapter levying an excise tax on rental motor vehicles shall specify with particularity the authorized projects or purposes, or both, for which proceeds of the tax are to be expended in each fiscal year during which the tax is collected. Such tax proceeds shall be used for one or more of the following purposes: (a)  Promoting industry, trade, commerce, and tourism; (b)  Capital outlay projects consisting of the construction of convention, trade, sports, and recreational facilities, or public safety facilities, including the acquiring, constructing, renovating, improving, and equipping of parking facilities, pedestrian walkways, plazas, connections, and other public improvements associated with such convention, trade, sports, and recreational facilities or public safety facilities or the retirement of debt issued with respect to such capital outlay projects; and (c)  Maintenance and operation expenses or security and public safety expenses associated with capital outlay projects funded pursuant to subparagraph (b) above.     Amounts collected pursuant to this chapter may be expended pursuant to a contract or contracts with a county, municipality, development authority, downtown development authority, urban redevelopment authority, recreation authority, or any combination of two or more of such entities. (Ord. of 6-12-2001, § 1) 
Sec. 2-7-12. - Annual audit requirement.     As a part of the annual audit report required under O.C.G.A. § 36-81-7, the auditor shall include, in a separate schedule, a report of the revenues and expenditures pertaining to the tax under this chapter. (Ord. of 6-12-2001, § 1) 
Sec. 2-7-13. - Termination of authority to levy the tax.     Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-93, subparagraph (a)(4), the tax levied by this chapter shall terminate not later than December 31, 2038, and thereafter Athens-Clarke County shall not be authorized to levy a rental motor vehicle tax. (Ord. of 6-12-2001, § 1) 