Title 5 - UTILITIES 
CHAPTER 5-1. - SEWER USE[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Editor's note— Ord. of 10-2-2018(1), § 1 , amended Ch. 5-1 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 5-1 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. of 10-3-95, § 1; Ord. of 7-2-96, § 1; Ord. of 7-7-98, § 1; Ord. of 7-6-99, § 1; Ord. of 5-7-2002, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 5-6-2008, § 1; Ord. of 5-5-2009, § 1; Ord. of 10-6-2009, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 2-7-2017(3), §§ 1—3; Ord. of 12-5-2017(1), § 1; Ord. of 7-5-2018, §§ 1—3. 
Sec. 5-1-1. - General provisions. (a)  Purpose and policy. This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for users of the publicly owned treatment works (POTW) for Athens-Clarke County and enables Athens-Clarke County to comply with all applicable state and federal laws including the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq.), and the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 CFR part 403). The objectives of this chapter are: (1)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW that will interfere with the operation of the POTW; (2)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW which will pass through the POTW, inadequately treated, into receiving waters or otherwise be incompatible with the POTW; (3)  To ensure that the quality of the wastewater treatment plant sludge is maintained at a level which allows its use and disposal in compliance with applicable statutes and regulations; (4)  To protect POTW personnel who may be affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment and to protect the general public; (5)  To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewater and sludge from the POTW, enhancing the prospects for beneficial reuse; (6)  To provide for fees for the equitable distribution of the cost of operation, maintenance and improvements to the POTW; (7)  To enable Athens-Clarke County to comply with its NPDES permit conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements and any other federal or state laws to which the POTW is subject; and (8)  To improve water quality in Athens-Clarke County.     This chapter shall apply to all users of the POTW. This chapter authorizes the issuance of wastewater discharge permits; authorizes monitoring, compliance and enforcement activities; establishes administrative review procedures; requires user reporting; and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein. (b)  Administration. Except as otherwise provided herein, the public utilities director shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this chapter. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the public utilities director may be delegated by the public utilities director to other public utilities department personnel. (c)  Definitions. Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this chapter, shall have the meanings hereinafter designated.     "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive or discretionary. The use of the singular shall be construed to include the plural and the plural shall include the singular as indicated by the context of its use. (1)  Act or the Act: The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C 1251 et seq. (2)  Athens-Clarke County: The Unified Government of Athens Clarke County. (3)  Authorized representative of the user: a.  If the user is a corporation, authorized representative shall mean: 1.  The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; 2.  The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operation facilities employing more than 250 persons or having gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding $25 million, if authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures; b.  If the user is a partnership, copartnership, limited liability company, or sole proprietorship, an authorized representative shall mean a general partner, manager or proprietor, respectively; c.  If the user is a federal, state or local governmental facility, an authorized representative shall mean a director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility, or his/her designee; d.  The individuals described in paragraphs a, b, c above may designate another authorized representative if the authorization is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, and the written authorization is submitted to public utilities director. (4)  Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD): The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure, five (5) days at 20 degrees Celsius expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/l). (5)  Biological substance : A substance from hospitals, medical clinics, medical laboratories, dental laboratories, dental clinics, health care facilities, necropsy facilities, research laboratories, biological research facilities, animal hospitals, veterinarian research facilities, or from other similar facilities, which 1) cannot be treated to acceptable levels by the wastewater treatment process, or 2) may contain either a pathogenic substance or an experimental biological substance. (6)  Building drain: That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five (5) feet outside the inner face of the building wall. (7)  Building sewer: The extension from the building drain to the POTW or other place of disposal, also called house connection. (8)  Categorical pretreatment standard or categorical standard: Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the U.S. EPA in accordance with sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1317) which apply to a specific category of industrial users and which appear in 40 CFR chapter I, subchapter N, parts 405-471. (9)  Chemical oxygen demand (COD): A quantitative measure of the amount of oxygen required for the chemical oxidation of carbonaceous (organic) material in wastewater using inorganic dichromate or permanganate salts as oxidants in a two-hour test. (10)  Color: The optical density at the visual wave length of maximum absorption, relative to distilled water. One hundred percent transmittance is equivalent to zero (0.0) optical density. (11)  Commission: The Mayor and Commission of the Unified Government of Athens-Clarke County. (12)  Composite sample: The sample resulting from the combination of individual wastewater samples taken at selected intervals based on an increment of either flow or time. (13)  Domestic wastewater: Water-carried wastes of human origin, as opposed to commercial or industrial activities. (14)  Easement: An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others. (15)  Effluent: The wastewater or other liquid which flows out of a basin, treatment process, or treatment plant. (16)  Environmental Protection Agency or EPA: The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the term may also be used as a designation for the regional water management division director or other duly authorized official of said agency. (17)  Environmental Protection Division or EPD: The State of Georgia Department of Natural Resources Environmental Protection Division. (18)  Existing source: Any source of discharge, the construction or operation of which commenced prior to the publication of proposed categorical pretreatment standards which will be applicable to such source if the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with section 307 of the Act. (19)  Fats, Oils, and Grease or FOG : Free, emulsified, or dissolved material from mineral, animal, or vegetable sources. FOG shall be analyzed using EPA method 1664, latest revision, n-Hexane Extractable Material (HEM, Oil and Grease). Non-polar FOG (associated with mineral sources) shall be analyzed using EPA method 1664, latest revision, Silica-Gel Treated n-Hexane Extractable Material (SGT-HEM, Non-Polar Material). The terms "fats, oils, and grease," "oil and grease," "oil and grease substances," and "grease" shall be included within this definition. (20)  Garbage: Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce. (21)  General pretreatment regulations: "The General Pretreatment Regulations for Existing and New Sources of Pollution," published in the Federal Register, 40 CFR 403, on June 26, 1978, and any revisions to same. (22)  Grab sample: A sample which is taken from a waste stream on a one-time basis without regard to the flow in the waste stream and collected over a period of time not exceeding 15 minutes. (23)  Grit: The heavy suspended mineral matter present in water or wastewater such as sand, gravel, or cinders. (24)  Indirect discharge: The introduction of pollutants into the POTW from any nondomestic source regulated under section 307(b), (c) or (d) of the Act. (25)  Industrial wastewater: Water-carried waste of commercial or industrial origin. (26)  Industrial user: An industrial facility, such as a processing or manufacturing plant, discharging wastewaters from domestic, manufacturing, or other process sources to the POTW. (27)  Instantaneous maximum allowable discharge limit: The maximum concentration (or loading) of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete or composite sample collected, independent of the flow rate and the duration of the sampling event. (28)  Interference: A discharge which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources: 1) Inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes, uses or disposal; and 2) therefore is a cause of a violation of Athens-Clarke County's NPDES permit or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with any of the following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued thereunder: section 405 of the Clean Water Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA), including Title II commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); any state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the SWDA; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act; and the Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act. (29)  Mass limit: The weight of material discharged during a given time interval. Unless otherwise specified, the mass limit shall mean pounds per day of the particular constituent or combination of constituents. (30)  Meat packing plants: Plants that carry out both the slaughtering and processing of cattle, calves, hogs, poultry, sheep, fish or other animals for the preparation of meat products and byproducts. The slaughtering of animals includes killing and hide removal in the case of cattle, calves and sheep; and scalding and dehairing for hogs; eviscerating; washing of carcasses; plucking of feathers in the case of fowl; washing of the carcasses and cooling. The processing function shall have as its main product fresh meat as whole, half or quarter carcasses or smaller meat cuts, sausages, cooked meats, cured meats, smoked meats, canned meats, frozen or fresh meat cuts, natural sausage casings and other prepared meats and meat specialties. (31)  Medical waste: Isolation wastes, infectious agents, blood and blood byproducts, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, fomites, etiologic agents, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes and dialysis wastes. (32)  National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System or NPDES permit: A permit issued to a POTW or an industry pursuant to section 402 of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1342). (33)  New source: a.  Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under section 307(c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1317) which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that: 1.  The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; or 2.  The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or 3.  The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should be considered. b.  Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting the criteria of subsections a.2. or 3. above, but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment. c.  Construction of a new source as defined under this paragraph has commenced if the owner or operator has: 1.  Begun, or caused to begin as part of a continuous onsite construction program. i.  Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment, or ii.  Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or 2.  Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this paragraph. (34)  Nonsignificant categorical industrial user: Industrial user subject to categorical pretreatment standards which discharges less than a total of 100 gallons per day of categorical process water. (35)  Pass through: A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the U.S. in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of Athens-Clarke County's NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation). (36)  Person: Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or assigns. This definition includes all federal, state or local governmental entities. (37)  pH: A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a substance, expressed in standard units. (38)  Pollutant: Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes, industrial wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, agricultural and industrial wastes, and the characteristics of the wastewater (i.e., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, odor. (39)  Pretreatment: The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater prior to or in lieu of introducing such pollutants into the POTW. This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes, by processing changes, or by other means, except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard. (40)  Pretreatment requirements: Any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment imposed on a user, other than a pretreatment standard. (41)  Pretreatment standard or standards: Pretreatment standards shall mean prohibitive discharge standards, categorical pretreatment standards, and local limits. (42)  Private wastewater disposal system: A wastewater disposal system requiring an absorption field, unless otherwise stated. (43)  Properly shredded garbage: The wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension. (44)  Prohibited discharge standards or prohibited discharge: Absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances; these prohibitions appear in section 5-1-2(c) of this chapter. (45)  Publicly owned treatment works or POTW: A treatment works as defined by section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1292), which is owned by the state or municipality. This definition includes any devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes and any conveyances which convey wastewater to the POTW. The term also means the municipal entity having jurisdiction over the users and responsibility for the operation and maintenance of the treatment works. (46)  Public utilities director: The person designated by Athens-Clarke County to supervise the operations of the POTW, and who is charged with certain duties and responsibilities by this chapter or his duly authorized representative. (47)  Septic tank waste: Any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, and septic tanks. (48)  Sewage: Human excrement and gray water (household showers, dishwashing operations, etc.). (49)  Sewer user charge: The sewer use charge includes the charges established annually by the Commission through which each sanitary sewer user pays for the use of the POTW to dispose of the user's wastewater. The total sewer user charge is the sum of the sewer user charge as defined herein plus the surcharge as defined in subparagraph (56). (50)  Significant user: Any user of the wastewater system that i) discharges an average of 25,000 gpd or more of wastewater, ii) contributes a wastestream which makes up five (5) percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the treatment plant or, iii) is designated as significant by Athens-Clarke County on the basis that the user has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement. (51)  Significant noncompliance: Significant noncompliance is defined in section 5-1-9. (52)  Sludge: The accumulated settleable solids separated from liquids, such as water or wastewater, during processing. (53)  Slug load: Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration which could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in section 5-1-2(c) of this chapter or any discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature, including, but not limited to, an accidental spill or a non-customary batch discharge. (54)  Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) Code: A classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the U.S. Office of Management and Budget. (55)  Stormwater: Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation, and resulting therefrom, including snowmelt. (56)  Surcharge: A sewer use charge based on pollutant concentrations in excess of the domestic wastewater concentrations contained in Table 5-1-2(f). (57)  Suspended solids: The total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater, or other liquid, and which is removable by laboratory filtering. (58)  Toxic pollutant: One of the pollutants, or combination of those pollutants, listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the EPA under the provision of section 307 (33 U.S.C. 1317) of the Act. (59)  Treatment plant effluent: Any discharge of pollutants from the POTW into waters of the state. (60)  User or sewer user : Any source of indirect discharge into the POTW. (61)  Wastewater: Liquid and water-carried industrial wastes, and sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are contributed to the POTW. (62)  Wastewater treatment plant or treatment plant: That portion of the POTW designed to provide treatment of sewage and industrial waste. (d)  Abbreviations: The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings:     BOD - five-day biochemical oxygen demand     CFR - Code of Federal Regulations     COD - chemical oxygen demand     EPA - U.S. Environmental Protection Agency     EPD - Georgia Department of Natural Resources Environmental Protection Division     FOG - Fats, oils, and grease     Gpd - gallons per day     mg/l - milligrams per liter     NPDES - National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System     O&M - operation and maintenance     POTW - publicly owned treatment works     RCRA - Resource Conservation and Recovery Act     SIC - standard industrial classifications     SWDA - Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 U.S.C. 6901 et seq.)     TKN - total Kjeldahl nitrogen     TP - total phosphorus     TSS - total suspended solids     USC - United States Code ( Ord. of 10-2-2018(1), § 1 ) 
Sec. 5-1-2. - General sewer use requirements. (a)  Use of public sewers required: (1)  Disposal of human and animal waste required. It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within Athens-Clarke County, or in any area under the jurisdiction of Athens-Clarke County, any human or animal excrement or garbage. Definition: As used in the exception provided for below, "gray water" means wastewater discharged from residential lavatories, bathtubs, showers, clothes washers, and laundry trays. Exception: Private residential direct reuse of gray water shall be lawful if the following conditions are met: a.  Gray water originating from the residence shall be used and contained within the property boundary for household gardening, composting, lawn watering, or landscape irrigation; b.  Gray water shall not be used for irrigation of food plants; c.  The gray water shall not contain hazardous chemicals derived from activities such as cleaning car parts, washing greasy or oily rags, or disposing of waste solutions from home photo labs or similar hobbyist or home occupational activities; d.  The application of gray water shall be managed to minimize standing water on the surface; e.  The application of gray water shall be outside the floodway; f.  The gray water shall not contain water used to wash diapers or similarly soiled or infectious garments unless the gray water is disinfected before irrigation; and g.  The gray water shall be applied only by hand watering using garden watering cans or similar hand-held containers. The enforcement and administration of the exception provided for above will be in accordance with enforcement and administrative provisions of Chapter 5-1. (2)  Discharge to natural outlets. It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within Athens-Clarke County, or in any area under the jurisdiction of Athens-Clarke County, any wastewater or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter. (3)  Privy, septic tank, cesspool or other facilities. Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of wastewater. (4)  Toilet facilities and connection to public sewer required. The owner(s) of all houses, buildings or properties used for human and/or animal occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within Athens-Clarke County and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located, or may in the future be located, a public sanitary sewer of said Athens-Clarke County is hereby required at the owner's expense, to install suitable toilet facilities therein and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter within 30 days after the date of official notice to do so; provided the public sewer is within 200 feet of the property line. (5)  Maintenance of private building sewers. All sewer users, including all residential sewer users, are required to maintain building sewers and other private sewer lines and laterals in good condition and in accordance with the International Property Maintenance Code Section 506.2. Such private sewers shall be maintained to prevent infiltration and inflow of surface water and/or groundwater, and to prevent sewage from entering the storm sewer system or surface waters. (6)  Force main connections. It shall be unlawful for any person, without the consent of the mayor and commission, to connect to the Athens-Clarke County sanitary sewage system by means of any force main from a pumping facility or apparatus. If any person should desire to connect a force sanitary sewer main with the sewage system of Athens-Clarke County, such person shall make written application to the mayor and commission. Such application shall be accompanied by detailed plans and specifications of such proposal, together with such other pertinent information as may be required by the Athens-Clarke County Public Utilities Department. The mayor and commission shall proceed to act on such application and shall take into consideration whether or not such would impose a burden on Athens-Clarke County, and in this connection shall consider the useful life of the plumbing facility, the replacement cost thereof, maintenance and repairs thereof, power costs, inflationary trends and any other costs or expense factors in connection therewith. After considering such factors, the mayor and commission may require the deposit of a sum of money with Athens-Clarke County by the applicant to compensate Athens-Clarke County for the burden thereof. The mayor and commission may require the conveyance of such pumping facility, together with all appurtenances connected therewith, to Athens-Clarke County, together with such certificates of title or evidence of ownership as might be required by Athens-Clarke County. It is the intent of this provision that such pumping facility should not become a burden to Athens-Clarke County in operating and maintaining the same. The mayor and commission shall then deny or grant such request. One-family residences and duplexes containing two-family units are exempted from the provisions of this section; except, that a permit shall be obtained by the owner thereof from the Athens-Clarke County Building Permits and Inspection Department prior to installing a sewage pumping device to any sanitary line which connects with the POTW. The plans and design of any such device shall be approved by the Athens-Clarke County Building Permits and Inspection Department prior to installation. Any person who shall violate the provisions of this section may, after notice and hearing before administrative hearing officer, have his sewer and other Athens-Clarke County utility services discontinued, in the discretion of the administrative hearing officer. (b)  Private wastewater disposal systems: (1)  Provisions for private system. Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of section 5-1-2(a)(4), building sewers shall be connected to private wastewater disposal systems complying with the provisions of this section. A private wastewater disposal system shall be a wastewater disposal system requiring an absorption field, unless otherwise stated. (2)  Permit and fees. Before commencement of construction of a private wastewater disposal system the owner(s) shall first obtain a written permit signed by the plumbing inspector. The application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the Athens-Clarke County Building Permits and Inspection Department, which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications, and other information as are deemed necessary by the plumbing inspector. Permit fees as required by the Athens-Clarke County Plumbing Code shall be paid to Athens-Clarke County at the time the application is filed. (3)  Inspection of construction. A permit for a private wastewater disposal system shall not become effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the plumbing inspector. The plumbing inspector shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction, and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the plumbing inspector when the work is ready for final inspection, and before any underground portions are covered. The inspections shall be made in a reasonable length of time by the plumbing inspector. (4)  Design specifications. The type, capacities, location, and layout of a private wastewater disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the Clarke County Health Department Sanitarian. No permit shall be issued for any private wastewater disposal systems employing subsurface soil disposal where the lot area is less than the minimum requirements specified by the Clarke County Health Department Sanitarian. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet. (5)  Connecting existing system to the public sewer. At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private wastewater disposal system, as provided in section 5-1-2(a)(4), a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer within 30 calendar days in compliance with this chapter; provided, that a person shall be entitled to continue to utilize any private wastewater disposal system which may be in use at the time the public sewer becomes available within 200 feet of property line for so long as such system functions properly for the treatment of wastewater as determined by the public utilities director. (6)  Operation and maintenance. The owner(s) shall operate and maintain the private wastewater disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times in accordance with the conditions of the operating permit, at no expense to Athens-Clarke County. All sludges and byproducts of private wastewater facilities shall be disposed of as provided by section 5-1-3(e) of this chapter. Such facilities shall be subject to inspection by the Clarke County Sanitarian at reasonable times. Athens-Clarke County recommends that septic tank disposal systems be inspected on intervals of not less than every five years, and maintenance performed as needed, at the owner's expense. (7)  Requirements of other authorities. No requirement contained in this Article shall be construed to relieve the applicant of any additional requirements that may be imposed by other authorities having legal jurisdiction. (c)  Prohibited discharge standards. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass through or interference. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other National, State or local pretreatment standards or requirement. Furthermore, no user may contribute the following substances to the POTW: (1)  Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW, including, but not limited to wastestreams with a closed-cup flashpoint of less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit (60 degrees Celsius) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21. (2)  Any wastewater having a pH less than 5.5 or more than 10.0, or otherwise causing corrosive structural damage to the POTW or equipment, or endangering Athens-Clarke County personnel. (3)  Solid or viscous substances in amounts which, alone or in conjunction with other pollutants, will cause obstruction of the flow in the POTW resulting in interference, but in no case solids greater than one and one-half (1½) inches in any dimension. This includes, but is not limited to, wastepaper, wood, plastics, sheets, towels, personal wet wipes and other waste that does not disintegrate in the POTW. (4)  Any wastewater containing pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, COD, etc.), released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause interference with either the POTW; or any wastewater treatment or sludge process, or which will constitute a hazard to humans or animals. (5)  Any wastewater having a temperature greater than 150 degrees Fahrenheit, or which will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant to exceed 104 degrees Fahrenheit. (6)  Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin (non-polar FOG), in excess of 100 mg/l. (7)  Any pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems. (8)  Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by Athens-Clarke County in accordance with section 5-1-3(e). (9)  Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance, a hazard to life, or to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance and repair. (10)  Any wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the POTW treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to the treatment plant's effluent. Color (in combination with turbidity) shall not cause the treatment plant effluent to reduce the depth of the compensation point for photosynthetic activity by more than ten percent from the seasonably established norm for aquatic life. (11)  Any wastewater which results in secondary effluent from a POTW treatment plant having ultraviolet transmittance less than the design basis for such plant's ultraviolet disinfection process. (12)  Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except as specifically approved by the public utilities director in compliance with applicable State or Federal regulations. (13)  Stormwater, surface water, ground water, artesian well water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, condensate, deionized water, and unpolluted industrial wastewater, unless specifically authorized by the public utilities director. (14)  Non-contact cooling tower water may be discharged to the POTW only if the system operates at four or more cycles of concentration. New non-contact cooling towers that discharge to the POTW shall include conductivity controllers, make-up flow meters, and blowdown flow meters. (15)  Any sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of wastes. (16)  Any medical wastes or biological substances, except as specifically authorized by the public utilities director. (17)  Any wastewater, alone or in conjunction with other sources, causing the treatment plant's effluent to fail a toxicity test. (18)  Any wastes containing detergents, surface active agents, or other substances which may cause excessive foaming in the POTW. (19)  Any wastewater causing two readings on an explosion hazard meter at the point of discharge into the POTW, or at any point in the POTW, of more than five percent (5%) or any single reading over ten percent (10%) of the Lower Explosive Limit (LEL) of the meter. Materials specifically prohibited from discharge into the POTW include gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, fuel oil, paints, solvents, or any other substance which may cause a fire or explosion hazard to the POTW. (20)  Any garbage that has not been properly shredded; however, the installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of one-half (½) horsepower or greater, or will allow particle size of one-half (½) inch in any dimension or greater to be discharged to the sewer system shall be subject to the review and approval of Athens-Clarke County. Discharge of ground paper products to the sewer system is prohibited. (21)  Non-residential facilities (all facilities except houses and apartments) are prohibited from disposing of medications to the sewer except as authorized by the public utilities director. Residential customers are not prohibited from disposing of medications to the sewer; however, they are encouraged to use alternative disposal practices, including disposal with municipal solid waste facilities or voluntary take-back programs, to the extent that such practices are acceptable to the US Drug Enforcement Agency. (22)  Any hauled waste from facilities that treat, store, or transfer waste from sources outside the facility grounds, such as a centralized waste facility, transfer station, or landfill. Wastes prohibited by this section shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be discharged to the POTW. All floor drains located in process or materials storage areas must discharge to the user's pretreatment facility before connecting with the POTW. (d)  Federal categorical pretreatment standards. The national categorical pretreatment standards found at 40 CFR chapter I, subchapter N, parts 405-471 are hereby incorporated. Any amendments thereto are hereby incorporated herein. (e)  Specific pollutant limitations. The following pollutant limits in Table 5-1-2(e) are established to protect against pass through, interference and sludge contamination at the North Oconee and Middle Oconee WRFs. Other than hauled waste, no person shall discharge wastewater containing in excess of the following maximum daily average concentrations and the instantaneous maximum allowable concentration for cyanide unless allowed by a wastewater discharge permit. Table 5-1-2(e). Specific Pollutant Limitations for North Oconee and Middle Oconee WRF Indirect Discharges to Take Effect on July 1, 2019 Pollutant North Oconee WRF Collection System Middle Oconee WRF Collection System Maximum Daily Average Concentration (mg/l) Maximum Instantaneous Concentration (mg/l) Maximum Daily Average Concentration (mg/l) Maximum Instantaneous Concentration (mg/l) Arsenic 0.14 0.48 Cadmium 0.013 0.11 Chromium 2.0 10 Copper 0.044 0.91 Cyanide 0.62 1.15 Not applicable 1.15 Lead 0.19 0.48 Mercury 0.00025 0.0072 Nickel 1.3 5.7 Selenium 0.30 1.0 Silver 0.079 0.76 Zinc 3.3 16 Phenol 42 42  (1)  Specific pollutant limitations apply at the point where the waste is discharged to the POTW (or to an upstream collection system such as the one owned and operated by the University of Georgia). All concentrations include soluble and particulate forms and all oxidation states (as applicable) unless indicated otherwise. (2)  The mercury concentration limit for the North Oconee WRF collection system is less than the reporting limit for EPA method 245.7. Compliance must be demonstrated using a "low level" analytical method with reporting limit no higher than the concentration limit. (f)  Conventional pollutant limitations . The conventional pollutant limits in Table 5-1-2(f) are established to protect the POTW throughout the wastewater collection system and at all WRFs. Other than hauled waste, no person shall discharge wastewater containing in excess of the following maximum daily average concentrations. Table 5-1-2(f). Conventional Pollutant Limitations for All Indirect Discharges Pollutant Domestic Wastewater Concentration (mg/l) Maximum Daily Average Concentration (mg/l) 5-Day biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) 250 1,000 Total suspended solids (TSS) 250 750 Total Kjeldahl nitrogen (TKN) 50 100 Total phosphorus (TP) 6 15 Polar fats, oils, and grease (FOG) 100 200 Non-polar oils Not applicable 100  (g)  Discharges with pollutant concentrations in excess of those for domestic wastewater stated above may result in a surcharge, as described in Sections 5-1-1(c)(56), 5-1-42 and 5-1-43(c), unless superseded by a mass limit contained in an Industrial Pretreatment Permit issued by Athens-Clarke County. (h)  The concentration limit for oxidized nitrogen (nitrate plus nitrite, as nitrogen) shall be 0.5 mg/l more than the oxidized nitrogen concentration in Athens-Clarke County potable water supply to a facility. (i)  Concentrations apply at the point where the waste is discharged to the POTW. For process discharges less than 25,000 gallons over 24 hours, the public utilities director may impose mass limitations for any parameter identified in subparagraph (e) or (f) calculated at 25,000 gpd in addition to or in place of the concentration-based limitations above, even if the equivalent concentration at flows less than 25,000 gpd exceed the concentration limits stated in subsection (e) or (f). (j)  Athens-Clarke County's right of revision. Athens-Clarke County reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in wastewater discharge permits, more stringent standards or requirements on discharges to the POTW if deemed necessary to comply with the objectives presented in section 5-1-1 of this chapter or the general and specific prohibitions in section 5-1-2(c) of this chapter. (k)  Special agreement. Athens-Clarke County reserves the right to enter into special agreements with users setting out special terms under which they may discharge to the POTW. In no case will a special agreement waive compliance with a pretreatment standard or requirement. However, the industrial user may request a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance with 40 CFR 403.15. The user may also request a variance from the categorical pretreatment standard from EPA. Such a request will be approved only if the industrial user can prove that factors relating to its discharge are fundamentally different from the factors considered by EPA when establishing that pretreatment standard. An industrial user requesting a fundamentally different factor variance must comply with the procedural and substantive provisions in 40 CFR 403.13. (l)  Dilution. No user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation unless expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement. The public utilities director may impose mass limitations on users which are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements or in other cases when the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate. ( Ord. of 10-2-2018(1), § 1 ) 
Sec. 5-1-3. - Pretreatment of wastewater. (a)  Pretreatment facilities. Users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as required to comply with this chapter and shall achieve compliance with all categorical pretreatment standards, local limits and the prohibitions set out by the public utilities director, whichever is more stringent. Any facilities required to pretreat wastewater to a level acceptable to Athens-Clarke County shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to Athens-Clarke County for review, and shall be acceptable to Athens-Clarke County before construction of the facility. The review of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an acceptable discharge to the POTW under the provisions of this chapter. (b)  Additional pretreatment measures: (1)  Meat packing plant requirements. No meat packing or allied products plants shall discharge waste or water into the POTW unless the following conditions are met: a.  There shall be a separation of domestic wastewater from the bathrooms and the packing wastewater. The domestic wastewater from all bathrooms may be emptied directly into the POTW. If there are floor drains in the bathroom area, these drains must be so arranged that no byproducts of production can be emptied directly or indirectly into them. b.  All meat packing wastewater, before entering the POTW, must pass through a 30 divisions per inch by 20 divisions per inch mesh vibrating screen or a device that will provide a complete separation of feathers, hair, offal and other packing byproducts. All floor drains or outside drains in pits shall be so connected that they will go through this screening process and no traps left available where covers may be raised and feathers, hair, offal and other packing byproducts emptied to go into the POTW without first going through these screens. c.  All plants shall furnish at their expense a layout showing the arrangement of their wastewater piping or troughs to be approved by Athens-Clarke County. d.  If sufficient fall is not available at the packing plants for effective screening, then a system of pumping of the wastewater to provide the screening must be provided at the owner's expense to adequately accomplish the screening. e.  All meat processors not covered under this meat packing section will be subject to the provisions of section 5-1-2(i). (2)  Control of discharge. As a result of upset to the POTW (existing or potential), the public utilities director may require a user to restrict its discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage wastestreams from process wastestreams, and such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the POTW and determine the user's compliance with the requirements of this chapter. (3)  Sand interceptors. Sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the public utilities director, they are necessary for the proper handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts of sand; except that such interceptors shall not be required for residential users. All sand interception units shall be of type and capacity approved by the public utilities director and shall be so located to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned, and repaired regularly, as needed, by the owner at his expense. (4)  Flammable substances. Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter. (c)  Accidental discharge/slug control plans. The public utilities director may require any user to develop and implement an accidental discharge/slug control plan. At least once every two years the public utilities director shall evaluate whether each significant user needs such a plan. Any user required to develop and implement an accidental discharge/control slug plan shall submit a plan which addresses, at a minimum, the following: (1)  Description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch discharges. (2)  Description of stored chemicals. (3)  Procedures for immediately notifying the POTW of any accidental or slug discharge. Such notification must also be given for any discharge which would violate any of the prohibited discharges in section 5-1-2 (c) of this chapter. (4)  Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site run-off, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants (including solvents), and/or measures and equipment for emergency response. (d)  Tenant responsibility. Where an owner of property leases premises to any other person as a tenant under any rental or lease agreement, if either the owner or the tenant is an user, either or both may be held responsible for compliance with the provisions of this chapter. (e)  Hauled wastewater: (1)  Septic tank waste may be accepted into the POTW at a designated receiving structure within the treatment plant area, and at such times as are established by the public utilities director, provided such wastes do not cause the WRF to violate its permit, fail a toxicity test, or cause interference or pass through. Wastewater discharge permits for individual vehicles to use such facilities shall be issued by the public utilities director. (2)  The discharge of hauled industrial wastes requires prior approval and a wastewater discharge permit from Athens-Clarke County. Only wastes generated within Athens-Clarke County will be accepted. The public utilities director shall have authority to prohibit the disposal of such waste if such disposal would interfere with the treatment plant operation. Waste haulers are subject to all other sections of this chapter. A manifest system will be utilized for each truckload of industrial waste to document where the industrial waste was generated. (3)  Any person, firm or corporation desiring to discharge or empty any septic tank or portable toilet contents shall be certified in accordance with Rules and Regulations for Individual Sewage Disposal System, chapter 270-5-25, Georgia Department of Human Resources and the Clarke County Board of Health. (4)  Septage and portable toilets: No person, firm or corporation shall discharge or empty any matter or contents of a septic tank and portable toilets into the wastewater system of Athens-Clarke County without paying the charge as established by resolution of the Mayor and Commission and discharging the same at the point hereinafter indicated. The public utilities director shall have the authority to limit or prohibit the disposal of wastes generated outside of Athens-Clarke County if such disposal would interfere with the treatment plant operations. The method of payments for utilizing this service shall be based on procedures as approved by the public utilities director. The point of emptying of the same shall be at the Cedar Creek Water Reclamation Facility or as directed by the public utilities director. A manifest system will be utilized for each truckload of septage to document where the septage was generated. (5)  Portable toilet waste shall contain only domestic wastewater and those chemicals approved for use in portable toilets. (6)  No person, firm or corporation shall discharge or empty any matter or contents of grease, oil or sand interceptors into any part of the wastewater collection and treatment system of Athens-Clarke County. (7)  Liquid wastes or byproducts transported over highways or public roads or streets of ACC shall be in watertight and completely covered containers or vehicles. (f)  Vandalism. No person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, tamper with or prevent access to any structure, appurtenance or equipment, or other part of the POTW. Any person found in violation of this requirement shall be subject to the provisions set out in sections 5-1-10 through 5-1-12. ( Ord. of 10-2-2018(1), § 1 ) 
Sec. 5-1-4. - Wastewater discharge permit eligibility. (a)  Wastewater survey. When requested by the public utilities director all users must submit information on the nature and characteristics of their wastewater by completing a wastewater survey prior to commencing their discharge. The public utilities director is authorized to prepare a form for this purpose and may periodically require users to update the survey. Failure to complete this survey shall be reasonable grounds for terminating water and sewer service to the user and shall be considered a violation of this chapter. (b)  Wastewater discharge permit requirement: (1)  It shall be unlawful for any significant user to discharge wastewater into the POTW without first obtaining a wastewater discharge permit from the public utilities director. Any violation of the terms and conditions of a wastewater discharge permit shall be deemed a violation of this chapter and subjects the wastewater discharge permittee to the provisions set out in sections 5-1-10 through 5-1-12. Obtaining a wastewater discharge permit does not relieve a permittee of its obligation to comply with all federal and state pretreatment standards or requirements or with any other requirements of federal, state and local law. (2)  The public utilities director may require other users, including liquid waste haulers, to obtain wastewater discharge permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter. (c)  Wastewater discharge permitting existing connections. Any significant user which discharges waste into the POTW prior to the effective date of this chapter and who wishes to continue such discharges in the future, shall, within 60 calendar days after said date, apply to Athens-Clarke County for a wastewater discharge permit in accordance with subsection 5-1-4(f) below and shall not cause or allow discharges to the POTW to continue after 120 calendar days of the effective date of this chapter except in accordance with a wastewater discharge permit issued by the public utilities director. (d)  Wastewater discharge permitting new connections. Any significant user proposing to begin or recommence discharging wastes into the POTW must obtain a wastewater discharge permit prior to the beginning or recommencing of such discharge. An application for this wastewater discharge permit must be filed at least 60 calendar days prior to the date upon which any discharge will begin. (e)  Wastewater discharge permitting extra-jurisdictional users. All user connections to the POTW which are outside the corporate boundary of Athens-Clarke County shall comply with the prohibitions stated in Section 5-1-2(c) and shall meet the categorical, specific and conventional pollutant limits stated in Section 5-1-2(d), (e) and (f) of this chapter. (f)  Wastewater discharge permit application contents. In order to be considered for a wastewater discharge permit, all significant users required to have a wastewater discharge permit must submit the information required by section 5-1-6(a) of this chapter. The public utilities director shall approve a form to be used as a permit application. In addition, the following information may be requested: (1)  Description of activities, facilities, and plant processes on the premises, including a list of all raw materials and chemicals used or stored at the facility which are, or could accidentally or intentionally be, discharged to the POTW. (2)  Hours of operation, and proposed or actual hours of operation of the facility. (3)  Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes, and rate of production. (4)  Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day). (5)  The site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details to show all sewers, floor drains, and appurtenances by size, location, and elevation, and all points of discharge. (6)  Plans, specifications, and operating procedures for wastewater pretreatment facilities shall be submitted to the Athens-Clarke County public utilities department for review in accordance with accepted engineering practices. (7)  Time and duration of the discharge. (8)  Average and peak flow rates for all process and nonprocess flows. (9)  Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the public utilities director to evaluate the wastewater discharge permit application. Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be returned to the user for revision. (g)  Application signatories and certification. All wastewater discharge permit applications and user reports must contain the following certification statement and be signed by an authorized representative of the user. "I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designated to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations." (h)  Wastewater discharge permit decisions. The public utilities director will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. Within 30 days of receipt of a complete wastewater discharge permit application, the public utilities director will determine whether or not to issue a wastewater discharge permit. If no determination is made within this time period, the application will be deemed denied. The public utilities director may deny any application for a wastewater discharge permit. ( Ord. of 10-2-2018(1), § 1 ) 
Sec. 5-1-5. - Wastewater discharge permit issuance process. (a)  Wastewater discharge permit duration. Wastewater discharge permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five (5) years. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued for a period of less than five (5) years, at the discretion of the public utilities director. Each wastewater discharge permit will indicate a specific date upon which it will expire. (b)  Wastewater discharge permit contents. Wastewater discharge permits shall include such conditions as are reasonably deemed necessary by the public utilities director to prevent pass through or interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment plant's effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge management and disposal, protect ambient air quality, and protect against damage to the POTW. (1)  Wastewater discharge permits must contain the following conditions: a.  A statement that indicates wastewater discharge permit duration, which in no event shall exceed five (5) years. b.  A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is nontransferable without prior notification to and approval from Athens-Clarke County and provisions for furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy of the existing wastewater discharge permit. c.  Effluent limits applicable to the user based on applicable standards in federal, state, and local law. d.  Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and record keeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sample frequency, and sample type based on federal, state, and local law. e.  Statement of applicable civil, criminal, and administrative penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance beyond that required by applicable federal, state, or local law. (2)  Wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not be limited to, the following: a.  Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization. b.  Limits on the instantaneous, daily and monthly average and/or maximum concentration, mass, or other measure of identified wastewater pollutants or properties. c.  Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology, pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment devices, designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW. d.  Development and implementation of spill control plans or other special conditions including management practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or nonroutine discharges. e.  Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW. f.  The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW. g.  Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities and equipment. h.  A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable federal and state pretreatment standards, including those which become effective during the term of the wastewater discharge permit. i.  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the public utilities director to ensure compliance with this chapter, and state and federal laws, rules, and regulations. (c)  Wastewater discharge permit appeals. Any person, including any user, may petition Athens-Clarke County in writing to reconsider the terms or the denial of a wastewater discharge permit within 30 calendar days of its issuance. Said petition shall be heard by the administrative hearing officer. (1)  Failure to submit a petition for reconsideration shall be deemed to be a waiver of the administrative appeal. (2)  In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the wastewater discharge permit provisions objected to, the reasons for this objection, and the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the wastewater discharge permit. (3)  The effectiveness, applicability and enforceability of the wastewater discharge permit shall not be stayed pending the appeal. (4)  If Athens-Clarke County fails to act within 30 calendar days of receipt of a petition for reconsideration, such petition for reconsideration shall be deemed to be denied. Decisions not to reconsider a wastewater discharge permit, not to issue a wastewater discharge permit, or not to modify a wastewater discharge permit, shall be considered final administrative action for purposes of judicial review. (5)  Aggrieved parties seeking judicial review of the final administrative wastewater discharge permit decision shall have the right thereof in accordance with law by writ of Certiorari to the Superior Court within 30 days of such final determination. (d)  Wastewater discharge permit modification. The public utilities director may modify the wastewater discharge permit for good cause including, but not limited to, the following: (1)  To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements. (2)  To address significant alterations or additions to the user's operation, process, or wastewater volume or character since the time of wastewater discharge permit issuance. (3)  A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge. (4)  Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the POTW, Athens-Clarke County personnel, or the receiving waters. (5)  Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge permit. (6)  Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting. (7)  Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13. (8)  To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater discharge permit. (9)  To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership and/or operation to a new owner/operator.     The filing of a request by the permittee for a wastewater discharge permit modification does not stay any wastewater discharge permit condition. (e)  Wastewater discharge permit transfer. Wastewater discharge permits may be reassigned or transferred to a new owner and/or operator only if the permittee gives at least three business days advance notice, in writing, to the public utilities director and the public utilities director approves the wastewater discharge permit transfer. The notice to the public utilities director must include a written certification by the new owner and/or operator which: (1)  States that the new owner and/or operator has no immediate intent to change the facility's operations and processes. (2)  Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur. (3)  Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing wastewater discharge permit.     Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the wastewater discharge permit voidable on the date of facility transfer. The responsibility for the pretreatment facility shall remain with the original owner or operator until the above written statement from the new owner or operator is received and approved by the public utilities director. (f)  Wastewater discharge permit revocation. Wastewater discharge permits may be revoked for the following reasons: (1)  Failure to notify the public utilities director of significant changes to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge. (2)  Failure to provide prior notification to the public utilities director of changed condition pursuant to section 5-1-6(e). (3)  Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application. (4)  Falsifying self-monitoring reports. (5)  Tampering with monitoring equipment. (6)  Refusing to allow Athens-Clarke County timely access to the facility premises and records. (7)  Failure to meet effluent limitations. (8)  Failure to pay fines. (9)  Failure to pay sewer charges. (10)  Failure to meet compliance schedules. (11)  Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater discharge permit application. (12)  Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business ownership of a permitted facility. (13)  Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this chapter.     Wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon nonuse, cessation of operations, or transfer of business ownership. All wastewater discharge permits are void upon the issuance of a new wastewater discharge permit. (g)  Wastewater discharge permit reissuance. A wastewater discharge permit holder shall apply for reissuance of a wastewater discharge permit by submitting a complete wastewater discharge permit application in accordance with section 5-1-4(f) a minimum of 60 calendar days prior to the expiration of the holder's existing wastewater discharge permit. ( Ord. of 10-2-2018(1), § 1 ) 
Sec. 5-1-6. - Reporting requirements. (a)  Baseline monitoring report: (1)  Within either 180 calendar days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing users subject to such categorical pretreatment standards, and currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the POTW, shall be required to submit to the public utilities director a report which contains the information listed in paragraph (2) below. At least 90 calendar days prior to commencement of their discharge, new sources, and sources that become users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, shall be required to submit to the public utilities director a report which contains the information listed in paragraph (2) below. A new user shall also be required to report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable pretreatment standards. A new user shall also give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants discharged. (2)  The user shall submit the information required by this section including: a.  Identifying information. The name and address of the facility including the name of the operator and owners. b.  Wastewater discharge permits. A list of any environmental control wastewater discharge permits held by or for the facility. c.  Description of operations. A brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial classifications of the operation(s) carried out by such user. This description should include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes. d.  Flow measurement. Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined wastestream formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e). e.  Measurement of pollutants: 1.  Identify the categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process. 2.  Submit the results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration (and/or mass, where required by the standard or by Athens-Clarke County) of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum and long term average concentrations (or mass, where required) shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in section 5-1-6(j). 3.  Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set out in section 5-1-6(k). f.  Certification. A statement reviewed by the user's authorized representative and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, whether additional O&M and/or additional pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements. g.  Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O&M shall be required. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. h.  All baseline monitoring reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 5-1-4(g). (b)  Compliance schedule progress report. The following conditions shall apply to the schedule required by subsection (a)(2)g. The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such events include hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing construction, beginning and conducting routine operation). No increment referred to above shall exceed nine (9) months. The user shall submit a progress report to the public utilities director no later than 14 business days following each date in the schedule and the final date of compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay (and, if appropriate) the steps being taken by the user to return to the established schedule. In no event shall more than nine (9) months elapse between such progress reports to the public utilities director. (c)  Report on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline. Within 90 calendar days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to Athens-Clarke County a report containing the information described in subsection (a)(2)d—f. For all users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's long term production rate. For all other users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 5-1-4(g). (d)  Periodic compliance reports: (1)  Any user subject to a categorical standard shall, at a frequency required by its wastewater discharge permit, submit a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by such pretreatment standards and the measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 5-1-4(g). (2)  All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge. (3)  If a user subject to the reporting requirement in and of this section monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the POTW, using the procedures prescribed in subsection (k) of this section the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report. (e)  Report of changed conditions. Each user is required to notify the public utilities director of any planned significant changes to the user's operations or system which might alter the nature, quality or volume of its wastewater at least 30 calendar days before the change. (1)  The public utilities director may require the user to submit such information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under subsection 5-1-4(f). (2)  The public utilities director may issue a wastewater discharge permit under subsection 5-1-4(h) or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit under subsection 5-1-5(d). (3)  No user shall implement the planned changed condition(s) until and unless the public utilities director has responded in writing to the user's notice. (4)  For purposes of this requirement flow increases of 10 percent or greater, and the discharge of any previously unreported pollutants, shall be deemed significant. (f)  Reports of potential problems: (1)  In the case of any discharge including, but not limited to, accidental discharges, discharges of a non-routine, episodic nature, a non-customary batch discharge, or a slug load which may cause potential problems for the POTW (including a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in subsection 5-1-2(c) of this chapter), it is the responsibility of the user to immediately telephone and notify Athens-Clarke County of the incident. This notification shall include the location of discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the user. (2)  Within five (5) business days following such discharge, the user shall, unless waived by the public utilities director, submit a detailed written report describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, natural resources, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties, or other liability which may be imposed by this chapter. (3)  Failure to notify Athens-Clarke County of potential problem discharges shall be deemed a separate violation of this chapter. (4)  A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of a discharge described in paragraph 1, above. Employers shall ensure that all employees, agents or representatives of users, who may cause or suffer such a discharge to occur, are advised of the emergency notification procedure. (g)  Reports from nonsignificant users. All users not subject to categorical pretreatment standards and not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall provide appropriate reports to Athens-Clarke County as the public utilities director may require. (h)  Notice of violation/repeat sampling and reporting. If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must notify the Athens-Clarke County public utilities department within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the public utilities department within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation. The user is not required to resample if the POTW performs monitoring at the user's facility at least once a month, or if the POTW performs sampling between the user's initial sampling and when the user receives the results of this sampling. (i)  Notification of the discharge of hazardous waste: (1)  Any user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall notify the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director, and state hazardous waste authorities in writing of any discharge into the POTW of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR part 261. Such notification must include the name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR part 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and the type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other). If the user discharges more than 100 kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the POTW, the notification shall also contain the following information to the extent such information is known and readily available to the user: an identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes, an estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the waste stream discharged during that calendar month, and an estimation of the mass of constituents in the waste stream expected to be discharged during the following 12 months. All notifications must take place no later than 180 days after the discharge commences. Any notification under this paragraph need be submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged. However, notifications of changed discharges must be submitted under subsection (e) above. The notification requirement in this section does not apply to pollutants already reported under the self-monitoring requirements of subsections (a), (c), and (d). (2)  Users are exempt from the requirements of paragraph (l) of this section during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than 15 kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more than 15 kilograms of non-acute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires a one-time notification. Subsequent months during which the user discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not require additional notification. (3)  In the case of any new regulations under section 3001 of RCRA identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any additional substance as a hazardous waste, the user must notify the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management Waste Division Director, and state hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such substance within 90 calendar days of the effective date of such regulations. (4)  In the case of any notification made under this section, the user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be economically practical. (j)  Analytical requirements. All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR part 136, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses must be performed in accordance with procedures approved by the EPA. (k)  Sample collection: (1)  Except as indicated in subsection 2 below, the user must collect wastewater samples using flow proportional composite collection techniques. In the event flow proportional sampling is not feasible, the public utilities director may authorize the use of time proportional sampling or through a minimum of eight (8) grab samples of equal volume where the user demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged. (2)  Samples for FOG, temperature, pH, cyanide, toxicity, sulfides, and volatile organic chemicals must be obtained using grab collection techniques. For volatile parameters, specifically cyanide, grab samples shall be collected using EPA-approved techniques that prevent loss of volatile pollutants. Individual grab samples may be analyzed separately, allowing calculation of a single composite result. Alternatively, a single composite sample may be prepared for analysis using EPA-approved techniques that prevent loss of volatile pollutants. (l)  Timing. Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date post-marked. For reports which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail facility serviced by the U.S. Postal Service, the date of receipt of the report shall govern. (m)  Record keeping. Users shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records and information required to be retained under this chapter. These records shall remain available for a period of at least three (3) years. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning compliance with this chapter, or where the user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the public utilities director. ( Ord. of 10-2-2018(1), § 1 ) 
Sec. 5-1-7. - Compliance monitoring. (a)  Inspection and sampling. Athens-Clarke County shall have the right to enter the facilities of any user to ascertain whether the purpose of this chapter, and any permit or order issued hereunder, is being met and whether the user is complying with all requirements thereof. Users shall allow the public utilities director or representative ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, taking photographs, records examination and copying, and the performance of any additional duties. (1)  Where a user has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel from Athens-Clarke County, EPD, and EPA will be permitted to enter without delay, for the purposes of performing their specific responsibilities. (2)  Athens-Clarke County, EPD and EPA shall have the right to set up on the user's property, or require installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the user's operations. (3)  Athens-Clarke County may require the user to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the user at its own expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated per the manufacturer's specifications, but no less than semiannually to ensure their accuracy. (4)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the user's facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the user at the request of the public utilities director and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be born by the user. (5)  Unreasonable delays in allowing Athens-Clarke County personnel access to the user's premises shall be a violation of this chapter. (6)  Where Athens-Clarke County holds an easement, duly authorized employees of Athens-Clarke County bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which Athens-Clarke County holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the POTW lying within the easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on the easement shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. (7)  While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in this section, duly authorized employees of Athens-Clarke County shall observe all reasonable safety rules applicable to the premises established by the Owner. (b)  Search warrants. If the public utilities director has been refused access to a building, structure or property or any part thereof, and if the public utilities director has demonstrated probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this chapter or that there is a need to inspect as part of a routine inspection program of Athens-Clarke County designed to verify compliance with this chapter or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, then the Athens-Clarke County Attorney shall prepare an application for any local law enforcement official to obtain a search warrant from the judge of the Municipal Court of Athens-Clarke County describing therein the specific location subject to the warrant. The warrant shall specify what, if anything, may be searched and/or seized on the property described. Such warrant shall be served at reasonable hours by the law enforcement officer who obtained same in the company of the public utilities director. ( Ord. of 10-2-2018(1), § 1 ) 
Sec. 5-1-8. - Confidential information.     Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater discharge permit applications, wastewater discharge permits, and monitoring programs, and from Athens-Clarke County inspection and sampling activities, shall be available to the public without restriction, unless the user specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the public utilities director and in accordance with the Georgia Open Records Act, that the release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets under applicable state law. When requested and demonstrated by the user furnishing a report that such information should be held confidential, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available immediately upon request to governmental agencies for uses related to the NPDES program or pretreatment program, and in enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other "effluent data" as defined by 40 CFR 2.302 will not be recognized as confidential information or as a trade secret and will be available to the public without restriction. ( Ord. of 10-2-2018(1), § 1 ) 
Sec. 5-1-9. - Publication of users in significant noncompliance.     Athens-Clarke County shall publish annually, in the largest general circulation newspaper published in Athens-Clarke County, a list of the users which, during the previous twelve months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. The term significant noncompliance shall mean: (1)  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which 66 percent or more of wastewater measurements taken during a six-month period exceed the daily maximum limit or average limit for the same pollutant parameter by any amount; (2)  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which 33 percent or more of wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant parameter during a six-month period equals or exceeds the product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, FOG, TKN and TP, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH); (3)  Any other discharge violation that Athens-Clarke County believes has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through (including endangering the health of Athens-Clarke County personnel or the general public); (4)  Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in Athens-Clarke County's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge; (5)  Failure to meet, within 90 calendar days of the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance; (6)  Failure to provide within 30-calendar days after the due date, any required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, 90-day compliance reports, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules; (7)  Failure to accurately report noncompliance; (8)  Any other violation(s) which Athens-Clarke County determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. ( Ord. of 10-2-2018(1), § 1 ) 
Sec. 5-1-10. - Administrative enforcement remedies. (a)  Notification of violation. Whenever the public utilities director finds that any user has violated or is violating this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment requirement, the public utilities director or his agent may serve upon said user a written Notice of Violation. Within 30 days of the receipt of this notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted by the user to the public utilities director. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the Notice of Violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of Athens-Clarke County to take any action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a Notice of Violation. (b)  Consent orders. The public utilities director is hereby empowered to enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with any user responsible for noncompliance. Such orders will include specific action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a time period also specified by the order. Consent Orders shall have the same force and effect as the administrative orders issued pursuant to subsections (d) and (e) below and shall be judicially enforceable. (c)  Show cause hearing. The public utilities director may order any user which causes or contributes to violation(s) of this chapter, wastewater discharge permits, or orders issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, to appear before the public utilities director and show cause why a proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the user show cause why this proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least 10 days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any authorized representative of the user. Whether or not the user appears as ordered, immediate enforcement action may be pursued following the hearing date. A show cause hearing shall not be a prerequisite for taking any other action against the user. (d)  Compliance orders. When the public utilities director finds that a user has violated or continues to violate the ordinance, wastewater discharge permits or orders issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, he may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that the user come into compliance within 20 calendar days. If the user does not come into compliance within 20 calendar days, sewer service shall be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated. Compliance orders may also contain other requirements to address the noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring, and management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewer. A compliance order may not extend the deadline for compliance established or a federal pretreatment standard or requirement, nor does a compliance order release the user of liability for any violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a prerequisite to taking any other action against the user. (e)  Cease and desist orders. When the public utilities director finds that a user is violating this chapter, the user's wastewater discharge permit, any order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or that the user's past violations are likely to recur, the public utilities director may issue an order to the user directing it to cease and desist all such violations and directing the user to: (1)  Immediately comply with all requirements. (2)  Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge.     Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a prerequisite to taking any other action against the user. (f)  Administrative fines: (1)  Notwithstanding any other section of this chapter, any user that is found to have violated any provision of this chapter, its wastewater discharge permit, and orders issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall be fined in an amount not to exceed $1,000.00. Such fines shall be assessed on a per-violation, per-day basis. In the case of monthly or other long term average discharge limits, fines shall be assessed for each day during the period of violation. (2)  Assessments may be added to the user's next scheduled sewer service charge and the public utilities director shall have such other collection remedies as may be available for other service charges and fees. (3)  Users desiring to dispute such fines must file a written request for the public utilities director to reconsider the fine along with full payment of the fine amount within 30 calendar days of being notified of the fine. The public utilities director shall convene a hearing on the matter within 30 calendar days of receiving the request from the user. In the event the user's appeal is successful, the payment together with any interest accruing thereto shall be returned to the user. Athens-Clarke County may add the costs of preparing administrative enforcement actions such as notices and orders to the fine. (4)  Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a prerequisite for taking any other action against the user. (g)  Emergency suspensions. The public utilities director may immediately suspend a user's discharge (after informal notice to the user) whenever such suspension is necessary in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge which reasonably appears to present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons. The public utilities director may also immediately suspend a user's discharge (after notice and opportunity to respond) that threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW, or which presents or may present an endangerment to the environment. (1)  Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the public utilities director shall take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The public utilities director shall allow the user to recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of Athens-Clarke County that the period of endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings set forth in subsection (h) are initiated against the user. (2)  A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed statement describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence to the public utilities director, prior to the date of any show cause or termination hearing under subsections (c) and (h).     Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to any emergency suspension under this section. (h)  Termination of discharge. In addition to those provisions in subsection 5-1-5(f) of this chapter, any user that violates the following conditions of this chapter, wastewater discharge permits, or orders issued hereunder, is subject to discharge termination. (1)  Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions. (2)  Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge. (3)  Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater volume, constituents and characteristics prior to discharge. (4)  Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection, monitoring or sampling. (5)  Violation of the pretreatment standards in section 5-1-2 of this chapter.     Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge and be offered an opportunity to show cause under subsection (c) of this section why the proposed action should not be taken. ( Ord. of 10-2-2018(1), § 1 ) 
Sec. 5-1-11. - Judicial enforcement remedies. (a)  Injunctive relief. Whenever a user has violated a pretreatment standard or requirement or continues to violate the provisions of this chapter, wastewater discharge permits or orders issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment requirement, the public utilities director may petition the Superior Court of Athens-Clarke County through the Athens-Clarke County Attorney for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific performance of the wastewater discharge permit, order, or the requirement imposed by this chapter or activities of the user. Such other action as appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief may also be sought by Athens-Clarke County. A petition for injunctive relief need not be filed as a prerequisite to taking any other action against a user. (b)  Criminal prosecution: (1)  Any user or representative thereof that willfully or negligently violates any provision of this chapter, any orders or wastewater discharge permits issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment requirement shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 per violation per day or imprisonment for not more than six (6) months or both. (2)  Any user or representative thereof that willfully or negligently introduces any substance into the POTW which causes personal injury or property damage shall, upon conviction, be guilty of an offense and be subject to a penalty of at least $1,000.00 and/or be subject to imprisonment for six (6) months. This penalty shall be in addition to any other cause of action for personal injury or property damage available under state law. (3)  Any user or representative thereof that knowingly makes or causes to make any false statements, representations, or certifications in any application, record, report, plan or other documentation filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this chapter, wastewater discharge permit or order, or who falsifies, tampers with or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 per violation per day or imprisonment for not more than six (6) months or both. (c)  Remedies nonexclusive. The provisions in sections 5-1-9 through 5-1-12 are not exclusive remedies. The public utilities director reserves the right to take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a noncompliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance with Athens-Clarke County's enforcement response plan. However, Athens-Clarke County reserves the right to take other action against any user when the circumstances warrant. Further, the public utilities director is empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any noncompliant user. These actions may be taken concurrently. ( Ord. of 10-2-2018(1), § 1 ) 
Sec. 5-1-12. - Supplemental enforcement action. (a)  Performance bonds. The public utilities director may decline to reissue a wastewater discharge permit to any user which has failed to comply with the provisions of this chapter, any orders, or a previous wastewater discharge permit issued hereunder, unless such user first files a satisfactory bond, payable to Athens-Clarke County, in a sum not to exceed a value determined by the public utilities director to be necessary to achieve consistent compliance. (b)  Liability insurance. The public utilities director may decline to reissue a wastewater discharge permit to any user which has failed to comply with the provisions of this chapter, any order, or a previous wastewater discharge permit issued hereunder, unless such user first submits proof that it has obtained financial assurance sufficient to restore or repair damage to the POTW caused by its discharge. (c)  Water supply severance. Whenever a user has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this chapter, orders, or wastewater discharge permits issued hereunder, water service to the user may be severed. Service will only recommence, at the user's expense, after it has satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to comply. (d)  Public nuisances. Any violation of this chapter, wastewater discharge permits, FOG requirements, or orders issued hereunder, is hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be corrected or abated as directed by the public utilities director in accordance with applicable Georgia law or Athens-Clarke County ordinance. Any person(s) creating a public nuisance shall be subject to the provisions of Section 3-13-14, Section 5-2-50(b), Chapter 5-4 Article II and this Sewer Use Ordinance, including the reimbursement of Athens-Clarke County for any costs incurred in removing, abating or remedying said nuisance. ( Ord. of 10-2-2018(1), § 1 ) 
Sec. 5-1-13. - Affirmative defenses to discharge violations. (a)  Upset: (1)  For the purposes of this section, "upset" means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with categorical or local pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation. (2)  An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the requirements of paragraph (3) are met. (3)  A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other relevant evidence that: a.  An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of the upset; b.  The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and workmanlike manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance procedures; c.  The user has submitted the following information to the POTW and treatment plant operator within 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset (if this information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within five (5) business days): 1.  A description of the indirect discharge and cause of noncompliance. 2.  The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to continue. 3.  Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance. (4)  In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof. (5)  Users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards. (6)  The user shall control production of all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost or fails. (b)  General/specific prohibitions. A user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought against it for noncompliance with the general and specific prohibitions in subsection 5-1-2 of this chapter if it can prove that it did not know or have reason to know that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, would cause pass through or interference and that either: (a) a local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the user was in compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during, the pass through or interference, or (b) no local limit exists, but the discharge did not change substantially in nature or constituents from the user's prior discharge when Athens-Clarke County was regularly in compliance with its NPDES permit, and in the case of interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal requirements. (c)  Bypass: (1)  a.  "Bypass" means the intentional or unintentional diversion of wastestreams from any portion of a user's treatment facility. b.  "Severe property damage" means substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production. (2)  A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to the provision of paragraphs (3) and (4) of this section. (3)  a.  If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the POTW, at least 10 business days before the date of the bypass if possible. b.  A user shall submit oral notice of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards to the POTW within 24 hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five (5) business days of the time the user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The POTW may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received within 24 hours. (4)  Bypass is prohibited, and the POTW may take enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless a.  The bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage; b.  There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment equipment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate backup equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; c.  The user submitted notices as required under paragraph (3) of this section. (5)  The POTW may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if the POTW determines that it will meet the three conditions listed in paragraph (4) of this section. ( Ord. of 10-2-2018(1), § 1 ) 
Sec. 5-1-14. - Miscellaneous provisions. (a)  Pretreatment charges and fees. Athens-Clarke County may adopt reasonable charges and fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating Athens-Clarke County's Pretreatment Program which may include: (1)  Fees for wastewater discharge permit applications including the cost of processing such applications. (2)  Fees for monitoring, inspection, and surveillance procedures including the cost of collection and analysis of a user's discharge, and reviewing monitoring reports submitted by users. (3)  Fees for reviewing and responding to accidental discharge procedures and construction. (4)  Fees for filing appeals. (5)  Other fees as Athens-Clarke County may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained herein. These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this chapter and are separate from all other fees, fines and penalties chargeable by Athens-Clarke County. ( Ord. of 10-2-2018(1), § 1 ) 
Secs. 5-1-15—5-1-25. - Reserved. 
Sec. 5-1-26. - Connection fees—Generally. (a)  The wastewater connection fee basic rate shall be as provided in section 5-3-79 of this Code. (b)  Users of the wastewater system shall pay a connection fee before new or additional wastewater service can be made available. Users will be subject to the fee at the time new wastewater service is requested. Users shall also be subject to the fee when their existing wastewater service tap is inadequate to carry the volume of wastewater desired and the wastewater service tap size is increased. All users shall be subject to the connection fee regardless of location of the service tap. (c)  Once a user has paid a connection fee to Athens-Clarke County it shall not be refunded. (d)  Users of the wastewater system shall also be subject to a wastewater connection fee herein described when their existing water meter size is increased. In such event, the amount of the connection fee shall be the difference between the fee stated for the size of the new meter as shown in section 5-3-79 less the fee stated therein for the size of the meter to be replaced. ( Ord. of 10-2-2018(1), § 1 ) 
Sec. 5-1-27. - Connection fees—Payment.     Users shall pay the connection fee at the time the application is made with the Building Permits and Inspection Department to increase the size of the existing wastewater service tap or for a new or additional wastewater service tap. ( Ord. of 10-2-2018(1), § 1 ) 
Sec. 5-1-28. - Revenue restrictions.     All revenues received from the wastewater system connection fee shall only be used for debt service payments for capital improvements or deposited into the Athens-Clarke County's water and sewer construction fund for construction and purchase of capital improvements. ( Ord. of 10-2-2018(1), § 1 ) 
Secs. 5-1-29—5-1-41. - Reserved. 
Sec. 5-1-42. - Sewer user charges—System for determination generally. (a)  Liability for surcharge, determination of total charge, establishing rate. No person shall discharge or empty any water or waste into the wastewater collection and treatment system of Athens-Clarke County with a concentration in excess of the domestic wastewater concentrations stated in Table 5-1-2(f) without paying the surcharge on sewer user charges imposed under this title. The surcharge assessment will only be based on the concentration in excess of the domestic wastewater concentrations stated in Table 5-1-2(f). The total sewer user charge would then be the normal sewer user charge plus the surcharge. The rates of both the user charge and surcharge shall be established by the public utilities director subject to approval in an ordinance by the mayor and commission. (b)  User charge rate criterion. The minimum criterion for establishment of the user charge rate shall be to recover the annual operation and maintenance cost inclusive of the capital accrual and replacement costs for providing collection and treatment of domestic wastewater. Said operations and maintenance portion of the rate shall be evaluated within a reasonable time prior to the end of each year. If the operation and maintenance portion of the revenues exceeds the operation and maintenance portion of the expenses, said excess revenues shall be credited toward the next year's operation and maintenance portion of the wastewater user's charge. (c)  Surcharge rate criterion. The minimum criterion for establishment of the surcharge rate shall be to recover the additional annual operation and maintenance cost for providing collection and treatment of wastewaters in excess of domestic wastewater concentrations. (d)  Determining persons liable for surcharge. The public utilities director shall determine which users are discharging waters or waste to the wastewater collection and treatment system in excess of acceptable levels. This shall be accomplished by sections 5-1-6 and 5-1-7 and the wastewater monitoring program conducted by the public utilities department. (e)  Billing, payment of surcharge. The surcharge shall be billed monthly by the water business office with the normal user charge, and the conditions for payment and penalties applicable to the normal user charge shall apply to the surcharge. (f)  Unacceptable wastes not subject to surcharge. There shall be no surcharge provisions for toxic pollutants in excess of concentrations defined in sections 5-1-2(c), 5-1-2(d), and 5-1-2(e). This decision is based on the fact that the POTW is not designed to facilitate the removal of the items referred to in this section. Any person in violation of this subsection shall be subject to the provisions set out in sections 5-1-9 through 5-1-12. ( Ord. of 10-2-2018(1), § 1 ) 
Sec. 5-1-43. - Sewer user charges—Rates; billing and collection; security deposits. (a)  Calculation, applicability of monthly volumetric rate charge. The volumetric rate shall be a cost per unit of wastewater volume. This rate shall be multiplied times the volume of wastewater returned to the sanitary sewer each month by the user. The base volumetric charge shall be applicable to all user classes. In the absence of empirical wastewater flow measurement by meters established for the sole purpose of measuring wastewater flow volume, the wastewater volume shall equal the volume of water usage measured by the water meter serving the premises which discharge to the POTW. (b)  Sewer rates established. Users shall pay the rates as set forth in section 5-3-80 of this Code. (c)  Calculation of monthly surcharge. The surcharge rate shall be a cost per pound of BOD, TSS, TKN, TP, and FOG. This rate shall be multiplied by the pounds of BOD, TSS, TKN, TP, and FOG discharged to the sanitary sewer each month by the user. The poundage shall be based on that concentration of BOD, TSS, TKN, TP and FOG over and above the domestic wastewater concentrations stated in Table 5-1-2(f) and the volume of wastewater discharged during the month. The results shall be the monthly surcharge. (d)  Monthly customer service fee. The monthly customer service fee for active accounts shall be as set forth in section 5-3-80 of this Code. (e)  Determination of volume of wastewater for residential users. A residential user's wastewater volume shall be determined by multiplying the user's monthly water consumption in gallons by 100 percent. Any exception to this requirement shall be in accordance with a policy and procedure adopted by the Mayor and Commission.     For leaks in the user's waterline which result in the additional water volume not being placed in the wastewater collection system, the wastewater portion of the bill shall be adjusted in accordance with a policy and procedure statement adopted by the Mayor and Commission.     The user may install an outdoor water use meter under the same rules and conditions as all meters connected to the waterworks system for use exclusively for outdoor water uses where none of the water would be returned to the sanitary sewer system, and no sewer charge would be made on this meter. The water used on the original meter measuring household use would continue to be charged for wastewater usage at 100 percent of the water volume. (f)  Determination of volume of wastewater for non-residential customers. Nonresidential user's wastewater volume shall be determined by taking 100 percent of the user's monthly water consumption in gallons. This percentage shall be reduced if the user provides written proof acceptable to the public utilities director that less than 100 percent of the user's water consumption is returned to the sanitary sewer. If the public utilities director accepts such proof, then the reduced percentage figure shall be used to determine the user's monthly wastewater volume. (g)  Charging system users not utilizing Athens-Clarke County water. Any wastewater system user having as its source of water a supply other than that owned and operated by Athens-Clarke County shall be subject to the charges established in this section. That user shall also install a water meter, approved by the public utilities director, in the user's water supply line between the source and the building or buildings where the water usage occurs and the wastewater discharge originates. A wastewater system user of this type shall be required to pay the base and surcharges described above. The wastewater volumes shall be determined in accordance with a policy and procedure statement adopted by the Mayor and Commission. The provisions of this Code applicable to the installation of water meters, reading of meters, billing, penalties, and termination of service for water shall apply to the meters and charges prescribed by this subsection. (h)  Late payment of bills. For failure of any user of the wastewater system to pay user charges when due, the user shall be subject to the penalties presently authorized, or that may be authorized in the future, by the Mayor and Commission for the failure to pay a water bill when due. (i)  Reinstatement of service. Any property owner whose sewer service by Athens-Clarke County shall have been disconnected pursuant to the provisions of this section shall have such sewer service reinstated upon compliance with the provisions of this article and upon the payment to Athens-Clarke County of a reinstatement fee covering all costs for restoration of sewer service, but not less than an amount specified in section 5-3-83 of this Code. (1)  Security deposits. In the case of mobile home parks, apartments, townhouses, motels or hotels, dwelling units or condominium complexes organized under the provisions of the Apartment Ownership Act or similar act of the General Assembly, the director of finance shall cause or require a security deposit as provided in section 5-3-74 of this Code. A deposit may also be required of any customer that has a record of delinquency for payment of sewer or water accounts or taxes due the county, bankruptcy, insolvency, where a foreclosure proceeding is pending with respect to property served, or where there is a reasonable likelihood that the account would not be paid. The deposit shall be paid at such times and in such amounts as may be specified by the director of finance. A bond with approved security, or other guarantee of payment, may be accepted in lieu of any security deposit. ( Ord. of 10-2-2018(1), § 1 ) 
Sec. 5-1-44. - Miscellaneous provisions. (a)  Pipeline construction parallel to existing sewers. No person shall lay any main pipe for gas, water or sewage, or conduit for any purpose in any street, within four feet on each side of the centerline of any sewer unless with the permission of the public utilities director. (b)  Transportation of liquid waste over highways. Liquid wastes or byproducts transported over highways or public roads or streets of Athens-Clarke County shall be in watertight and completely covered containers or vehicles. ( Ord. of 10-2-2018(1), § 1 ) 
Sec. 5-1-45. - Fats, oils, and grease management. (a)  Purpose and policy. This section establishes uniform registration, maintenance and monitoring requirements for controlling the discharge of FOG from food service facilities discharging into the POTW. The purpose of this section augments the purpose and policy of Section 5-1-1, with emphasis on the following: (1)  To prevent the introduction of excessive amounts of FOG into the POTW; and (2)  To prevent clogging or blocking of the sanitary sewer system due to grease accumulation. FOG accumulation causes potential sewage backup which can result in overflows which violate NPDES permits, illicit discharges, nuisance conditions, damages to private or public property, loss of business, or flooding of streets, residences, and commercial buildings, all of which impair the public health, safety and welfare. (b)  Definitions. The following definitions supplement those in section 5-1-1(c). (1)  Food service establishment: Any facility that prepares and/or packages food or beverages for sale or consumption, on or off site, with the exception of private residences. Food service facilities shall include, but are not limited to, food courts, food manufacturers, food packagers, restaurants, cafeterias, grocery stores, bakeries, lounges, hospitals, hotels, nursing homes, schools, and all other food service facilities not otherwise listed. (2)  Garbage disposal: A device which shreds or grinds up waste materials into smaller portions for discharge into the POTW. (3)  Grease transporter: A person who collects the contents of a grease interceptor and transports it to an approved recycling or disposal facility. (4)  Grease interceptor: A device located either a) underground and outside or b) inside a food service facility, designed to separate and retain food wastes and grease from the waste stream while allowing the balance of the liquid waste to discharge to the POTW. (5)  Grease removal system: A system consisting of one or more grease interceptors, including ancillary components. (c)  Applicability. This section shall apply to all food service establishments that are connected to the POTW, including those connected to privately-owned upstream collection systems. (d)  Grease removal systems. (1)  Requirements. Food service establishments that discharge to the POTW are required to have a grease removal system. The requirements in this section are in addition to any applicable code requirements. In the event of conflict, the more stringent standard shall govern. a.  New food service establishments. On or after the effective date of this section, food service establishments which are newly proposed or constructed, or existing establishments which will be expanded or renovated to include a food service facility where such did not previously exist, shall be required to install, operate, and maintain a grease interceptor according to the requirements contained in this section. 1.  At any food service establishment, indoor grease interceptors may be used upstream of underground outdoor grease interceptors. However, an underground outdoor grease interceptor is required unless, due to space limitations, the public utilities director authorizes an indoor grease interceptor to be installed. 2.  Grease interceptors shall be installed prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. b.  Existing food service establishments. For the purposes of sizing and installation of grease interceptors, all food service establishments existing prior to the effective date of this section shall be permitted to operate and maintain existing grease interceptors provided these grease interceptors are in efficient operating condition as demonstrated by compliance with the FOG concentration limit stated in Table 5-1-2(f). c.  The public utilities director may require an existing food service establishment to install, operate, and maintain a grease interceptor that complies with the requirements of this section or to modify or repair any noncompliant plumbing or existing interceptor within 90 days of written notification by the public utilities director when any one or more of the following conditions exist. 1.  The food service establishment is found to be contributing FOG in quantities sufficient to cause line blockages, partial blockages or necessitate increased maintenance of the POTW. 2.  The food service establishment does not have a grease interceptor. 3.  The food service establishment has an undersized, irreparable, or defective grease interceptor, as determined by the Athens-Clarke County public utilities department. 4.  Remodeling of the food preparation or kitchen waste plumbing system is performed which requires a plumbing permit to be issued by the Athens-Clarke County Building Permits and Inspection Department. 5.  The existing food service establishment does not have plumbing connections to a grease interceptor in compliance with the requirements of this section. (2)  Plumbing connections. Grease interceptors shall be located in the food service establishment's lateral sewer line downstream of all fixtures which may introduce grease, and upstream of the facility's connection to the POTW. Such fixtures shall include, but are not limited to, sinks, dishwashers, garbage disposals, automatic hood wash units, floor drains in food preparation and storage areas, and any other fixture which is determined to be a potential source of fats, oils or grease. Wastewater from sanitary facilities and other similar fixtures shall not be introduced into a grease interceptor under any circumstances. (3)  Design. Grease removal systems shall be designed in accordance with all applicable requirements of the International Plumbing Code (latest edition). Mechanically operated grease interceptors may not be used. Outdoor underground grease interceptors shall have a minimum capacity of 1,500 gallons, two compartments and shall be capable of separation and retention of grease and settleable solids. Interceptor design shall conform to the requirements of the state plumbing code. A control manhole over each compartment for monitoring purposes shall be required and installed at the user's sole expense. Covers shall have a gas-tight fit. The grease interceptor shall be designed, constructed and installed for adequate load-bearing capacity. Flow control devices shall be required where the water flow through the interceptor could otherwise exceed its rated flow. Interceptors shall be installed in a location outside of the building which provides easy access at all times for inspection, cleaning and proper maintenance, including pumping. If space limitations do not permit an outdoor grease interceptor, indoor interceptors may be used with a minimum capacity of 40 pounds. Grease removal system designs will be reviewed by the public utilities director as part of a plumbing permit application. In the permit application, the user shall furnish complete information about the food service facility, including description of operations (amount and type of food prepared); hours of operation; number of seats; number, type, and capacities of fixtures that produce grease; and description and capacity of proposed grease separation system components. The application shall include calculations that demonstrate conformance with applicable design standards. (4)  Installation. Grease removal systems shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. To allow for observation, sampling and measurement of wastewaters, a sampling point on the effluent discharge side of the grease interceptor shall be provided at the owner's expense. The sampling point shall be maintained and kept safe and accessible to Athens-Clarke County personnel at all times. (5)  Maintenance . All costs for maintenance of grease removal systems are the responsibility of the user. Grease removal systems shall be maintained so as to be in continuously efficient operation. Outdoor grease interceptor maintenance shall be performed at intervals of not less than once every three months. Indoor grease interceptor maintenance shall be performed at intervals of not less than once every four weeks. However, food service establishments that serve or prepare 500 to 1,000 servings per month may be serviced not less than every six months and those serving fewer than 500 servings per month may be serviced not less than every twelve months. All maintenance frequencies above are contingent on the interceptor discharge concentrations not exceeding permissible FOG concentrations stated in Table 5-1-2(f). a.  Additives. It is specifically prohibited to use any additive including, but not limited to, enzymes, chemicals, or bacteria as a substitute for or in conjunction with grease removal system maintenance. b.  Waste removal. The user shall be responsible for the proper removal and legal disposal of the grease waste per EPD Rule 391-3-6-.24 Regulation of Commercial Waste Originators, Pumpers, Transporters, Processors, and Disposal Facilities . Grease interceptors shall be serviced by a state registered transporter, and a completed manifest shall be kept on site by the user for every service event. Cleaning and maintenance of grease interceptors shall include the complete removal of all contents, including solids and liquids, including from the tank walls, baffles, cross pipes, inlets and outlets, two tee's, and the cover. Top skimming, decanting, or back flushing of the grease interceptor is prohibited. Further, the discharge of liquid, semi-solids, or solids into a grease interceptor from vehicles after servicing is prohibited. Vehicles capable of separating water from grease shall not discharge separated water into the grease interceptor, or POTW. c.  Waste disposal . Grease waste shall not be disposed of to the POTW or stormwater collection system. All grease waste shall be tracked by an Athens-Clarke County approved three-part manifest, and the waste shall be disposed of at a facility permitted and approved to receive such waste. d.  Manifest transmittal. The user shall maintain a legible copy of the completed three-part manifest on site for each service event for a period of at least three years. Failure to provide all manifests for review by Athens-Clarke County may result in a fine. (6)  Repairs. All costs for repair of grease removal systems are the responsibility of the user. The food service facility shall be responsible for scheduling all repairs to its grease removal system. Repairs required by Athens-Clarke County shall be completed within 30 calendar days after the date of written notice of required repairs is received by the facility, unless the public utilities director approves in writing a different schedule. (7)  Inspection. Athens-Clarke County may inspect grease removal systems as necessary to confirm that proper efficiency of the grease removal system is being achieved. a.  Entry. Each food service establishment shall allow Athens-Clarke County personnel access at reasonable times to all parts of the premises for the purpose of inspection, observation, records examination, measurement, sampling, and testing in accordance with the provisions of this section. This includes the taking of photographs to document conditions. The refusal of any food service establishment to allow Athens-Clarke County personnel entry to or upon the facility's premises for the purposes listed shall constitute a violation of this section. b.  Monitoring. Athens-Clarke County personnel shall have the right to sample and analyze the wastewater from any food service establishment at any time to determine levels of FOG contained within a facility's discharge. c.  Failed inspection. If a grease interceptor fails the initial inspection, the inspector may notify the user that the grease interceptor shall be cleaned out within seven calendar days. After seven calendar days, the grease interceptor should be re-inspected. d.  Failed re-inspection. If at the first re-inspection, the grease interceptor is found to be in non-compliance, a notice of violation may be issued, and the user may be told that the grease interceptor shall be cleaned immediately. After three weekdays, the grease interceptor may be re-inspected. (8)  Recordkeeping. It shall be a violation of this section for a user to allow the removal of its grease interceptor waste without documentation using an approved three-part manifest. The user shall be responsible for maintaining a copy of these manifests on site for a period of three years and subject to Athens-Clarke County's review without prior notification. The manifest shall contain the information listed below: a.  Food Service Establishment: Facility name, address, and telephone number Interceptor type and size Date and volume removed from the interceptor Authorized signature (verifying the grease interceptor was cleaned and in operable condition) b.  Service Company Information (Waste Transporter): Transporter name, address, and telephone number Transporter permit number Date and volume removed from the interceptor Disposal method Authorized signature of transporter c.  Disposal Site: Facility name, address, and telephone number Facility EPD permit number Date and volume received Authorized signature verifying receipt of waste (9)  Exceptions and variances. Athens-Clarke County may allow variances or exceptions in extenuating circumstances and shall maintain records of any exceptions granted to this section's design or maintenance requirements, including the rationale, signed by the official granting such exception. (10)  Enforcement. Any violations of this section are subject to the enforcement provisions of this chapter. ( Ord. of 10-2-2018(1), § 1 ) 
CHAPTER 5-2. - SOLID WASTE[2] Article 1. Statement of Intent; Definitions Sec. 5-2-1. Intent. Sec. 5-2-2. Definitions, service categories, customer classification; special customer. Article 2. Athens-Clarke Solid Waste Department Sec. 5-2-3. Solid waste department. Sec. 5-2-4. Director of solid waste department; duties, responsibilities. Sec. 5-2-5. Residential collection—Urban Service District. Sec. 5-2-6. Service billing—Residential; penalty discontinuance of service Sec. 5-2-7. Leaf and limb service—General Service District. Sec. 5-2-8. Unscheduled service. Sec. 5-2-9. Commercial dumpster service fee. Sec. 5-2-10. Sale of loadable containers. Sec. 5-2-11. Commercial curbside collection fees. Sec. 5-2-12. Service billing—Commercial. Sec. 5-2-13. Collection personnel. Article 3. Franchisees and Customers Generally Sec. 5-2-14. Customer service provisions generally—Commercial and residential customers. Sec. 5-2-15. Same—Residential customers. Sec. 5-2-16. Same—Commercial customers generally. Sec. 5-2-17. Other commercial activities. Sec. 5-2-18. Disposal of needles. Sec. 5-2-19. Disposal of garbage generally. Sec. 5-2-20. Abandonment of personal property within public rights-of-way. Sec. 5-2-21. Responsibility of franchisees generally. Sec. 5-2-22. Franchisees; billing and fees. Sec. 5-2-23. Requirements; conditions of franchisee. Sec. 5-2-24. Franchisees—Termination of franchise. Sec. 5-2-25. Revocation of franchise. Sec. 5-2-26. Vehicle requirements. Sec. 5-2-27. Identification. Sec. 5-2-28. Insurance. Sec. 5-2-29. Opportunity to recycle. Sec. 5-2-30. Hours of collection. Article 4. Landfill Regulations Sec. 5-2-31. Franchisees and self-haulers generally. Sec. 5-2-32. Service collections; landfill; penalty. Article 5. Schedule of Fines Sec. 5-2-50. Violations; schedule of fines. Sec. 5-2-51. Recyclable materials. Sec. 5-2-51.1. Solid Waste Improvement Fund. Sec. 5-2-52. Landfill fee schedule. Sec. 5-2-53. Building permits. Sec. 5-2-54. Violations. Article 6. Scrap Tire Management Sec. 5-2-55. Definitions. Sec. 5-2-56. Scrap tire management—General. Sec. 5-2-57. Accumulation. Sec. 5-2-58. Violations and penalties. Sec. 5-2-59. Severability. Footnotes: --- (2) --- Editor's note— An ordinance of April 4, 1995, repealed former Ch. 5-2 in its entirety. Said chapter contained provisions relative to solid waste and was derived from ordinances enacted Dec. 1, 1992; July 6, 1993; and March 7, 1995. In addition, said ordinance of April 4, 1995, substituted new provisions enacted as a new Ch. 5-2. 
ARTICLE 1. - STATEMENT OF INTENT; DEFINITIONS 
Sec. 5-2-1. - Intent. (a)  It is the intent of Athens-Clarke County to reduce the amount of solid waste generated and disposed by undertaking aggressive source reduction and recycling activities. Athens-Clarke County's policy shall promote the development of environmentally sound practices regarding the collection, and processing of solid waste. (b)  In order to attain these goals and to protect public health and the environment, Athens-Clarke County shall regulate collection of solid waste, within the boundaries of the General Service District (GSD) or county. In carrying out this intent, the goals of this ordinance are: (1)  To reduce the amount of solid waste disposed, as measured on a per capita basis, 25 percent by July 1, 1996, as required under the Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act of 1990 (O.C.G.A. § 12-9-20 et seq.) (2)  To ensure the safe and sanitary collection, transportation and recovery of solid waste, recyclable and compostable materials. (3)  To provide Athens-Clarke County residents and businesses the opportunity to recycle more materials through convenient on-site, curbside and dropoff station collection programs and through the addition of recyclable materials to the collection program as appropriate. (4)  To establish and enforce solid waste collection standards to ensure uniform, cost effective and high quality service delivery to all residents. (5)  To create fee system components by which collection rates can be established for waste collection which are fair to the public, encourage waste reduction, and promote safe, efficient collection. (6)  To promote community awareness in order to achieve the highest participation possible in the solid waste and collection system and all recycling opportunities (7)  To enhance waste reduction and recycling in the multifamily, commercial, institutional and industrial sectors. (8)  To undertake studies and demonstration projects on developing more efficient, economical and effective methods of waste reduction, recycling and waste collection. (Ord. of 4-4-95, § 1) 
Sec. 5-2-2. - Definitions, service categories, customer classification; special customer. (a)  General terms defined: Words not defined here shall be construed to have their common dictionary definition.     Athens-Clarke means the area within the General Services District Boundary.     Bulky waste shall mean solid waste with weights or volumes which exceed the designated capacity of solid waste storage or collection containers. Such waste includes but is not limited to tree limbs, mattresses, and other large items.     Collect includes storage, transportation or disposal.     Commercial collection means the collection of solid waste from: (1)  A nonresidential source; (2)  A multifamily residence of five (5) or more units;     Compensation means and includes: (1)  Any type of consideration paid for service, including, without limitation, rent, lease payments and any other direct or indirect provision of payment of money, goods, services or benefits by owners, tenants, lessees, occupants or similar persons; (2)  The exchange of services between persons; and (3)  The flow of consideration from the person owning or possessing the solid waste or recyclable material to the person providing the service or from the person providing the service to the person owning or possessing the solid waste material.     Construction and demolition waste shall mean a type of solid waste consisting of waste building materials and rubble resulting from construction, remodeling, repair and demolition operations on pavement, houses, commercial buildings and other structures. Construction and demolition debris includes trees, stumps, and brush removed from property during construction, maintenance or repair of structures.     Construction and demolition waste does not include any of the following, which is defined under this ordinance as solid waste even if it results from construction, remodeling, repair and demolition of structures: (a) garbage, (b) furniture and (c) solid waste resulting from a processing technique that renders individual waste components unrecognizable, such as pulverizing or shredding. It also does not include any of the following, which may require special disposal considerations: (a) asbestos waste, (b) drums and containers, (c) fuel tanks, (d) corrugated container board, and (e) appliances.     Cost of service shall mean cost of personnel, services, supplies, other services and charges, maintenance and repair, capital equipment, fringe benefits, supervision, overhead and other costs related to providing service.     Customer shall mean the local person responsible for the serviced location who receives and/or pays for solid waste service from a franchisee.     Director is the director of the solid waste department, or his or her duly authorized representative or agent.     Disposal facility means any facility or location where any treatment, utilization, processing, deposition or disposition of solid waste occurs.     Disposal site means the location where the final deposition or disposition of solid waste occurs.     Dropoff station means an established area approved by Athens-Clarke County where any person may deposit recyclable materials specified by Athens-Clarke County.     Dumpster shall mean a large metal bulk container which has capacity of no less than two (2) nor more than eight (8) cubic yard storage, and is a design approved by the solid waste department.     Fees paid service shall mean the routine service provided for by the solid waste department to customers for a fee determined by the schedule of fees as set forth in article 2 of this chapter.     Food service establishment shall include any establishment used for the preparation, packaging and serving of meals, lunches, short orders, sandwiches, frozen desserts, food samples or other edible products.     Franchise means a solid waste collection franchise awarded by Athens-Clarke County and contractually agreed to between Athens-Clarke County and the franchisee allowing them to engage in activities of a franchise as defined in and governed by this chapter.     Franchisee shall mean any person, persons or entity granted a franchise from Athens-Clarke County who, under agreements for compensation by those receiving services, is engaged in whole or in part in the business of collecting, transporting, delivering, or disposing of solid waste materials, other than industrial waste, within Athens-Clarke County. "Franchisee" includes any employees or other persons authorized to act on behalf of the Franchisee. "Franchisee" has a meaning identical to that of "grantee" as used in the franchise agreement.     Garbage means all household or domestic waste, including waste from the preparation and cooking of food, vegetables, fruit and meat scraps, ashes, cans and bottles, paper, floor sweepings, cardboard, and other such material to be disposed of from residences, houses of worship, schools, office buildings, business establishments and similar places.     Garbage can shall mean a container of a capacity not less than 20 gallons and not to exceed 96 gallons and where solid waste is placed for collection. Such a can shall have two (2) handles upon the sides of the can, or a bail by which it may be lifted and shall have a tightfitting metal, plastic, or rubber top.     Hazardous waste shall mean solid waste that is harmful to human or environmental health. Such waste includes, but is not limited to, solids, semisolids, liquids, and gases that are or may become toxic, caustic, infectious, contagious, flammable, or explosive and other items described as being hazardous in federal, state, or local government codes and regulations, except radioactive waste materials as provided in the Rules of the Department of Human Resources, Chapter 270-5-20, entitled, "Radioactive Materials."     Industrial waste means solid waste generated by manufacturing or industrial processes that is not a hazardous waste regulated under the Hazardous Waste Management Act and regulations promulgated by the Board of Natural Resources, Chapter 391-3-11. Such waste includes, but is not limited to, wastes resulting from the following manufacturing processes: Electric power generation; fertilizer/agricultural chemicals; food and related products/byproducts; inorganic chemicals; iron and steel manufacturing; leather and leather products; nonferrous metals manufacturing/foundries; organic chemicals; plastics and resins manufacturing; pulp and paper industry; rubber and miscellaneous plastic products; stone, glass, clay, and concrete products; textile manufacturing; transportation equipment; and water treatment. This term does not include mining waste or oil and gas waste.     Inert wastes shall mean wastes which will not, or are not likely to, cause production of leachate of environmental concern. Such wastes are limited to earth and earth-like products, concrete, cured asphalt, rock, bricks, yard trimmings, stumps, limbs, and leaves. This definition excludes industrial and demolition wastes not specifically listed herein.     Infectious waste shall mean a solid waste capable of producing an infectious disease. The types of waste designated as infectious are: microbiological waste, pathological waste, blood products, and sharps.     Leaf and limb materials shall mean leaf or limb materials resulting from normal yard maintenance, such as leaves, brush, grass clippings, shrub and tree prunings, discarded Christmas trees, nursery and greenhouse vegetative residuals, and vegetative matter resulting from landscaping development or other garden activities. This term does not include stumps, logs, pallets, agricultural wastes, animal waste, roots, sewage sludge or garbage.     Litter shall mean misplaced or improperly discarded "solid waste" as defined herein.     Person shall mean any individual, partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, representative, agent, or assignee. Regarding customers of the solid waste department, "person" shall mean: (1)  The occupant of the structure serviced by the solid waste department; (2)  The local manager in charge of operations within the structure serviced by the solid waste department; or (3)  The owner of the structure serviced by the solid waste department.     Premises shall mean a parcel of land, including any buildings or structures located thereon, within Athens-Clarke County used for residential, commercial, industrial, agricultural or institutional purposes either separately or in combination to which a separate street address, postal address or box, tax map description, or other similar identification has been assigned or which is in use by a person having control of the area.     Prohibited waste shall mean any waste that cannot be included in the solid waste set out for collection from any premises located within Athens-Clarke County.     Prohibited waste list shall mean a list of banned waste established by the director of solid waste.     Receptacle shall mean any container (dumpster, garbage can, roll cart or bag) approved by the solid waste department for use in the temporary storage, collection and disposal of solid waste, including containers used for recycling service.     Recyclable or recovered material shall mean material(s) which have known use, reuse, or recycling potential; can be feasibly used, reused or recycled; and have been diverted or removed from the solid waste stream for sale, use, reuse, or recycling, whether or not requiring subsequent separation and processing.     Recycling means the series of activities including collection, separation, and processing, by which products or other materials are recovered from or otherwise diverted from the solid waste stream (1) for use in the form of raw materials in the manufacture of new products other than fuel and (2) in the case of source separated wood waste which has no material use, for use as fuel. Recycling includes composting of source separated organics but not composting of mixed waste.     Refuse means trash, rubbish or items or materials no longer fit for their original intended use.     Residence means any dwelling unit that is a four-plex or smaller that is occupied by either an owner or tenant.     Resident means any person living in a "residence."     Routine service shall mean the collection, transfer and disposal of refuse from receptacles on a pre-established schedule and route serviced by a franchisee.     Scavenger shall mean any person engaged in the uncontrolled picking, separating or reclaiming of discarded solid waste and/or recyclable materials from the receptacle of another.     Self-haul means the collection and transportation of nonresidential solid waste, at a level not to exceed five (5) tons per month, or residential solid waste, at a level not to exceed one-quarter tons per month, that is generated by tenants, homeowners, manufacturing operations, or other facilities owned by the hauler by the living unit owner or his or her direct employee, doing so without charge or reimbursement for such services.     Service means the collection and transportation of solid waste by persons for compensation.     Servicing shall mean the physical or mechanical act of collateral transferring and loading of solid waste from approved receptacles by a franchisee.     Service provider shall mean a franchisee.     Serviceability shall mean the ability for the franchisee to have access to and service receptacles.     Solid waste means any garbage or refuse; sludge from a wastewater treatment plant, water supply treatment plant, or air pollution control facility; and other discarded material including but not limited to solid, liquid, semisolid, or contained gaseous material resulting from industrial, commercial, mining, and agricultural operations and from community activities, but does not include recovered materials; solid or dissolved materials in domestic sewage; solid or dissolved materials in irrigation return flows or industrial discharges that are point sources subject to permit under 33 U.S.C. Section 1342; or source, special nuclear, or byproduct material as defined by the federal Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended (68 Stat. 923).     Solid waste handling shall mean the physical or mechanical act of storing, collecting, transporting, treating, utilizing, processing, or disposing of solid waste or any combination of such activities.     Source-separated materials shall mean recyclable or leaf and limb materials are substantially separated from other solid waste and kept segregated in some form from solid waste.     Targeted materials list shall mean the list established by the director of solid waste of all recyclable materials that are to be collected by the franchisee. A copy of the list is available for public inspection in the Office of the Clerk of Commission and Office of the Director of Solid Waste. Such list, as amended from time to time, is incorporated into this ordinance by reference.     Tipping fee shall mean the fee to be charged upon delivery of solid waste, recyclable materials or leaf and limb materials to an Athens-Clarke County facility.     Transfer station shall mean a facility used to transfer solid waste from one (1) route collection vehicle to another bulk transfer vehicle or trailer for transportation to a disposal facility or landfill.     Volume-based fee system shall mean a fee system, used by the franchisee to charge customers for services, that meet requirements to encourage waste reduction, reuse, recycling and processing through reduced rates for smaller containers or numbers of containers of solid waste. The components of the fee system shall include a fixed monthly base charge plus a disposal charge based on the number and size of the containers. (b)  Service categories. Services provided to residential and commercial customers are defined below: (1)  Bag service. Collection of solid waste contained in a sealed disposable bag. (2)  Backyard service. Collection of solid waste from garbage cans, located adjacent to and at the side or rear of the structure being served. Receptacles shall not be located within the public right-of-way nor at any other locations readily visible from such public right-of-way, other than on scheduled collection days. (3)  Curbside service. Collection of solid waste or recycling materials from garbage cans or recycling containers, respectively, located within 15 feet of the curb. (4)  Dead animals services. Collection of a dead household pet or other small animal which is placed in a plastic bag outside the premises at the property boundary and/or curb, and disposing of same at a landfill. (5)  Dumpster service. Collection of garbage or recycling materials from solid waste department approved dumpsters by a specially designed and compatible top-loading collection vehicle, dumping and returning dumpster to its authorized location. (6)  Leaf and limb service. Collection of bagged leaves and bundled limbs at preannounced times and places. (7)  Roll cart service. Collection of refuse and garbage or recycling materials from approved roll carts located adjacent to the structure or temporarily placed at the curb as specified by the franchisee. (8)  Special/unscheduled service. Nonroutine collection of furniture, moving boxes, auto parts, construction materials, leaf and limb, or solid waste weighing less than 100 pounds per item by the franchisee at the expense of the owner or occupant of the premises. (c)  Customer classification defined. Customers of the franchisee shall be classified as either residential or commercial. (1)  Residential customers. Single-family detached, duplex, and four-plex dwelling structures occupied by either an owner or tenant. All such residential customers within the Urban Service District (USD), as set forth in [section] 7-301(a) of the Charter shall use the Athens-Clarke County Solid Waste Department as their franchisee for the collection and disposal of their garbage. (2)  Commercial locations. Structures that house more than four families or businesses that are otherwise engaged in profit, nonprofit or public service activities. These structures include, but are not limited to, the following: a.  Multifamily structures. Multifamily structures include fraternity houses, sorority houses, hotels, motels, trailer parks, townhouses, and apartment or condominium complexes with more than four attached family dwelling units. b.  Business structures. Facilities housing wholesale and retail businesses that provide goods and services not otherwise defined in this chapter. c.  Restaurant structures. Eating establishments having seating capacity for their customers to consume food on the premises. d.  Food concession structures or facilities. Food concession structures or facilities including structures, stands, and carts from which fast food is purchased by individuals for consumption and which do not provide seating for customers. e.  Industrial structures. Structures which shelter employees, or clientele who are engaged in the manufacturing or processing of goods and materials. f.  Institutional structures. Facilities owned and/or operated by an organization having a governmental, educational, civic, or religious purpose such as a school, hospital, nursing home, correctional facility, church, or similar establishment or facility. (d)  Special customers defined. Residential and commercial customers who request unscheduled services or services other than routine services. The franchisee shall have the right to accept or reject the performance of such unscheduled services and levy fees on a cost of service basis. The franchisee shall determine services and fees for special customers. (Ord. of 4-4-95, § 1; Ord. of 6-3-97, § 1; Ord. of 2-3-2004, § 2; Ord. of 7-5-2006, § 1; Ord. of 4-7-2009, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 11-7-2012, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 11-7-2012, §§ 1, 2) 
ARTICLE 2. - ATHENS-CLARKE SOLID WASTE DEPARTMENT 
Sec. 5-2-3. - Solid waste department. (a)  This department shall be under the direction of the solid waste director. It shall collect, transport, transfer and dispose of garbage and refuse, and other solid waste for the portions of Athens-Clarke County as approved by the mayor and commission. It is also responsible for providing and/or coordinating community wide solid waste reduction efforts and for managing the operations of the Athens-Clarke County landfill. (b)  The solid waste department shall be responsible for administration of all franchises for the collection of solid waste and recyclable materials within the boundaries of Athens-Clarke County. (Ord. of 4-4-95, § 1; Ord. of 7-2-96, § 1; Ord. of 7-6-99, § 1) 
Sec. 5-2-4. - Director of solid waste department; duties, responsibilities. (a)  The director of the solid waste department shall be appointed by the manager. (b)  The solid waste director shall have the authority to assign departmental employees the responsibility to make routine inspections of solid waste receptacles; compacting equipment used in conjunction with any such receptacle; service and/or operational standards; and other solid waste department inspection responsibilities. (c)  The solid waste director shall be responsible for the administration of the provisions of this chapter, other ordinances, and other policies and regulations dealing with health, sanitation, and litter. All regulations, policies and operating procedures of the solid waste department shall be subject to review and approval by the manager. (d)  The director of the solid waste department is hereby authorized and directed to review and approve all plans and specifications for the installation of compactor units. Such compactors shall be approved by the director of solid waste prior to the installation being made. All compactor shredders and compactor receptacles shall be installed on concrete pads of a type and design acceptable to the director of solid waste. All such installations shall comply with the requirements of the building codes, the fire prevention codes, and other safety laws and ordinances of Athens-Clarke County. The director of solid waste is further authorized to adopt additional regulations as may be necessary and reasonable as to his or her judgment that will carry out the requirements and/or intent of this chapter. The director of the solid waste department is authorized to approve a different size of loadable receptacles as specified in this chapter. The director is also authorized to make this determination with reference to receptacles not covered under this chapter. (Ord. of 4-4-95, § 1) 
Sec. 5-2-5. - Residential collection—Urban Service District. (a)  There is hereby levied and assessed a monthly fee for all residential customers receiving backyard pick up of solid waste and curbside pick up of recycling materials within the confines of the urban service district as defined in section 7-301(a) of the Charter of the Unified Government of Athens-Clarke County. Customers shall pay according to the size and number of solid waste containers as follows: 1 20-gallon container ..... $30.60 1 32-gallon container ..... $32.60 2 32-gallon containers ..... $36.60 3 32-gallon containers ..... $43.60 4 32-gallon containers ..... $52.60 5 32-gallon containers ..... $65.60 (b)  There is hereby levied and assessed a monthly fee for all residential customers receiving rollcart curbside pickup of solid waste and curbside pick up of recycling materials within the confines of the urban service district as defined in section 7-301(a) of the Charter of the Unified Government of Athens-Clarke County. Customers shall pay according to the size and number of solid waste containers as follows: 1 20-gallon container ..... $15.60 1 32-gallon container ..... $17.60 2 32-gallon containers ..... $21.60 3 32-gallon containers ..... $28.60 4 32-gallon containers ..... $37.60 5 32-gallon containers ..... $50.60 (c)  Customers with occasional extra bags of garbage shall be required to purchase a special sticker from the solid waste department to place on their bagged garbage. The fee per sticker shall be $2.00. (d)  Customers may change their level of service without charge one time during each calendar year; thereafter, any customers who desire to change said level of service shall be required to pay a fee of $10.00 per change. (e)  Customers requiring "dead animal" services defined in section 5-2-2 (b)(4) herein shall be required to purchase a sticker in the amount of $2.00 to place on the bag to be disposed of. (f)  Customers who have small appliances or empty corrugated cardboard boxes weighing no more than 40 pounds and no larger than three feet tall by three feet wide may request a special pickup by the solid waste department. Customers shall be required to purchase a sticker in the amount of $2.00 to place on each item to be disposed of. (g)  New customer accounts established after September 1, 1995, shall be assessed a security deposit equal to one month's service plus a nonrefundable service fee of $10.00 to "turn on" the service. The security deposit shall be applied to the customer's last bill. (Ord. of 4-4-95, § 1; Ord. of 7-5-95, § 1; Ord. of 6-3-97, § 1; Ord. of 6-12-2001, § 1; Ord. of 5-3-2005, § 1; Ord. of 6-5-2007, § 1; Ord. of 5-6-2008, § 1; Ord. of 10-4-2011, § 1) 
Sec. 5-2-6. - Service billing—Residential; penalty discontinuance of service. (a)  Fees paid for routine services provided to residential customers by the solid waste department shall be billed on a monthly basis on a customer's water bill. If it is determined that a proprietor, tenant or owner of a structure does not receive a water bill, then solid waste fees shall be billed separately by the water business office. In the event unscheduled services are requested, charges for those services shall be applied to the next monthly bill or by separate billing. The administration and collection of garbage fees on water bills shall be coordinated between the solid waste department and other appropriate departments. (b)  Any customer who fails to make payment of the charges by the due date as determined by the water business office shall pay, in addition to the amount of the charge, a penalty of ten percent of the amount of said charge. Said penalty shall also be applied to all prior unpaid accounts and on any prior penalties resulting therefrom. (Ord. of 4-4-95, § 1) 
Sec. 5-2-7. - Leaf and limb service—General Service District. (a)  Leaf and limb service—Collection of brush, leaves and limbs generally. The solid waste department shall provide this service throughout Athens-Clarke County. Residential customers are the primary recipients of this service; however, commercial customers may receive this service on a cost-of-service basis. (b)  Frequency of service—Amount collectible . The solid waste department shall not collect more than one load at any one location per predetermined cycle unless collected as an unscheduled service. A "load" is defined as one three-quarter-ton pickup truck or six cubic yards. (c)  Placement and preparation of items generally. Brush and limbs shall be placed between curb and sidewalk. Where there is no sidewalk, limbs may be placed on the owner's property near the street. Limbs shall not be over six feet in length or four inches in diameter and shall be completely trimmed. Limbs shall be stacked no closer than 50 feet from an intersection and shall be in a manner not to obstruct the view of traffic. All limbs and leaves shall be separated with limbs placed in one direction, that is, with all cut ends together. Leaves and grass shall be placed in paper lawn bags or other approved biodegradable containers and placed between curb and sidewalk. Alternate containers must be approved by the director of the solid waste department. Where there is no sidewalk, bags shall be placed on the owner's property near the street. Shrubbery clippings, vines, briars and other running plants must be separated from all other leaf and limbs placed near the street for collection. Dirt, rocks, grass roots and other plant roots containing soil shall not be collected by Athens-Clarke County.     Leaves, limbs, grass or other trimmings shall be placed in an orderly manner so as not to obstruct the free and normal flow of any drainage system or the safe vision or movement of any pedestrian or vehicular traffic. Such debris shall not be placed in the gutter of any roadway at any time.     It shall be unlawful for any person to place or dispose of any leaves, limbs, grass or other trimmings within the public rights-of-way throughout Athens-Clarke County at any time except as provided in this section. (d)  Placement of items by persons other than property owner. Limbs cut and placed near the street for collection by any person other than the owner of the property shall not be collected or hauled by Athens-Clarke County. Individuals or companies under contract to collect leaves and limbs shall haul and dispose of all such refuse. This requirement also applies to utility or railroad companies which trim vegetation away from their wires, equipment or tracks to maintain their right-of-way over public and private land. (e)  Items placed on vacant lots. Leaves or limbs put on vacant lots by property owners or violators shall not be collected. (f)  Entry on property by Athens-Clarke County vehicles and employees. Except as otherwise provided, Athens-Clarke County owned vehicles shall not enter upon private property to collect limbs or other solid waste, and employees are hereby prohibited from entering upon private property to collect limbs which are placed more than five feet behind the sidewalk or property line, whichever is the farthest from the centerline of the street. (g)  Length of time materials may remain at the curb. Such debris as leaves, limbs or other trimmings shall not be placed within a public right-of-way more than ten calendar days prior to the Monday of the week scheduled for the collection and removal of such debris by Athens-Clarke County or a private or commercial collector. (Ord. of 4-4-95, § 1; Ord. of 2-3-98, § 1; Ord. of 8-3-99, § 1; Ord. of 2-4-2003, § 1; Ord. of 7-5-2006, § 2) 
Sec. 5-2-8. - Unscheduled service. (a)  The minimum charge under section 5-2-6 shall be $75.00 per vehicle load or part thereof plus disposal cost based on the current landfill rates for the type of materials collected for all customers requesting additional municipal solid waste and/or leaf and limb collection services by the solid waste department within the confines of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia. (b)  The director of solid waste shall charge a customer for collection and disposal expenses associated with the removal of waste which does not comply with the solid waste ordinance or approved policies and procedures and shall charge a minimum of $75.00 per vehicle load or part thereof plus disposal cost based on the current landfill rates for the type of materials collected within the confines of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia. (Ord. of 4-4-95, § 1; Ord. of 7-1-97, § 1; Ord. of 7-5-2006, § 3) 
Sec. 5-2-9. - Commercial dumpster service fee. (a)  The monthly base rate schedule for weekly commercial solid waste dumpster service from loadable containers owned by Athens-Clarke County for all customers receiving commercial solid waste collection services, within the confines of the Urban Service District as defined by section 7-301 (a) of the Charter of the Unified Government of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia, shall be as follows: 2 yds 4 yds 6 yds 8 yds 1 per week $71.60 $86.60 $105.60 $124.60 2 per week 125.60 157.60 189.60 223.60 3 per week 181.60 226.60 275.60 323.60 4 per week 236.60 296.60 360.60 422.60 5 per week 291.60 366.60 445.60 524.60  (b)  The monthly base rate schedule for weekly commercial recycling dumpster service from loadable containers owned by Athens-Clarke County for all customers receiving commercial solid waste collection services, within the confines of the Urban Service District as defined by section 7-301 (a) of the Charter of the Unified Government of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia, shall be as follows: 2 yds 4 yds 6 yds 8 yds 1 per week $ 54.00 $ 55.00 $ 59.00 $ 63.00 2 per week 93.00 94.00 97.00 101.00 3 per week 132.00 133.00 137.00 140.00 4 per week 171.00 172.00 176.00 179.00 5 per week 210.00 211.00 214.00 217.00  (c)  There shall be a charge of $15.00 per dumpster for blocked dumpsters or switching out dumpsters. (d)  Customers requesting an extra pickup shall pay the following fees for each additional dumpster tip requested: 2 yard $12.00 4 yard  15.28 6 yard  18.52 8 yard  21.76  (e)  Any customer requesting a change in service level or collection schedule over and above the one "free" change allowed to each customer during a calendar year shall be assessed a fee of $10.00 per change. (f)  If a customer currently serviced within the confines of the urban service district as defined by section 7-301(a) of the Charter of the Unified Government of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia, has other area offices within the boundaries of Athens-Clarke County, then the solid waste director shall have the authority to provide a bid to deliver the requested services to all of the customer's area offices. (g)  Commercial dumpster customers shall sign either a one-, two- or three-year service contract with the Athens-Clarke County Unified Government for collection services. (Ord. of 4-4-95, § 1; Ord. of 7-5-95, § 2; Ord. of 6-3-2003, §§ 1—3; Ord. of 5-6-2008, § 1; Ord. of 10-4-2011, § 2) 
Sec. 5-2-10. - Sale of loadable containers. (a)  Effective September 1, 1995, Athens-Clarke County shall no longer provide for the sale of loadable containers to customers receiving commercial collection services, within the confines of the Urban Service District as defined by section 7-301(a) of the Charter of the Unified Government of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia. (b)  There shall be a charge of $15.00 per location for the relocation of dumpsters not owned or serviced by Athens-Clarke County. (c)  A minimum of $20.00 shall be charged for steam cleaning and disinfecting dumpsters not owned by Athens-Clarke County. (Ord. of 4-4-95, § 1; Ord. of 7-5-95, § 3) 
Sec. 5-2-11. - Commercial curbside collection fees. (a)  The monthly base fees for commercial curbside collection services for all customers receiving commercial solid waste collection services, within the confines of the Urban Service District as defined by section 7-301(a) of the Charter of the Unified Government of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia, shall be as follows: Class A ..... $26.60 Class B ..... 32.60 Class 1A ..... 82.60 Class 2A ..... 161.60 Class D ..... 40.60     In addition, customers shall be required to purchase from the solid waste department official garbage bags in which to place their garbage for collection. The fee per bag shall be $1.50 to cover the cost of purchasing the bag and the cost of disposing of the waste in said bag at the landfill.     The fee system includes a monthly base fee for the collection function and a disposal fee based upon the volume of waste collected. The base fee element of the system shall be based on the following customer classes: Class A —Customers that have a need for solid waste collection service two times/week, Monday through Saturday. This service classification shall not be made available to restaurants or bars and is only for commercial customers outside the commercial business district. Class B —Customers that have a need for solid waste collection service three times/week, Monday through Saturday. This service classification shall not be made available to restaurants or bars. Class 1A —Customers that have a need for solid waste collection service one time/day, Monday through Sunday. Class 2A —Customers that have a need for solid waste collection services two times/day, Monday through Sunday. Class 4 —Customers that have collection services provided by dumpster service. Such fees for this type service shall be based on the volume of the dumpster and the frequency of collection as set forth in section 5-2-9. Class D —Residential customers, defined as either owners or tenants occupying a dwelling unit, excluding multifamily residences of 30 or more units, unless approved by the solid waste director, that have a need for solid waste collection service two times/week, Monday through Saturday. (b)  Customers shall be charged $3.00 per five-gallon container of cooking oil collected. (c)  There shall be a minimum charge of $75.00 per vehicle load or part thereof plus disposal cost based on the current landfill rates for the type of materials collected by request of the customer as an unscheduled or special service, as herein defined.     The director of solid waste shall charge a customer for collection and disposal expenses associated with the removal of waste which does not comply with the solid waste ordinance or approved policies and procedures and shall charge a minimum of $75.00 per vehicle load or part thereof plus disposal cost based on the current landfill rates for the type of materials collected. (d)  Recycling services. Recycling services shall be exempt from additional charges only if the customer properly registers for the service through the solid waste department. Customers who need unscheduled or special services who are not properly registered with the solid waste department shall be charged as set forth in section 5-2-11(c). (e)  Glass Bottle Reduction Program . Bars and restaurants in the commercial business district are eligible to participate in the glass bottle reduction program. Each business that elects to participate shall annually complete and have on file with the Athens-Clarke County Solid Waste Department a Glass Bottle Reduction Program Reporting Form, as set forth in Solid Waste Policy SW-023, a copy of which is available for public inspection and use in the Office of the Clerk of Commission and the Office of the Director of Solid Waste. (f)  Any customer requesting a change in service level or collection schedule over and above the one "free" change allowed to each customer during a calendar year, shall be assessed a fee of $10.00 per change. (g)  Class D customers shall not be required to purchase official garbage bags for their solid waste; however, they shall be required to place their solid waste in the official garbage bags which shall be made available to them by the Athens-Clarke County Solid Waste Department in accordance with established policies and procedures. (Ord. of 4-4-95, § 1; Ord. of 7-5-95, § 4; Ord. of 6-3-97, §§ 1—4; Ord. of 7-1-97, § 1; Ord. of 7-3-97, § 2; Ord. of 8-3-99, § 2; Ord. of 7-2-2002, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 6-3-2003, §§ 1—3; Ord. of 5-3-2005, § 2; Ord. of 7-5-2006, § 4; Ord. of 5-6-2008, § 1; Ord. of 10-4-2011, § 3; Ord. of 3-6-2012, § 1; Ord. of 7-3-2018(1), § 1 ) 
Sec. 5-2-12. - Service billing—Commercial.     Fees paid for routine services provided to commercial customers by the solid waste department shall be billed on a monthly basis on the customer's water bill. If it is determined that a proprietor, tenant or owner of a structure does not receive a water bill, then it shall be billed separately by the water business office. In the event unscheduled services are requested, charges for those services shall be applied to the next monthly bill or by separate billing. The administration and collection of garbage fees on water bills shall be coordinated between the solid waste department and other appropriate departments. (a)  Payment for services. Payment for services shall be as follows: (1)  Those food service establishments using bags to dispose of solid waste shall be assessed fees as set forth in section 5-2-11. (2)  Hotels, professional buildings, bank buildings, apartments, condomi-niums, and other multiple tenant structures in the downtown business district that offer garbage services or janitorial services as part of their lease, rental or association agreement shall be assessed a monthly fee in accordance with section 5-2-11. The fee shall be prepaid by the individual or entity who is responsible for the structure's water bill. Multiple unit structures that are not managed or maintained by a central agency will be individually assessed the minimum monthly fee per unit as set forth in section 5-2-11. A multiple tenant structure which is serviced by an Athens-Clarke County dumpster shall be assessed fees in accordance with section 5-2-9 or 5-2-10, whichever is applicable. (3)  Other businesses that use approved bags as their primary means of disposing of refuse shall be billed as set forth in section 5-2-11. (b)  Penalty; discontinuance of service for nonpayment; liens. Any customer who fails to make payment of the charges by the due date as determined by the water business office shall pay, in addition to the amount of the charge, a penalty of ten percent of the amount of said charge. Said penalty shall also be applied to all prior unpaid accounts and on any prior penalties resulting therefrom. (Ord. of 4-4-95, § 1) 
Sec. 5-2-13. - Collection personnel.     The following provisions apply to garbage and refuse collection personnel employed by the solid waste department: (a)  Collectors shall not be permitted to enter any residence or commercial establishment in the performance of their duties even at the request of the customer. (b)  Collectors shall not accept, money or other things of value in exchange for the performance of extra services. (Ord. of 4-4-95, § 1) 
ARTICLE 3. - FRANCHISEES AND CUSTOMERS GENERALLY[3] Footnotes: --- (3) --- Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Feb. 3, 2004, changed the title of art. 3 of ch. 5-2 from "Franchisees Generally" to "Franchisees and Customers Generally." 
Sec. 5-2-14. - Customer service provisions generally—Commercial and residential customers.     All persons within Athens-Clarke County shall comply with the following provisions: (a)  Requirements for receptacles. It shall be unlawful for any person as defined in this chapter to violate any of the following provisions concerning receptacles as defined in this chapter: (1)  Location of receptacles. Other than between 6:00 p.m. the day before scheduled collection and noon of the day following the customer's scheduled collection day, receptacles shall be stored behind or adjacent to the residence, unit or structure receiving the collection service or otherwise screened from view from the public right-of-way. (2)  Approved receptacles. All items placed within the public right-of-way by any person must be contained in an approved receptacle unless otherwise authorized by law and/or service standards approved by the solid waste director. (3)  Below-ground receptacles. Collection from below ground receptacles is prohibited. (b)  Prohibited items. Certain items, by their nature, prohibit disposal or collection by ordinary or routine means due to their size, weight, volume, bulk, putrescibility, injurious or hazardous characteristics. The following is a nonexclusive list of the type of items that shall not be collected by the service provider as part of its routine service. Placement of these items or similar items in receptacles serviced by the provider is prohibited: (1)  Household or industrial appliances and furniture; (2)  Carpets or carpet scraps; (3)  Tires; (4)  Wooden crates or cardboard boxes that have not been collapsed or flattened; (5)  Logs or limbs; (6)  Bed springs; (7)  Rock, dirt, concrete blocks or other construction and demolition waste; (8)  Liquids of any type not in a sealed container; (9)  Wet garbage not in a waterproof bag; (10)  Household solid waste not in an approved bag; (11)  Vehicle batteries; (12)  Toxic, caustic, infectious, contagious, explosive or otherwise hazardous waste: a.  The service provider shall not collect nor handle toxic, contagious, explosive or otherwise hazardous waste for disposal. Such waste shall be disposed of in accordance with federal, state and local laws and procedures. b.  It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to dispose of toxic, caustic, contagious, explosive or otherwise hazardous waste in receptacles of any type without the knowledge and approval of collection service. (13)  Leaf and limb materials as defined in this chapter. a.  It shall be unlawful for any person to place or mix leaf and limb materials with solid waste within Athens-Clarke County. (c)  Maintenance of receptacle and area surrounding. Owners, occupants, agents and, when appropriate, service providers are responsible for keeping receptacles in a serviceable condition, reasonably clean and free of decaying matter, and placed in such a manner as to not interfere with the routine utilization of the right-of-way. The solid waste director at his discretion may designate locations for, or deny the placement of, receptacles to better facilitate the use of public rights-of-way. The area surrounding receptacles shall be free and clear of accumulations of refuse. Where two (2) or more occupants, owners or agents share the same receptacle, it shall be the joint responsibility of all of the users to maintain the area surrounding the receptacle. Maintenance of receptacles shall be the responsibility of the owner of the receptacle. (d)  Removal of tenant property. Owners or agents of the owner shall be responsible for items removed from real properties rented or leased to others and placed in residential yards, rights-of-way, or adjacent commercial structures. Fees levied for the removal of such items shall be the responsibility of the owner or authorized agent. (e)  Dead animals. The property owner may elect to have the franchisee collect a dead house pet or other small animals. In such case, the dead house pet or other small animals shall be put into a plastic bag by the customer, placed at the curb, and shall be collected by the franchisee. Such service shall be on an on-call basis during regular operating hours, considered a special service, and may be subject to additional fees. (f)  Disposal of vehicle parts or junked vehicles. The franchisee reserves the right to deny pickup and disposal of vehicle parts or junked vehicles. (g)  Unauthorized disposal. Placement of commercial or residential solid waste, recyclable materials, leaves, limbs, or other materials by any person in the receptacle of another is prohibited without the express permission of the owner or other person in lawful possession of said property. This provision includes, but is not limited to, the unauthorized disposal of commercial or residential materials as noted above in public waste or recycling cans or dumpsters. (h)  Unscheduled service. Items (1), (2), and (4) through (6) of subsection (b) above and leaf and limb materials, as defined in this chapter, may be disposed of by calling the franchisee and making an appointment to have said materials removed at the customer's expense on a cost-of-service basis. This service shall classify the requester as a special customer, and permits the franchisee the right to accept or refuse service. Items to be collected shall be placed next to the customer's refuse receptacle or another location that meets with the approval of the franchisee and the director. (i)  Recycling requirements—Residential and commercial requirements. (1)  Residential—Separation of targeted materials. The owner of each residential property within Athens-Clarke County electing to participate in recycling activities shall be responsible for keeping the materials on the Targeted Materials List, as set forth in Solid Waste Policy SW-004 and a copy of which shall be made available for public inspection and use in the Office of the Clerk of Commission and the Office of the Director of Solid Waste, separate from solid waste generated on their premises and properly preparing them for recycling. (2)  Commercial—Separation of targeted materials. It shall be the responsibility of all commercial customers within Athens-Clarke County to provide at all times such recycling containers as are suitable and necessary to provide for and accommodate the collection of all items listed on the Targeted Materials List, as set forth in Solid Waste Policy SW-004 and a copy of which shall be made available for public inspection and use in the Office of the Clerk of Commission and the Office of the Director of Solid Waste, that are generated by such commercial customer. (3)  Commercial—Promotion and education related to recycling. It shall be the responsibility of all commercial customers within Athens-Clarke County to provide recycling information and guidelines to its employees and/or tenants. Owners of multi-family properties shall distribute to new tenants at the beginning of the lease and to all existing tenants at least annually, general recycling program information and current recycling program guidelines as updated and provided by the Athens-Clarke County Solid Waste Department. (4)  Commercial—Reporting. Each commercial customer within Athens-Clarke County shall complete and have on file with the Athens-Clarke County Solid Waste Department a Commercial Customer Recycling Plan, as set forth in Solid Waste Policy SW-022, a copy of which is available for public inspection and use in the Office of the Clerk of Commission and the Office of the Director of Solid Waste. (5)  Commercial compliance . Persons responsible for compliance with the requirements of this section related to commercial customers shall be the local manager in charge of the operation of the enterprise or the local manager in charge of the multifamily dwelling at the customer's location or when appropriate the owner of the commercial property. (6)  Exemptions . The Solid Waste Director or his or her designee may waive the requirements for recycling described in this subsection if a customer establishes (i) that the customer's premises contain insufficient space to comply with the commercial customer recycling requirements without otherwise being in noncompliance with other applicable laws or ordinances, (ii) no recyclable materials are being generated from the customer's premises, or (iii) commercial recycling services through Athens-Clarke County or an authorized franchisee are not available on terms that are available to similarly situated commercial customers. A customer may appeal the decision of the Solid Waste Director to the Administrative Hearing Officer pursuant to Chapter 1-5 of this Code. (7)  Delayed effective dates for certain provisions. The requirements of subparagraph (3), regarding promotion and education, and subparagraph (4), regarding reporting by commercial customers, shall become effective January 1, 2013, with Recycling Plans to be filed no later than January 1, 2014. The requirements of subparagraph (2), regarding separation of Targeted Materials for commercial customers, shall become effective May 10, 2013, unless a commercial customer has applied for and received an extension for good cause shown, based on circumstances beyond the reasonable control of the commercial customer, in which event the deadline shall be 90 days after the extended deadline. (j)  Unlawful dumping . No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited, nor sort, scatter, throw, drop or leave any solid waste, hazardous waste, motor oil, banned materials, construction or demolition debris, leaf and limb materials or recyclable material, as herein defined, upon or into any street, right-of-way, alley, or other public or private property within Athens-Clarke County. (k)  Accumulation of solid waste. No owner or occupant of any premises shall permit the accumulation of solid waste thereon for a period in excess of 15 days except as permitted in paragraph (l) below. (l)  Composting and recycling. Leaf and limb materials, wood ash, and waste from preparation and cooking of food, vegetables, or fruit may be accumulated indefinitely for composting or other processing purposes in a manner that will not attract or harbor rodents or become a public nuisance. Source-separated recyclable material may be accumulated indefinitely in a manner that will not become a public nuisance for the purpose of and in a form acceptable for transport and delivery to a recycling facility. (m)  Preparation of materials. Franchisee may require that solid waste be contained in receptacles. (n)  Any property owner who has had three or more illegal dumping violations on the property by a third party within a five-year period must post "No Dumping" signs provided by the Athens-Clarke County Solid Waste Department on the affected property at each point of vehicular access to the property. Said signs must comply with the sign ordinance and must be placed on the property so that the signs are clearly visible to the public from the points of access. (o)  Reasons to deny routine service. In the event services are denied, the service provider will post a notice on or near refuse receptacles. Services may be denied for reasons including, but not limited to, the following: (1)  Gates are locked; (2)  Gates are wired or tied shut; (3)  One or more dogs are loose in the yard or tied too close to the receptacle; (4)  Receptacles are filled with liquid; (5)  Receptacles have sharp edges, broken handles or should otherwise be replaced; or (6)  Receptacles contain prohibited items. (7)  Customers in violation of parts of this chapter or other ordinances, operating policies or regulations. (8)  Receptacles placed in a location inaccessible to collectors, blocked by vehicles or located too close to private property whereby damage could result may not be serviced. (Ord. of 4-4-95, § 1; Ord. of 10-1-96, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 10-2-2001, § 1; Ord. of 2-3-2004, §§ 3, 4; Ord. of 6-1-2004, § 1; Ord. of 7-5-2006, § 5; Ord. of 4-7-2009, §§ 3—5; Ord. of 11-7-2012, § 3) 
Sec. 5-2-15. - Same—Residential customers.     In addition to the requirements governing all customers, it shall be unlawful for any person as defined in this chapter receiving residential solid waste collection services to violate any of the following provisions: (a)  Residential backyard service. Residential customers who receive backyard garbage service from the solid waste department shall provide approved garbage cans, roll-carts or bags as defined in this chapter. A number of receptacles adequate to hold refuse normally accumulating between scheduled collection shall be provided on each premise by either the customer, or the franchisee, for collection by the franchisee. All containers for residential service shall be located in one place for each dwelling unit. (b)  Residential curbside service. Residential customers who receive curbside garbage service shall be either provided with approved garbage cans, roll-carts or bags by their franchisee or shall provide themselves with approved garbage cans, roll-carts or bags as defined in this chapter. A number of receptacles adequate to hold refuse normally accumulating between scheduled collection shall be provided on each premise by either the customer, or the franchisee, for collection by the franchisee. All containers for residential service shall be located in one place for each dwelling unit. (c)  Owner responsibility to inform tenants of requirements. Owners shall ensure their tenants are informed of tenant responsibilities regarding the temporary storage of solid waste, maintenance of receptacles and areas surrounding receptacles, scheduled routine services, required location of receptacles, and reasons for noncollection. Failure of the owner to provide this information to the tenant is not a defense for the tenant for violation of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. of 4-4-95, § 1; Ord. of 2-3-2004, §§ 5—7; Ord. of 7-5-2006, § 6) 
Sec. 5-2-16. - Same—Commercial customers generally.     Persons responsible for compliance with this chapter shall be the local manager in charge of the operation of the enterprise or the local manager in charge of the multifamily dwelling at the customer's location and, when appropriate, the manager of the service provider. In addition to restrictions and requirements otherwise applicable to all customers, the following provisions shall apply: (a)  Services. Services shall be determined by the following factors: Type of waste, volume of waste, location, type of commercial enterprise, accessibility of receptacles, environmental impact of receptacles, topography, and efficiency. The franchisee shall provide information regarding the types of services available or required for the customer's location based upon requirements outlined in this chapter. (1)  Dumpster service. Commercial customers who utilize dumpster service shall comply with the following requirements for dumpster sites and dumpster enclosures. a.  Dumpster screening. All dumpsters must be screened from view of the public right-of-way. Screening walls may be used to conceal the containers and assist in controlling any loose debris which surrounds the dumpsters. b.  Dumpster sites. Each solid waste dumpster shall be placed on a raised concrete pad; minimum size 8′ × 12′. The pad shall be at least six (6) inches thick. Concrete shall be 3,000 psi test strength. There must be a minimum three-foot clearance between the container and the screening wall. There shall be a clear and level loading area (nine (9) feet wide and 25 feet long) with an approximately 50-foot turning radius in front of each container for the use of the servicing vehicle. There shall be a minimum of 25 feet of vertical clearance above the dumpster pad. c.  Dumpster enclosure. If gates are installed, they must be opened by the customer on scheduled pickup days. d.  Prohibited areas. A dumpster shall not be located within ten (10) feet of a public right-of-way. e.  Dumpster permit. Commercial establishments must obtain a permit for dumpster placement that meets all of the requirements of this chapter from the Athens-Clarke County Solid Waste Department and must provide the franchised hauler with a copy of the signed permit from the Athens-Clarke County Solid Waste Department prior to dumpster placement. (2)  Receptacle service. Receptacle services may be provided to customers who are not, or cannot be, serviced by a dumpster. This restriction includes, but is not limited to, multifamily dwellings where dumpster servicing vehicles cannot safely operate. a.  Approved locations for receptacles. Receptacles shall not remain at curbside or roadside for any purpose other than scheduled pickup. At times other than scheduled collection times, receptacles shall be located in storage areas designated by the franchisee and approved by the director. Storage areas of receptacles for new or rebuilt structures shall be designated by the franchisee and approved by the director. A new or rebuilt structure shall not be approved for occupancy or business operation until adequate measures have been taken to accommodate refuse storage and collection as set forth in section 5-2-53. b.  Collection service. Customers receiving receptacles service, who desire service on scheduled collection days, shall position their container(s) at the curb or edge of the roadway on scheduled collection days, and remove them after collection. Receptacle removal shall be within eight hours following pickup for those customers receiving daily service, and in accordance with the provisions of section 5-2-14 for all other customers outside the Central Business District. Customers located within the Central Business District utilizing receptacles must move their receptacles from the curb to the approved storage area within 30 minutes of the solid waste from said receptacles being picked up by the franchisee. Commercial customers may be exempted from moving their receptacles, with the approval of the solid waste director, for the following reasons: 1.  The solid waste director determines that the receptacles can be more efficiently serviced if they remain within a designated area. 2.  All individuals residing in a particular dwelling unit of a multifamily structure having the demonstrable inability, due to age or physical handicap, to move the receptacle to the roadway or street. (3)  Bag service—Central Business District. All commercial customers with establishments located in the Central Business District and all residential customers residing in the Central Business District shall be required to use the franchisee authorized by the Mayor and Commission to provide such service in the district; provided, however, commercial customers may dispose of food waste and cooking oil by other means as approved pursuant to policies and procedures developed by the solid waste director. Those commercial and residential customers who cannot receive other garbage pickup or disposal service due to their location, availability of space for receptacles, or other reasons of serviceability shall deposit their refuse in approved bags for collection by the franchisee authorized by the Mayor and Commission to provide such service in the Central Business District. For the purpose of this chapter, the Central Business District shall be defined as that area in Athens-Clarke County, Georgia, described as follows: Beginning at the intersection of Dougherty Street and Pulaski Street; running thence east on Dougherty Street to Thomas Street; running thence south on Thomas Street to Strong Street; running thence east on Strong Street to Foundry Street; running thence south on Foundry Street to Oconee Street; running thence northwest on Oconee Street to South Thomas Street; running thence South on South Thomas Street to Fulton Street; running thence west on Fulton Street to South Jackson Street; running thence north on South Jackson Street to East Broad Street; running thence west on East Broad Street to Pulaski Street; running thence north on Pulaski Street to the intersection of Pulaski Street and Dougherty Street, the beginning point. (b)  Specific commercial customers: (1)  Food service establishments: a.  Restaurants or food concession businesses shall have collection by the authorized franchisee a minimum of three times per week, and such businesses shall store all wet garbage and food in authorized waterproof bags for collection. Failure to provide waterproof bags shall permit the franchisee to discontinue service after written notice to such establishment, and where applicable, copy the director of the solid waste department. b.  Used cooking grease, oil and other liquids, semiliquids and solids of this nature shall be disposed of through private contract, self-disposal or through special collection by the franchisee on a cost-of-service basis. No person shall dispose of wastes of this nature in the sewer system of Athens-Clarke County. Such wastes, if collected by the franchisee, shall be properly sealed by the customer in approved five-gallon disposable containers. Customers who dispose of such wastes themselves or through private contract shall take similar or other appropriate preventive actions to ensure such wastes do not spill on Athens-Clarke County sidewalks, streets or roadways while being transferred to a collection vehicle or while being transported to an appropriate disposal facility. Customers or other persons responsible for local management of the food service establishment shall not allow waste residue from transfer containers to accumulate on walkways or streets where they may endanger the safety of pedestrian or vehicle traffic. No grease-holding containers shall be placed on the public right-of-way at any time. c.  All food service establishments shall: 1.  Place all garbage in approved disposable containers, securely closed, before placing garbage in the authorized receptacles or in a predesignated area approved by the franchisee and the solid waste director as set forth in established policies and procedures. 2.  Not use bags as a final means of storing garbage except where there is scheduled daily pickup and except where used with volume reducing equipment. Such container shall be watertight, securely closed, and shall not exceed 40 pounds when filled. 3.  Dispose of wastes that result from cleaning solid waste receptacles into a sanitary or combination sewer or provide such other alternatives, as approved by the Clarke County Health Department that are capable of maintaining a sanitary condition. (2)  Hospital, clinics or undertakers' shops. It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of soiled lint, cotton or bandages or infectious wastes or refuse of any character whatsoever from any hospital, sanitarium, infirmary, clinic or undertakers' establishment or funeral parlor, whether public or private, in any manner, except in accordance with established regulations approved by the State of Georgia, Department of Natural Resources, Environmental Protection Division. (3)  Industrial enterprises. The production of industrial waste and other wastes, both putrescible and nonputrescible, shall cause the producers thereof to be classified as a special customer. Solid waste generated at industrial facilities that is not industrial waste as defined herein, shall be subject to all applicable provisions of this chapter. Alternative service and methods of storage, handling and disposal of such waste shall be subject to the approval of the solid waste director on an individual basis. Industrial waste is exempt from the provisions of this chapter, provided that the handling of such waste is done in accordance with applicable environmental and public health regulations and codes. (c)  Administrative regulations. The Solid Waste Department shall have the authority to develop and implement administrative regulations for the enforcement of this section in accordance with the policy entitled "Policy and Procedure Statement, Solid Waste Department, Athens-Clarke County, Georgia, Policy and Procedure Number SW-010," approved by the Mayor and Commission on December 2, 2014, as amended from time to time, incorporated herein by reference, and on file and available for public inspection in the office of the Clerk of Commission, Room 204, City Hall, 301 College Avenue, Athens, Georgia and in the office of the Solid Waste Department, 725 Hancock Industrial Way, Athens, Georgia. (Ord. of 4-4-95, § 1; Ord. of 7-5-95, § 5; Ord. of 7-2-96, § 1; Ord. of 7-6-99, § 1; Ord. of 8-3-99, §§ 3—5; Ord. of 7-2-2002, § 3; Ord. of 4-7-2009, §§ 6, 7; Ord. of 12-2-2014, §§ 1—3 ) 
Sec. 5-2-17. - Other commercial activities. (a)  Privately contracted collectors and others. Privately contracted collectors engaged in providing refuse, leaf and limb, collection services in addition to those services provided by a franchisee for commercial or residential customers within Athens-Clarke County, who are located outside or within Athens-Clarke County and use Athens-Clarke County streets or roadways, and self-haulers shall: (1)  Comply with local, state and federal rules and regulations regarding the storage, handling, transporting and disposing of solid waste and other materials. (2)  Dispose of waste materials only at landfills permitted by the Environmental Protection Division (EPD) of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources when disposing solid waste within the State of Georgia. The transfer of any refuse into receptacles serviced, or onto property within Athens-Clarke County is prohibited. (3)  Operate only approved refuse transportation vehicles designed or modified to prevent debris from dropping or blowing away, and sealed to prevent waste liquids from spilling on the streets. (4)  Obtain any other permits required by law. (b)  Construction/demolition contractors: (1)  The property owner or owners and the prime contractor in charge of a construction-site and/or demolition-site shall be required to furnish solid waste and/or recycling containers for solid waste and/or recovered materials produced by construction and by workers. All solid waste from construction, demolition or related activities shall be picked up and placed in containers by the end of each workday. Provided, however, that construction material and debris which cannot be blown away by wind or blown or carried away by any other natural force shall not be affected by this provision until completion of said construction or demolition. (2)  No material shall be collected by the franchisee resulting from construction, remodeling or demolition of buildings, or any mixtures of solid wastes containing building materials, including floor and carpet scraps. (3)  No debris from burned houses or their contents shall be collected by the franchisee. (4)  The location of bulk containers used at construction/demolition-sites shall meet with the approval of the solid waste director and the building inspector. (c)  Scavengers. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate as a scavenger within Athens-Clarke County. Unauthorized removal of recyclable materials from containers provided for the temporary storage or collection of such materials shall be deemed to be unlawful. (d)  Special events. Persons requesting the use of public streets and sidewalks for the purpose of special events shall meet the requirements set forth in title 6, chapter 5 of this Code. (e)  Street vendors: (1)  Street vendors shall be required to purchase in advance, from the solid waste department, a minimum quantity of two (2) official garbage bags per week for every week they anticipate they will be in business for the proper disposal of their solid waste. The fee shall be $1.00 per bag to cover the cost of purchasing the bag and the cost of disposing of the waste in said bag at the landfill. (2)  Street vendors shall also be required to register for commercial curbside collection services through the franchisee authorized by the mayor and commission to provide such service in the Downtown Tax District. (f)  Privately contracted leaf and limb collectors/service providers. Privately contracted leaf and limb collectors engaged in providing leaf and limb collection services, whether or not they are in addition to those services provided by a franchisee for commercial or residential customers within Athens-Clarke County, and who are located outside or within Athens-Clarke County and who use Athens-Clarke County streets or roadways and who desire to be placed on Athens-Clarke County's list of approved leaf and limb collectors shall be required to adhere to the following criteria: (1)  [Application.] Every person desiring to engage in the collecting, transporting, delivering or disposing of leaves and limbs generated by another person within Athens-Clarke County shall make written application to the solid waste department on forms prescribed by the solid waste manager. (2)  [Occupational tax certificate required.] Service providers shall possess a valid occupational tax certificate. (3)  [Capability.] Service providers shall be capable of collecting leaves, limbs, grass clippings, pine straw and other leaf and limb material as defined in this chapter. (4)  [Name and address of disposal facility.] Service providers shall be required to provide Athens-Clarke County with the name and address of their principal disposal facility for the leaf and limb materials. (5)  [Estimates for services.] Service providers shall be required to provide an estimate for services if requested by the customer. (6)  Responsibility of service providers regarding debris and fluids. It shall be the responsibility of any service provider collecting leaf and limb materials from the right-of-way to sweep or otherwise remove all debris located on the public right-of-way prior to leaving the collection site. (7)  Insurance. It shall be unlawful for any operator of any leaf and limb collection service to fail to maintain the proper insurance as required in this chapter. Each leaf and limb service provider shall provide to the solid waste department proof of insurance as set forth in section 5-2-28 of this Code. (8)  Availability. All service providers shall be required to provide a listed phone number, business address and be open during normal business hours. (9)  Disposal standards. Service providers shall be required to dispose of all leaf and limb material at construction and demolition debris landfills, inert landfills or composting or mulching facilities in accordance with title 12, chapter 8 of the O.C.G.A. (Ord. of 4-4-95, § 1; Ord. of 7-5-95, § 6; Ord. of 7-2-96, § 1; Ord. of 9-3-96, § 1; Ord. of 7-1-97, § 2; Ord. of 7-6-99, § 1) 
Sec. 5-2-18. - Disposal of needles. (a)  Any person that uses disposable needles shall be required to dispose of these in containers that are rigid, puncture-resistant and leakproof, and which are taped closed or tightly lidded to completely contain the contents therein and prevent any spillage. Said containers shall be set aside from other household garbage for pick up by the franchisee. This section shall apply only to persons residing in single-family dwelling units and single-family residential premises. (b)  Notwithstanding subsection (a) hereinabove, it shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of infectious wastes, disposable scalpel blades, needles and other sharp objects in any dumpster or any other container of solid waste which is serviced by any franchisee. (Ord. of 4-4-95, § 1) 
Sec. 5-2-19. - Disposal of garbage generally. (a)  No person shall unlawfully empty, dump or otherwise place any trash, tin cans, garbage, rubbish, dead animals or other discarded personal property upon the right-of-way of any public road in Athens-Clarke County or upon the lands of another. (b)  Any person removing a wrecked or damaged vehicle from a highway shall remove all glass or other injurious substances dropped upon the highway from such vehicle. (c)  No person shall haul, convey or transport in any manner, trash, rubbish, garbage or waste matter in any form over and along the streets, highways and other public places upon trucks, carts, cars or other modes of transportation without having such trash, rubbish, garbage or waste tightly covered with a canvas tarpaulin, or other equally suitable material, to prevent littering the streets, highways or other public places of the county. Asphalt and baled or containerized waste matter are exempted from this cover provision. (Ord. of 4-4-95, § 1) 
Sec. 5-2-20. - Abandonment of personal property within public rights-of-way.     Whenever personal property remains on the streets and sidewalks within public rights-of-way within the confines of Athens-Clarke County for more than 96 hours, said property shall be deemed to be abandoned and shall be disposed of by the appropriate department. (Ord. of 4-4-95, § 1) 
Sec. 5-2-21. - Responsibility of franchisees generally.     All franchisees and their customers shall be required to adhere to the collection schedules set out in this chapter. (a)  No person shall engage in the business of collecting, transporting, delivering or disposing of solid waste, other than industrial waste, generated by another person within Athens-Clarke County without first obtaining a franchise, unless considered a self-hauler under this chapter. (b)  Every person desiring to engage in the collecting, transporting, delivering or disposing of solid waste, other than industrial waste, generated by another person within Athens-Clarke County shall make written application to the solid waste department on forms prescribed by the solid waste director. (c)  Franchisees must comply with this chapter as well as any policies and/or procedures, including the provision of recycling collection to all who receive collection of solid waste. (d)  In addition to any other permit required by Athens-Clarke County, all persons now or thereafter engaged in the business of the collection or transportation of solid waste, other than industrial waste, in Athens-Clarke County shall annually apply for a franchise to operate such business. The application shall be filed with the solid waste department and a franchise shall not be issued until the solid waste department has approved the application in writing. (e)  No franchise shall be issued or renewed except upon a written application available from the solid waste department in a form prescribed by Athens-Clarke County and setting forth such facts as Athens-Clarke County may deem appropriate, including, but not limited to the franchise application information outlined in established policies and procedures. (f)  Maintaining passage on public streets. Franchisees shall, to the greatest extent practicable, avoid stopping collection vehicles so as to block the passage of other vehicles and pedestrians on public streets and sidewalks. (g)  Labeling receptacles with the normal day of collection. Franchisees shall affix to each receptacle used for curbside, recycling or rollcart service a label at least three inches by five inches in size with the normal day of collection stated thereon in lettering at least 2½ inches high and affixed thereto so that the label is clearly visible from the road. (h)  Labeling receptacles with dwelling unit number. For all receptacles used by any customer residing in a duplex, triplex or four plex, franchisees shall also print on the label required by paragraph (g) above the unit number of the dwelling being serviced by the receptacles. The printing shall be in indelible ink and in letters at least one inch high. (Ord. of 4-4-95, § 1; Ord. of 10-2-2001, § 1; Ord. of 2-3-2004, § 8) 
Sec. 5-2-22. - Franchisees; billing and fees. (a)  The franchisee shall set equitable fees for comparable collection services and charges for commercial and residential collection and removal services shall be charged to the owners of the real property served, except that by requesting services, any tenant may become jointly bound to pay same. (b)  At the time of initial application for a franchise, a franchise application fee of $300.00 shall be paid to Athens-Clarke County. Said franchise application fee shall be nonrefundable. (c)  A franchise fee of $1.00 shall be paid to Athens-Clarke County for each franchise decal received. Said decal shall be purchased annually. (d)  At the time of application for the renewal of the franchise, a franchise renewal fee of $100.00 shall be paid to Athens-Clarke County. (e)  At the time of quarterly reports, a waste minimization/education fee of $0.60 per customer/per month for residential customers and $1.60 per customer/per month for commercial customers shall be paid by the franchisee to Athens-Clarke County. (Ord. of 4-4-95, § 1; Ord. of 9-7-2004, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 10-4-2011, § 1) 
Sec. 5-2-23. - Requirements; conditions of franchisee. (a)  Condition for franchise. It shall be a condition of each franchise that the franchisee shall comply with all the following: (1)  All provisions of this chapter, and the policies and/or procedures promulgated under authority of this chapter. (2)  All applicable federal, state, county and local laws, statutes, rules and regulations, including but not limited to those pertaining to the collection, transport, delivery or disposal of solid waste generated within Athens-Clarke County. (3)  All applicable provisions of the Athens-Clarke County Unified Government Solid Waste Plan as required under the Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act of 1990 (O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.) and any agreements regarding inter-county transport of solid waste authorized or restricted by the Unified Government of Athens-Clarke County and other counties. (4)  A franchise shall be issued for a 12-month term. The maximum number of solid waste franchises shall be the number of the franchisees holding valid franchises at the time of approval of this ordinance. In the event that a franchisee terminates its franchise or fails to submit a renewal application, or in the event that the franchise is revoked by action of the Administrative Hearing Officer, then the maximum number of solid waste franchises that may be issued shall be decreased by one. A franchisee holding a valid franchise may transfer the franchise provided, however, that any transferee must first submit an application to Athens-Clarke County, and such application must be approved in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. A franchisee holding a valid franchise shall have the right to submit a renewal application for a succeeding 12-month term; provided, however, that such application shall be subject to the ordinances and regulations in effect at the time of such application, and no applicant for a renewal of a franchise shall have a vested right or a property right in a renewal of a franchise. (b)  Residential service. The franchisee shall provide, or arrange to provide through subcontract, weekly collection services for solid waste and biweekly collection services for recyclable materials on the Targeted Materials List. (c)  Commercial service. The franchisee shall provide, or arrange to provide through subcontract, collection services for solid waste and recyclable material on the Targeted Materials List. The collection services shall be at a frequency that meets the customers needs in accordance with established policies and procedures developed by the solid waste department. (d)  Fees for service. Fees for services shall be charged to customers on a volume-based fee system basis. (e)  Quarterly reports. Any quarterly reports required hereunder or set in established policies and/or procedures shall be filed with the solid waste department by the 15th of the month following the end of the quarter. (f)  Annual reports. Any annual reports required hereunder or set in established policies and/or procedures shall be filed with the solid waste department at the time of their franchise renewal or September 1, or whichever comes first. (g)  Denial of franchise. The solid waste department may deny the issuance of the franchise for any of the following reasons: (1)  Failure of the applicant to comply with this chapter. (2)  Violations of this chapter or any other applicable federal, county and local laws, statutes, rules and regulations, including, but not limited to, those pertaining to the collecting, transporting, delivering or disposing of solid waste generated within Athens-Clarke County. (3)  Prior criminal convictions in connection with solid waste collection, processing and disposal activities in the last ten years (other than minor traffic offenses) by the applicant, its subsidiaries or its parent company or prior license revocation(s) by the applicant, its subsidiaries or its parent company. (4)  Misrepresentations of any material fact in the application for the franchise. (5)  An application for a franchise that would increase the number of franchised haulers above the limit identified in Section 5-2-23(a)(4). (Ord. of 4-4-95, § 1; Ord. of 6-3-97, § 3; Ord. of 10-4-2011, § 2; Ord. of 11-7-2012, §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 5-2-24. - Franchisees—Termination of franchise. (a)  Franchises may be terminated by mutual agreement of Athens-Clarke County and the franchisee at any time. Franchisees may terminate franchises by giving 60 days' notice to the director of the solid waste department and furnishing evidence to the director that all unused payments from customers have been refunded. The department shall make said evidence available to any aggrieved customer of said franchisee, but Athens-Clarke County shall have no liability to any such customer for failure of any franchisee to comply with its contractual obligation to its customers. (b)  Reserved. (Ord. of 4-4-95, § 1; Ord. of 11-7-2012, § 3) 
Sec. 5-2-25. - Revocation of franchise.     Athens-Clarke County shall have the right to revoke the franchise of any person that fails to abide by any provision of this chapter and any policies and procedures authorized hereunder. Before revocation of a franchise, the solid waste department shall inform the applicant of its intention and provide the applicant with an opportunity to be heard before the administrative hearing officer (AHO) after which the AHO shall make its final decision. Prior revocation of a franchise shall be sufficient grounds for refusal to certify any future application by such franchisee. (Ord. of 4-4-95, § 1) 
Sec. 5-2-26. - Vehicle requirements. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any franchisee or for any other person to operate any vehicle used for the collecting and disposal of solid waste material under this chapter that does not comply with the requirements of this section. All vehicles operating under this chapter shall be inspected by a designated Athens-Clarke County inspector at the time of franchise renewal, in accordance with a timetable to be developed by the solid waste director, in order to ensure that each vehicle complies with the following requirements: (1)  Weight and size. Vehicles and containers shall meet all requirements of the Georgia Department of Transportation for highway safety and local ordinances governing weight and size for the streets which must be traveled for collection. If deemed necessary, then vehicles may be subject to unannounced inspection by Athens-Clarke County officials. (2)  Enclosed vehicles. Vehicles used for the collection or transportation of solid waste shall be enclosed at all times, except during the loading and unloading thereof so as to prevent the contents from falling, leaking, or blowing out of the trucks and shall be enclosed, weather-tight, substantially leakproof, easily cleanable and constructed of durable metal. (3)  Audible alarm. All vehicles used for the collection or transportation of solid waste shall have an operating audible alarm which sounds when any such vehicle backs up or is in reverse. (4)  Emergency lights. All vehicles used for the collection or transportation of solid waste shall have an operating, flashing or revolving amber light mounted near the top of the vehicle and visible from its rear. All franchisees shall comply with any corresponding state or federal laws or regulations. (5)  Discharge of load. All vehicles used for the collection or transportation of solid waste shall be able to rapidly discharge its load within a 15-minute time period at any Athens-Clarke County operated disposal facility. (6)  Exempt equipment. The following solid waste collection equipment shall be exempt from the vehicle requirements enumerated in subsection (a)(2) above; provided, however, that nothing in this section excludes compliance with all other vehicle requirements specified by this chapter: a.  Roll-off equipment; b.  Leaf, limb, or brush collector equipment; c.  Knuckle-boom picker equipment; d.  Open-top equipment; or e.  Transfer trailer. (7)  Fees; corrections; reinspection. A fee of $50.00 shall be levied for each inspection under this section. If a vehicle fails to pass the requirements of inspection, a correction slip shall be issued to the operator listing the items that need correction and showing the status of the inspection. The inspection fee shall then be due, and the correction slip shall constitute a receipt for the fee. The owner of the vehicle shall have 15 days to correct the items listed, and no additional fee shall be charged for reinspection if the vehicle is presented back within 15 days after it first failed to pass. The correction slip must be kept with the vehicle until it passes inspection, and the vehicle may not be used for refuse collection within Athens-Clarke County until it successfully passes inspection. The owner of any vehicle, which does not pass inspection within the 15-day period, shall be charged a fee of $10.00 for each additional inspection. (Ord. of 4-4-95, § 1; Ord. of 9-7-2004, §§ 3, 4; Ord. of 11-7-2012, § 4) 
Sec. 5-2-27. - Identification.     The following items shall at all times be clearly visible on each and every vehicle used in the collection or transportation of solid waste including temporary replacement vehicles: (a)  The identity and telephone number of the franchisee on both sides of the vehicle displayed by letters or characters at least three inches in height; and (b)  A franchise decal placed conspicuously on the front windshield of each vehicle. (c)  Registration of and title to the vehicles shall be in the name of the franchisee or a leasing agent with a duly authorized power of attorney issued in the name of the franchisee. (d)  Franchisees shall provide an adequate number of vehicles for regular collection services. (Ord. of 4-4-95, § 1) 
Sec. 5-2-28. - Insurance. (a)  At the time of the submission of a signed franchise agreement, and annually thereafter, each franchisee shall provide to the solid waste department proof of insurance as follows: (1)  Statutory workers' compensation insurance. (2)  Reserved. (3)  Vehicle liability: a.  $100,000.00 limit per person. $300,000.00 per occurrence for bodily injury. $100,000.00 property damage. (b)  Umbrella liability insurance coverage at least as broad primary coverage in an amount of $1,000,000.00. (c)  No cancellation, nonrenewal or lapse in coverage of insurance shall be effective until the expiration of 10 days' notice of intended cancellation, nonrenewal or lapse in coverage has been given in writing to the director of solid waste by registered mail or personal delivery of the notice. It shall be a requirement under this chapter that this be a provision of and a part of any insurance policy submitted under this chapter. (Ord. of 4-4-95, § 1; Ord. of 12-3-96, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 3-4-97, § 1) 
Sec. 5-2-29. - Recycling requirements—Franchisees. (a)  Residential—Targeted materials. All franchisees shall offer to their residential customers the option of having their recyclable materials collected at least biweekly. Recyclable materials to be collected shall include those on the Targeted Materials List, as set forth in Solid Waste Policy SW-004 and a copy of which shall be made available for public inspection and use in the Office of the Clerk of Commission and the Office of the Director of Solid Waste. (b)  Residential—Collection containers. All franchisees shall offer an appropriate container for those residential customers opting for this recycling service. Any franchisee providing such a container to any such customer may charge a fee for such container. (c)  Commercial—Targeted materials. All franchisees shall provide to their commercial customers recycling services at least biweekly. Recyclable materials to be collected shall include those on the Targeted Materials List, as set forth in Solid Waste Policy SW-004, a copy of which shall be made available for public inspection and use in the Office of the Clerk of Commission and the Office of the Director of Solid Waste. (d)  Commercial—Collection containers. All franchisees shall make available at all times such recycling containers as are suitable and necessary to provide for and accommodate the service needs of those commercial customers that are required to participate in the recycling program. Any franchisee providing such a container to any such customer may charge a fee for such container. (e)  In no event shall any of the recyclable materials collected pursuant to this optional residential recycling service and this commercial recycling service be mixed together with other types of refuse or disposed of in any landfill, unless and until rejected by the market due to unacceptable levels of contamination. (f)  Other than on scheduled collection days, recycling receptacles shall not be located within the public right-of-way nor at any other locations that would violate planning or building codes. (Ord. of 4-4-95, § 1; Ord. of 6-3-97, § 2; Ord. of 2-3-2004, § 8; Ord. of 11-7-2012, § 4) 
Sec. 5-2-30. - Hours of collection. (a)  No person or entity shall engage in the residential collection of any solid waste or recyclable materials from dumpsters, containers, or receptacles of any kind or type except during the hours of 7:00 a.m. until 9:00 p.m. unless performing emergency work to safeguard the immediate health, safety and welfare of the public. (b)  No person or entity shall engage in the commercial collection of any solid waste or recycling from dumpsters, containers, or receptacles of any kind or type except during the hours of 7:00 a.m. until 11:00 p.m., with the exception of commercial curbside collection activities in the Central Business District performed by the Athens-Clarke County Solid Waste Department, unless performing emergency work to safeguard the immediate health, safety and welfare of the public. (c)  The director of solid waste is hereby authorized to review and approve alternate collection hours in accordance with established policies and procedures. (Ord. of 4-4-95, § 1; Ord. of 5-6-97, § 1) 
ARTICLE 4. - LANDFILL REGULATIONS 
Sec. 5-2-31. - Franchisees and self-haulers generally. (a)  Any person residing or doing business in Athens-Clarke County or Oglethorpe County shall be allowed to use the landfill subject to the provisions set out in the contract between Athens-Clarke County and Oglethorpe County for use of the landfill dated August 5, 1992, a copy of which shall be made available for public inspection in the office of the clerk of commission.     Any persons residing or doing business in Oconee, Greene, or Madison Counties or the cities of Union Point or Greensboro shall be allowed to use the landfill subject to the provisions set out in the individual landfill usage agreements dated April 6, 1994, between Athens-Clarke County and Oconee, Greene, and Madison counties and the cities of Union Point and Greensboro, a copy of which shall be made available for public inspection in the office of the clerk of commission. (b)  All garbage and refuse shall be dumped in the area designated by an attendant on duty or by appropriate signs. All directional and speed limit signs shall be obeyed. (c)  No person shall move, remove or cross any fence or barrier or shall move, remove or disobey any sign at the landfill. (d)  The following materials shall not be disposed at any solid waste disposal facility having a liner and leachate collection system or requiring vertical expansion located within Athens-Clarke County: (1)  Septic tank sludge and scum; (2)  Live animals and fowl; (3)  Automobiles and objects of similar size; (4)  Burning or smoldering materials; (5)  Inert wastes, leaf and limb material, and construction and demolition wastes as defined in this chapter. In the event the Oglethorpe County Landfill is unable to accept the wastes set forth above, then the Athens-Clarke County Landfill may accept them for a period of time not to exceed 90 days. (6)  Lead acid batteries; (7)  Tires; (8)  Paint; (9)  All liquids; (10)  Any container designed to hold liquids, unless lids are removed. Fifty-five (55) gallon drums are prohibited. (11)  Any other material prohibited by the State of Georgia, Department of Natural Resources, Environmental Protection Division. (e)  No person shall set fire or burn solid waste at any designated disposal facility or disposal site. (f)  No person shall rummage through the solid waste at any designated disposal facility or disposal site. No person shall remove any solid waste material from the landfill. (g)  All prohibited materials delivered to the landfill shall be removed within 12 hours of notification. The cost of removing the materials will be at the customer's expense. (h)  All users of the landfill, except those considered self-haulers under this chapter, shall apply for a landfill permit as set forth in established policies and procedures. (i)  Discharge of load. All vehicles used for the collection or transportation of solid waste shall be able to discharge its load within fifteen minutes at any Athens-Clarke County operated disposal facility. (Ord. of 4-4-95, § 1; Ord. of 10-1-96, § 3) 
Sec. 5-2-32. - Service collections; landfill; penalty. (a)  Categories of landfill customers. Landfill customers shall be categorized as follows: (1)  Cash/check customer. Landfill customers who pay as they use the landfill. (2)  Contract users. Landfill customers who are required to pay a deposit up front based on the estimated volume of waste to be landfilled in any given month. This deposit shall be monitored by the Landfill Manager and the customer notified when the deposit is close to being depleted. (3)  Billing customer. Landfill customers who use the landfill on a regular basis. In addition, as of September 1, 1995, new customer accounts established shall be required to post a security deposit equal to 10 percent of their estimated monthly volume of waste landfilled. (b)  Billing customers. If bill is not paid within 30 days of the due date, as determined by the finance department, a 10 percent penalty will be applied to the unpaid balance. For every additional month the balance is left unpaid, an additional one (1) percent per month will be applied to the unpaid balance. (Ord. of 7-5-95, § 7) 
Secs. 5-2-33—5-2-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 5. - SCHEDULE OF FINES 
Sec. 5-2-50. - Violations; schedule of fines. (a)  Generally. It shall be unlawful to dispose of any solid waste in Athens-Clarke County except as specified in this chapter. (b)  General violations. The minimum fines for the following violations shall apply to all private residences, business establishments, and private institutions within Athens-Clarke County. (1)  Placing prohibited items other than dangerous items in a trash receptacle for collection or disposal ..... $25.00 (2)  Placing a dangerous (toxic, caustic, contagious, explosive or otherwise hazardous) item in a trash receptacle for collection or disposal ..... 1,000.00 (3)  Placing trash or garbage on the property of another or in the waste receptacle of another without permission ..... 25.00 (4)  Dumping bulk trash or garbage on vacant lots or public roadway ..... 100.00 (5)  Disposal of grease into the Athens-Clarke County sewer system by food service establishments resulting in blockage or back up of the system, plus Athens-Clarke County costs ..... 100.00 (6)  Spillage of grease or cooking residue on sidewalks or roadways, or in public flower beds ..... 50.00 (7)  Abandoning furniture or other items on the street ..... 100.00 (8)  Overloading a dumpster ..... 25.00 (9)  Placing a dumpster in unauthorized area ..... 50.00 (c)  Food service sanitation violations. The minimum fines for the following violations shall apply to all food service establishments: (1)  Failure to have wet garbage removed at least three times weekly ..... $50.00 (2)  Failure to dispose of putrescible garbage in approved bags ..... 25.00 (3)  Failure to maintain clean dumpsters, roll carts or other receptacles ..... 25.00 (d)  Central Business District violations. The minimum fines for the following violations shall apply to all businesses, institutions, and residences in the Downtown Business District: (1)  Disposing of garbage or trash in public waste receptacles meant for pedestrians ..... $25.00 (2)  Disposing of garbage or trash in front of the business establishment of another ..... 50.00 (3)  Placing loose garbage on the sidewalk or street ..... 25.00 (4)  Placing roll carts or bagged garbage on the street or sidewalk at other than established collection periods ..... 25.00 (e)  Specialty and contractor sanitation violations. The minimum fines for the following violations shall apply to all specialty business such as medical, industrial, and contract refuse collectors: (1)  Disposal of medical, dental, clinic, or undertaker refuse other than required by ordinance ..... $100.00 (2)  Disposal of industrial or construction by-products in regular trash ..... 100.00 (3)  Disposal of waste in other than an authorized landfill ..... 1000.00 (4)  Transporting waste material in a vehicle not designed and/or not capable of containing it, resulting in the spillage of liquid or solid waste upon the public right-of-way ..... 500.00 (5)  Operating and collecting refuse within Athens-Clarke County without a license ..... 500.00 (6)  Scavenging ..... 100.00 (7)  Spilling wet concrete or cement on roadway ..... 300.00 (Ord. of 4-4-95, § 1) 
Sec. 5-2-51. - Recyclable materials. (a)  Term defined; separation of material required. "Recyclable materials" are those items listed on the Targeted Materials List and any other material that Athens-Clarke County deems to be recyclable and adds to the Targeted Materials List. Recyclable materials shall be set at the curb on the designated collection days and properly placed in designated and approved collection containers supplied by the franchisee. Persons may also dropoff recyclable materials at approved Athens-Clarke County recycling dropoff stations, or sell or donate such materials. (b)  Damage, removal, etc., of materials or containers prohibited. It shall be unlawful to damage, alter or remove from the curbside or designated dropoff stations the recyclable materials or collection containers. (c)  Fines for violations. The minimum fines for violations of this section shall be as set forth below: (1)  First offense ..... $25.00 (2)  Second offense ..... 50.00 (3)  Each subsequent offense ..... 100.00 to 250.00 (d)  Rights of generator/owner. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, Athens-Clarke County shall not require any generator or owner of recyclable or recovered materials to transfer any such materials to Athens-Clarke County, to its designee, or to any designated facility, unless the generator or owner of the recovered materials voluntarily makes those materials available to Athens-Clarke County or its designee and has relinquished any rights to or ownership of such materials. A person shall not be prohibited or prevented from selling, purchasing, accepting, conveying, or transporting any recovered materials for purposes of recycling those materials into a raw material or finished product, other than for use as a fuel or for purposes of disposal. (Ord. of 4-4-95, § 1) 
Sec. 5-2-51.1. - Solid waste improvement fund. (a)  The manager is hereby authorized to reduce any and all recycling fees set out in title 5, chapter 2 of this Code and any and all recycling processing fees set forth in the materials recovery facilities contract between the currently established fees and zero dollars ($0.00). (b)  The manager is required to advise the mayor and commission and the solid waste citizen advisory committee of said revisions, whenever possible, at least ten days prior to implementation but not later than five days after implementation. (Ord. of 8-6-96, § 1; Ord. of 1-7-97, § 1; Ord. of 7-1-97, § 1; Ord. of 7-6-99, § 1) 
Sec. 5-2-52. - Landfill fee schedule.     The landfill rates shall be as follows: (a)  Residential refuse: (1)  Customers shall be limited up to six standard trash bags (20″ × 40″) of refuse per vehicle, per day and shall be assessed a fee of $1.50 per trash bag. (2)  All unbagged loads of refuse or bagged loads of refuse which exceed six standard bags per vehicle shall be assessed a fee at the rate of $10.00 per vehicle. The $10.00 fee per vehicle shall apply to all automobiles, including pickup trucks where the garbage does not extend above the normal, standard manufactured truck bed. This excludes loads of leaf and limb materials as defined in section 5-2-2. (b)  Commercial solid waste and leaf and limb: (1)  The landfill fee for solid waste and other refuse shall be $42.00 per ton. When the scales are inoperable, then the fee shall be as follows: Compacted ..... $13.50 per cubic yard Noncompacted ..... $5.25 per cubic yard (2)  Commercial customers shall be assessed $18.00 per ton for all loads of leaf and limb materials, as defined in section 5-2-2. When the scales are inoperable, then the fee shall be $5.00 per cubic yard. (c)  Surcharges: (1)  Customers shall be assessed a fee at the rate of $42.00 per ton plus a $30.00 surcharge per load for all non-hazardous manifested loads which the landfill Manager shall properly validate. (2)  Customers shall be assessed a fee at the rate of $42.00 per ton plus a $40.00 surcharge per load plus $2.00 per ton for any load which requires landfill personnel or equipment to assist in off-loading or any other special handling. (3)  Customers with uncovered loads shall be denied access to the landfill. (d)  Other fees: (1)  All commercial landfill customers, excluding residential users of the landfill, requesting to use the Athens-Clarke County landfill shall complete and apply for a landfill permit. These customers shall be assessed a fee of $10.00 to process the application. (2)  Approved commercial landfill customers shall be required to exhibit a decal on each of their vehicles. These customers shall be assessed a fee of $1.00 per decal per vehicle. (3)  The solid waste director shall have the authority to reduce the posted tipping fee on a case-by-case basis by the estimated value of any material relative to its use as intermediate cover or as an application to other landfill operations. (e)  Residential recycling: (1)  Customers shall be assessed a fee of $2.50 per cubic yard for all loads of leaf and limb materials (as defined in section 5-2-2) to be mulched at the designated point within the landfill area. (2)  Customers who purchase mulch from Athens-Clarke County shall be charged a fee of $9.00 per pickup truck or 1,000 pounds. (3)  Customers shall be allowed to deposit the following materials at no charge at the recycling center locations located within the landfill area: Commingled paper (includes the following items: newspaper, magazines, corrugated cardboard, office paper, junk mail, and textiles (bagged) in accordance with established policies and/or procedures). Commingled containers (includes the following items: aluminum, glass, plastics numbered 1 and 2, steel, tin, or bimetal food or beverage cans, and aseptic/paperboard juice or frozen food packaging) in accordance with established policies and/or procedures). Scrap metal (includes the following items: refrigerators, ranges, bicycles, etc.). (Ord. of 4-4-95, § 1; Ord. of 7-5-95, § 8; Ord. of 7-2-96, §§ 1—3; Ord. of 6-3-97, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 2-6-2001, § 1; Ord. of 4-2-2002, § 1; Ord. of 4-1-2008, § 1) 
Sec. 5-2-53. - Building permits.     No building permit shall be issued for construction of any commercial structure, including a multifamily structure, unless or until arrangements for the storage of refuse and location of receptacles have been approved by the solid waste director. (Ord. of 4-4-95, § 1) 
Sec. 5-2-54. - Violations. (a)  Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall be punished as set forth in section 1-1-5 of this Code. (b)  Reserved. (c)  In addition to fines and penalties, the court shall be authorized to assess actual costs for any removal of trash, garbage, or debris performed by the solid waste department. (Ord. of 4-4-95, § 1; Ord. of 11-7-2012, § 3) 
ARTICLE 6. - SCRAP TIRE MANAGEMENT 
Sec. 5-2-55. - Definitions.     As used in this Article 6, the following terms shall have the meanings set forth below: (a)  The term "dump" means to throw, discard, place, deposit, discharge, bury, burn, or dispose of a substance, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-7-51. (b)  The term "person" means the State of Georgia or any other state or agency or institution thereof, and any municipality, county, political subdivision, public or private corporation, solid waste authority, special district empowered to engage in solid waste management activities, individual, partnership, association, or other entity in Georgia or any other state. This term also includes any officer or governing or managing body of any municipality, political subdivision, solid waste authority, special district empowered to engage in solid waste activities, or public or private corporation in Georgia or any other state. This term also includes employees, departments, and agencies of the federal government, as defined in section 391-3-4-.01 of the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management. (c)  The term "retail tire dealer" means a person actively engaged in the business of selling new replacement tires, as defined in section 391-3-4-.19(2) of the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management. (d)  The term "scrap tire" means a tire that is no longer suitable for its original intended purpose because of wear, damage, or defect, as defined in section 391-3-4-.19(2) of the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management. (e)  The term "scrap tire carrier" means any person engaged in picking up or transporting scrap tires not otherwise exempted in the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management for the purpose of removal to a scrap tire processor, end user, or disposal facility, as defined in section 391-3-4-.19(2) of the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management. (f)  The term "scrap tire generator" means any person who generates scrap tires. Generators may include, but are not limited to, retail tire dealers, retreaders, scrap tire processors, automobile dealers, private company vehicle maintenance shops, garages, service stations, and city, county, and state governments, as defined in section 391-3-4-.19(2) of the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management. (g)  The term "scrap tire processor" means any person who is approved by the Environmental Protection Division to receive scrap tires from scrap tire generators or scrap tire carriers for the purpose of scrap tire processing, as defined in section 391-3-4-.19(2) of the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management. (h)  The term "scrap tire sorter" means any person, other than the original scrap tire generator, who handles mixed tires by separating used tires and retreadable casings from scrap tires, as defined in section 391-3-4-.19(2) of the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management. (Ord. of 12-2-2003, § 1) 
Sec. 5-2-56. - Scrap tire management—General. (a)  The owner or occupant of any premises shall be responsible for the sanitary handling and disposal of all scrap tires on the premises used or occupied by such person. (b)  It shall be unlawful to cause, suffer or allow the dumping of scrap tires at any place in Athens-Clarke County including, and without limitations, in or on any public highway, road, street, alley, or thoroughfare, including any portion of the right-of-way thereof, any public or private property in the county or any waters in Athens-Clarke County unless such scrap tires originate in Athens-Clarke County or other areas authorized by the mayor and commission of Athens-Clarke County and (1)  The property is designated by the mayor and commission or its duly designated agent and the Georgia Environmental Protection Division for the collection or disposal of scrap tires and the person is authorized to use such property; (2)  The scrap tires are placed into a receptacle or container installed specifically for such property; and (3)  The property has a valid solid waste handling permit or other applicable identification numbers, approvals and/or permits issued by the Georgia Environmental Protection Division (EPD) when required. (c)  All persons defined as scrap tire generators, scrap tire carriers, scrap tire processors, including scrap tire sorters, and retail tire dealers shall be subject to rules as defined in Chapter 391-3-4 et seq. of the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management and handle scrap tires in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq. and the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management, Chapter 391-3-4 et seq. applicable to scrap tires, except where requirements of this ordinance are more stringent. (Ord. of 12-2-2003, § 1) 
Sec. 5-2-57. - Accumulation. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person in a residential zone to accumulate any amount of scrap tires on or around property, which they own or occupy. (b)  A retail tire dealer may hold up to 100 scrap tires per garage bay in storage, up to a maximum of 1,000 scrap tires. (c)  Tires shall be stored in covered or enclosed areas to prevent the accumulation of water. (Ord. of 12-2-2003, § 1) 
Sec. 5-2-58. - Violations and penalties. (a)  Any person(s), firm, or corporation violating any portion of this article shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, in the Municipal Court of Athens-Clarke County, shall be punished as provided in Code section 1-1-5. (b)  In addition to actions filed by Athens-Clarke County for violations of this ordinance, any state or federal agency may independently file separate or concurrent charges within their respective applicable authority and seek conviction within a court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. of 12-2-2003, § 1) 
Sec. 5-2-59. - Severability.     Should any sentence, section, subsection or provision of this article or application of a provision of this article be declared invalid or unconstitutional by any court or other competent jurisdiction, such declaration shall not affect the validity of the article as a whole or any part thereof that is not specifically declared to be invalid or unconstitutional. (Ord. of 12-2-2003, § 1) 
CHAPTER 5-3. - WATER Article 1. General Provisions Sec. 5-3-1. Definitions. Sec. 5-3-2. Billing and collection for use of water —Responsible office designated. Sec. 5-3-3. Same—Contents, etc., of bills. Sec. 5-3-4. Same—Authority to schedule billing. Sec. 5-3-5. Installation of service pipes and taps. Sec. 5-3-6. Connecting private water supply with Athens-Clarke County system. Sec. 5-3-7. Reinstatement of service after violations. Sec. 5-3-8. Water rates. Sec. 5-3-9. Security deposits; increasing frequency of meter readings; billings; applicability; discontinuance, reinstatement of service. Sec. 5-3-10. Estimated water bills. Sec. 5-3-11. Bond in lieu of security deposit. Sec. 5-3-12. Penalty for late payment of water charges generally. Sec. 5-3-13. Excessive water charges. Sec. 5-3-14. Cutting off water as relief from liability for water charges. Sec. 5-3-15. Towers; tanks. Sec. 5-3-16. Connection of property located outside of Athens-Clarke County to water or sewer system. Sec. 5-3-17. Tap and meter charges. Sec. 5-3-18. Petitions by Property Owners for water line extensions and special assessments for the costs. Sec. 5-3-19. Water line installations and special assessments for the costs thereof established by the Mayor and Commission. Secs. 5-3-20—5-3-30. Reserved. Article 2. Connection Fee Sec. 5-3-31. Users subject to fee. Sec. 5-3-32. Payment of fee. Sec. 5-3-33. Revenue restrictions. Secs. 5-3-34—5-3-45. Reserved. Article 3. Meters Sec. 5-3-46. Required; cost generally. Sec. 5-3-47. Installation costs, etc. Sec. 5-3-48. Duty of Athens-Clarke County to furnish and install; failure to pay cost; avoiding metering. Sec. 5-3-49. Stop and waste cock. Secs. 5-3-50—5-3-59. Reserved. Article 4. Cross-connection Control Program Sec. 5-3-60. Adopted by reference. Sec. 5-3-61. Administration. Secs. 5-3-62—5-3-69. Reserved. Article 5. Water and Sewer Fees Sec. 5-3-70. Athens-Clarke County water contracts. Sec. 5-3-71. Installations requiring state encroachment permit. Sec. 5-3-72. Paving cut and bull head charges. Sec. 5-3-73. Security deposits for new applicants—Water. Sec. 5-3-74. Same—Sewers. Sec. 5-3-75. Tap and meter charges. Sec. 5-3-76. Water system connection fee. Sec. 5-3-77. Water rates. Sec. 5-3-78. Fire sprinkler system(s) charges. Sec. 5-3-79. Wastewater connection fee. Sec. 5-3-80. Sewer rates. Sec. 5-3-81. Same—Surcharge. Sec. 5-3-82. Development plan review and system evaluation fees. Sec. 5-3-83. Reinstatement of sewer service. Sec. 5-3-84. Reserved. Sec. 5-3-85. Fire hydrant meter rental fee. Sec. 5-3-86. Inspection fees. Secs. 5-3-87—5-3-93. Reserved. Article 6. Drought/Water Shortage Management Plan (DWSMP) Sec. 5-3-94. Purpose and intent. Sec. 5-3-95. Definitions. Sec. 5-3-96. Drought and water shortage management measures for water usage. Sec. 5-3-97. Drought and water shortage emergencies. Sec. 5-3-98. Enforcement. Sec. 5-3-99. Adjustments with Respect to Emergency Drought/Water Shortage Management Plan. Sec. 5-3-100. Reserved. Secs. 5-3-101—5-3-119. Reserved. Article 7. Water Conservation Sec. 5-3-120. Purpose and policy. Sec. 5-3-121. Application. Sec. 5-3-122. Outdoor watering schedule when using a public watering system. Sec. 5-3-123. Prevention of water wasting. Sec. 5-3-124. Exceptions to the restrictions of sections 5-3-122 and 5-3-123. Sec. 5-3-125. Enforcement; civil surcharges; penalties. 
ARTICLE 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sec. 5-3-1. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Commercial users: Any business or enterprise, including ice or concrete-products manufacturer, churches, schools, offices, public buildings, nursing homes, Young Women's Christian Association, Young Men's Christian Association, hotels, motels, tourist courts, and any user not covered under residential or industrial user class definitions.     Industrial users: Processing or manufacturing plants.     Peak month average day demand: The peak month average day demand shall be defined as the maximum monthly water consumption in a calendar year (January through December) divided by the number of days in the billing cycle.     Residential users: Private dwellings, trailers in trailer parks, apartments, fraternities, sororities, boarding and roominghouses, facilities of the Athens Housing Authority, single-family dwelling units located in an apartment complex, mobile home parks, apartment houses or facilities, or condominium complexes or facilities or similar facilities.     Water service pipe: Any pipe connecting a water meter to a point of water use by the consumer.     Water service tap: Any pipe connecting an Athens-Clarke County water main to a water meter.     Water system connection fee: A fee assessed for the privilege of connection to the existing water system and paid in addition to water service tapping, water meter, water consumption, sprinkler system, hydrant rent, turn on/off or other charges. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1; Ord. of 11-7-95, § 1; Ord. of 2-7-2017(3), § 5 ) 
Sec. 5-3-2. - Billing and collection for use of water—Responsible office designated.     The water business office shall bill and collect all charges made by Athens-Clarke County for the use of water from the waterworks system of Athens-Clarke County. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1) 
Sec. 5-3-3. - Same—Contents, etc., of bills.     On each water bill to each customer the water business office shall clearly specify the amount due and the last date (due date) when such sum may be paid without the penalty provided in section 5-3-12. On each bill to each customer there shall be set out by the water business office notice of the penalty provided in section 5-3-12 for failure of a customer to pay the amount of the bill by the last date (due date) specified on the bill. Except as otherwise provided, the head of the water business office may use his discretion as to the form of bills and as to the details of information to be conveyed in such bills. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1) 
Sec. 5-3-4. - Same—Authority to schedule billing. (a)  The water business office may establish a schedule for billing customers so that due dates for payments shall be staggered among the customers throughout Athens-Clarke County. This schedule of billing may be established by the water business office so as to provide for due dates of not less than 21 days after billing date, which due dates may be set and staggered among all customers at the discretion of the water business office so as to afford an even flow of payments of bills into such office during each month; provided, that no customer shall be billed more than once a month unless such customer fails to pay the amount due on the date specified on his bill or if a customer discontinues use and is rendered a final bill; provided, further, that in order to make adjustments in the schedule of billing from time to time in the future, the water business office may bill any customer twice during any one month. (b)  The water business office may set up more frequent readings or billings with respect to commercial or industrial water accounts. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1) 
Sec. 5-3-5. - Installation of service pipes and taps. (a)  All water service pipes shall be installed by licensed plumbers. Under no condition shall a plumber tap Athens-Clarke County water mains. Applications for connection shall be made on standard application forms furnished by the building inspection department. (b)  All water service taps shall be installed by Athens-Clarke County under the supervision of the public utilities director of Athens-Clarke County. Whenever a water service tap is required for a meter over two inches in capacity, it shall be the duty of the public utilities director to determine the actual expense of the installation of the water service tap and to certify the name of the customer and the amount of the expense to the water business office. 
Sec. 5-3-6. - Connecting private water supply with Athens-Clarke County system. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to make any cross-connection between a private water supply and the water supply system owned and operated by Athens-Clarke County. Any person violating the provisions of this section within Athens-Clarke County shall be punished as proscribed in section 1-1-5. A "cross-connection," within the meaning of this section, shall mean any connection by means of an unbroken pipe, irrespective of the presence in the pipe of shutoff valves and irrespective of the quality or characteristics of the water in the private water supply system. (b)  If any person shall violate the provisions of this section, the public utilities director shall disconnect that person's water system from the water system owned and operated by Athens-Clarke County and shall notify him of such action. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1) 
Sec. 5-3-7. - Reinstatement of service after violations.     Any person whose water service shall have been discontinued by Athens-Clarke County for violation of this chapter shall have his water service reinstated upon compliance with the provisions of this chapter and upon the payment to Athens-Clarke County of a reinstatement fee as provided in section 5-3-77(d). (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1) 
Sec. 5-3-8. - Water rates. (a)  Rates for water consumed. Rates to be charged for the sale of water to retail consumers of Athens-Clarke County shall be as set forth in section 5-3-77. (b)  Minimum monthly charge based on size of water meter. A minimum monthly charge to each customer for the sale of water, as determined by the size of the water meter, shall be as set forth in section 5-3-77(c). (c)  Additional regulations. The water business office is authorized to adopt any additional regulations as it shall deem necessary with reference thereto. (d)  Persons liable for payment. In the case of townhouses, apartment houses, apartment complexes or buildings, mobile home parks, as defined in the zoning ordinance, or similar usages located on the same plot of land, irrespective of whether dwelling units are located in the same building or not, the water bill shall be billed by the water business office of Athens-Clarke County to the owner of the property served; but in the case of a condominium (as organized under O.C.G.A. § 44-3-70 et seq. or other provisions of law), the same shall be charged to the association, except in cases where each dwelling unit has its own water meter. The owner of the property served or the association, where a condominium without individual meters is involved, shall be responsible for payment for water services. (e)  Sprinkler system charges. Charges on sprinkler systems, foam systems and private fire hydrants shall be as set forth in section 5-3-78. (f)  Exemption from sprinkler system charges. Charges for sprinkler connections, private fire hydrants and standpipes are eliminated when the customer has a fire flow meter. (g)  Discontinuance of service upon nonpayment of bill; fee for re-establishment of service. If a water account is not paid within ten days following the date specified as the due date thereof, or other date as specified or extended by the water business office, then the water business office or its authorized representative, shall cause water service to be discontinued on notice. A charge provided for in section 5-3-77(d) will be made to re-establish service after water is cut off for nonpayment. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1) 
Sec. 5-3-9. - Security deposits; increasing frequency of meter readings; billings; applicability; discontinuance, reinstatement of service. (a)  Security deposits for multiple-family service. The waterworks commercial office is hereby authorized to require a security deposit in advance equal to 1½-month's usage or other period of usage as applicable with respect to townhouses, apartments or dwelling units organized under the provisions of the Apartment Ownership Act or similar act of the General Assembly located upon the same plot of land and irrespective of whether located in the same building or not, apartment houses with two or more units, apartment complexes or buildings, mobile home parks, as defined in the zoning ordinance, townhouse complexes, motels, hotels, or other similar usages located on the same plot of land, irrespective of whether all dwelling units are located in the same building or similar usages. (b)  Security deposits where payment doubtful. The water business office may require a security deposit with respect to any customer where there is a record of delinquency on the part of such customer with respect to payment for water or sewer service or Athens-Clarke County taxes pertaining to the property service, bankruptcy, insolvency, pending foreclosure proceedings involving property served by Athens-Clarke County, or other reason appearing that payment for such service may not be forthcoming. (c)  Authority to require security deposits of others. The water business office, with the approval of the mayor and commission, may require a security deposit with respect to other customers or classes of customers which shall be paid at such times and in such amounts as may be approved by the mayor and commission. (d)  Interest to be paid on security deposits. All customers of the water and sewer department who are required to put up a deposit under subsections (a) through (c) of this section shall be paid interest on such deposits at a rate equal to the rate paid on passbook savings by Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation insured banks in Athens-Clarke County. (e)  Discontinuance of service authorized. For a violation or omission on the part of any customer to comply with this chapter or any requirement of the water business office, the water business office is authorized and directed to discontinue service to the customer. (f)  Applicability. These requirements are applicable to all customers. (g)  Payment of expenses and charges upon reinstatement of service. Any customer whose water service is discontinued and proposed to be reinstated shall be required to pay all expenses and charges as calculated by the water business office notwithstanding any other provisions or ordinances of the mayor and commission. (h)  Security deposits for new applicants. The water business office is hereby authorized to require a security deposit from all new water service applicants not covered under subsection (a) through (c), except those customers moving from one location to another on Athens-Clarke County water lines. The security deposit shall be as set out in section 5-3-73. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1; Ord. of 7-2-96, § 1; Ord. of 7-6-99, § 1) 
Sec. 5-3-10. - Estimated water bills.     The water business office may, at its option, estimate the water bill (based on past or projected usage by the best means possible) every other month, subject to such being adjusted when read. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1) 
Sec. 5-3-11. - Bond in lieu of security deposit.     The water business office may accept a bond with approved security, or other guaranty of payment, in lieu of any security deposit. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1) 
Sec. 5-3-12. - Penalty for late payment of water charges generally.     Any customer of Athens-Clarke County waterworks who fails to make payment of the charges established in this chapter by the due date as determined by the water business office shall pay, in addition to the amount of such charge, a penalty of ten percent of the amount of such charge. Such penalty shall also be applied to all prior unpaid accounts and on any prior penalties resulting therefrom. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1) 
Sec. 5-3-13. - Excessive water charges. (a)  In instances where the water business office finds that the excessive consumption of water was due to a fault traceable to Athens-Clarke County, the excess above the average water consumption shall not be charged against the consumer. (b)  In instances where the excessive consumption of water was due to a leak below ground that the consumer was not aware of, the bill on which the excess appears should be adjusted to the average bill for the past 12 months and the excess shall be charged at one-half the applicable rate. A certificate signed by a licensed plumber certifying that necessary repairs have been made is required before the adjustment is made. (c)  In instances where there is a disagreement as to the propriety or the amount of the adjustment between the water business office and the consumer, the consumer may request that the administrative hearing officer grant him a hearing, review the case, and issue a ruling on the matter. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1) 
Sec. 5-3-14. - Cutting off water as relief from liability for water charges.     Water being shut off at the stop and waste cock by the owner shall not relieve the customer from paying the minimum monthly fee. Bills will be collected until the water business office is notified in writing or in person to shut the water off. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1) 
Sec. 5-3-15. - Towers; tanks. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to paint or mark upon any portion of any Athens-Clarke County water tower. (b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to enter upon the lots on which such towers or tanks are located and to climb or attempt to climb any portion of the water towers or tanks and a notice shall be erected at the base of each water tower or tank with a warning setting out the terms and punishment provided by section 1-1-5. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1) 
Sec. 5-3-16. - Connection of property located outside of Athens-Clarke County to water or sewer system.     Any person desiring to connect property located outside of Athens-Clarke County to the water or sewer system of Athens-Clarke County shall first apply for a permit therefor under the provisions of the Georgia State Plumbing Code or such other plumbing code as may be adopted by Athens-Clarke County, with the exceptions that the fee for each plumbing fixture outside Athens-Clarke County shall be as provided in title 7, chapter 1 of this Code. The qualifications provided in the plumbing code of Athens-Clarke County or under other laws or ordinances pertaining to plumbers to do work inside Athens-Clarke County shall not be applicable to those doing work outside Athens-Clarke County. All such plumbing work on property located outside Athens-Clarke County and proposed to be connected to sewer or water systems or other systems of Athens-Clarke County shall comply with all provisions of the plumbing code as to standards, inspections, general regulations and the like. No property outside Athens-Clarke County shall be connected to the Athens-Clarke County water or sewer systems when its plumbing does not meet the requirements of such laws or ordinances. The plumbing official, after ten days' written notice, may discontinue water or sewer service or disconnect from Athens-Clarke County's water or sewer system the same on failure of any holder of such a permit or owner or property affected thereby to correct deficiencies or for violation of standards or other provisions of such plumbing code. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1) 
Sec. 5-3-17. - Tap and meter charges.     The fees for tap and meter charges shall be as set forth in section 5-3-75. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1) 
Sec. 5-3-18. - Petitions by Property Owners for water line extensions and special assessments for the costs.     Pursuant to the powers granted under the Charter of Athens-Clarke County section 7-101(b)(7) and section 8-114(31), Athens-Clarke County may provide for the extension of water lines and for special assessments for the costs thereof, as follows: (a)  Generally. If the owners of at least 60 percent of the parcels of land benefiting from a requested water line extension shall petition the commission for said water line extension, citing this section and designating by general description the improvement to be undertaken and the water line or part thereof to be extended. A public hearing as provided by subsection 5-3-18(g) of this section must be held, and such water line extension must be approved by ordinance. All petitions for water line extensions must be signed in ink by the owners of the property or by their duly authorized agents. The petition shall warrant that the person signing as owner of each parcel is the fee simple owner of that parcel and state that the property owners may be assessed for the cost of the extension and that said assessment constitutes a lien on the real property. Along with the petition, each owner must provide a certificate of title in accordance with the standards of the Georgia State Bar prepared by an attorney showing ownership of each parcel signed for. (b)  Execution when Athens-Clarke County owns property. When Athens-Clarke County owns property along the water line to be extended, the mayor may sign the petition in the name of Athens-Clarke County for the parcels of land owned by Athens-Clarke County along the proposed water line extension. (c)  Right to withdraw signature. Any person shall have the right to withdraw such person's signature from a petition for the extension of a water line prior to the adoption of an ordinance authorizing said extension, but the withdrawal must be in the handwriting of the withdrawing petitioner and shall state that it is the petitioner's own act. (d)  Effect of withdrawal of signature. Any person who has signed a petition for a water line extension and withdraws such person's signature therefrom prior to the adoption of an ordinance authorizing the water line extension will not thereafter be permitted to resign the same petition for said water line extension. The person withdrawing the signature may sign any other petition, but the commission will not approve the other petition unless 60 percent of the owners of parcels of land benefiting from the proposed water line extension, including the party who had withdrawn such party's signature from a previous petition, sign the petition. (e)  Method of calculation of cost to be assessed per parcel. For each project, the commission shall establish by ordinance an assessment method from among the methods set forth below which will most accurately assess each lot or parcel of land according to the benefit conferred upon it by the project. Assessments per parcel of land for the total costs of the water line extension may be made on the basis of the following as determined by the commission for each project: (1)  The property frontage abutting on the project, by dividing the total cost of the construction by the total frontage abutting the construction to ascertain the cost per front foot and assessing each lot or parcel of abutting property according to its frontage on construction at an equal rate per foot of frontage, exclusive of connection fees; (2)  The area of land served, or subject to being served, by the project, at an equal rate per unit of area; or (3)  The number of lots served, or subject to being served, where the project involves extension of an existing system to a residential or commercial subdivision, at an equal rate per lot calculated by dividing the total cost of the project by the total number of parcels benefited by the project. In the event that the lots to be served include existing multifamily housing or platted subdivisions not yet built, then "lots" as used in this subpart (3) shall include said unbuilt subdivision lots or said existing multifamily housing with each multifamily dwelling unit counted as a lot. (f)  Authority of commission for improvements not petitioned for. The commission may assess the pro rata costs of improvements provided for herein upon each parcel of real property abutting the improvement solely within its discretion and in the absence of an abutting landowner's signature on the petition for the improvements. (g)  Ordinance and notice of hearing. The construction of each project and the assessment for the construction shall be provided for by ordinance. Athens-Clarke County shall cause a legal notice to be published in the legal organ of Athens-Clarke County, at least ten days before and not more than 45 days from a public hearing, stating the time and place of such hearing concerning the adoption of an ordinance providing for a water line extension as defined above. The notice shall contain a project description of the proposed water line extension, including the parcels to be benefited and a statement of the general character, material, size and total cost of the water line. The hearing shall be for the purpose of receiving and considering the recommendation of the public utilities department and public comment on the merits of the proposed water line project. The ordinance may be adopted at the next meeting after the notice has been published. Substantial compliance with this section as to notice shall be sufficient. (h)  Deferred or installment payments; execution of special assessments. The director of public utilities is authorized, upon commission authorization for the work, to accept application and payment from property owners assessed for the water line extension and to permit deferred or installment payments for the assessed costs plus interest at an interest rate based on prevailing rates, as set forth in the project ordinance per annum over a period not to exceed ten years of any owner of property abutting the water line extension. Such installment payments for costs of the water line extension shall be in the name of the property owner applying for installment payments, shall be non-assignable, and shall be billed to said property owner by the Clarke County tax commissioner. The installment account shall be paid in full, including earned interest, at the time of any transfer of ownership of the property. In addition, pursuant to the Charter of Athens-Clarke County section 8-106, whenever any special assessment imposed by this chapter is not paid within the time periods provided for herein, then the manager or his lawful designee the Clarke County tax commissioner as ex-officio marshal shall issue execution against such person, firm, or entity liable therefor or property subject thereto for such sums as may be due with interest at the legal rate for county taxes from due date, and costs. The unified government shall have the right to enforce payment of such execution by levy and sale as in the case of county taxes, and the purchaser at such sale shall acquire the same title and rights as a purchaser at a sale for county taxes. Executions issued hereunder, and the levy and sale thereunder shall be governed by general law. (i)  Completion of work; lien on property abutting water line extension. The director of public utilities shall notify the tax commissioner of the completion of any water lines which constitute a lien against abutting property, and this information shall be recorded and maintained in the records of the tax commissioner and available for public inspection in the office of the tax commissioner. The lien shall be effective in the same manner as provided for liens for county taxes. A notice of lien for special assessments shall be filed in the real estate records of the clerk of superior court of Athens-Clarke County. Said notice shall also state that the lien must be paid in full at the time of any transfer in ownership of the property. The date of entry of the completed work shall be deemed the date when the lien attaches to the abutting property. (Ord. of 10-2-2001, § 1; Ord. of 5-1-2012, § 1) Editor's note— An ordinance of May 1, 2012, changed the title of § 5-3-18 from Petitions for water line extensions and special assessments for the costs to Petitions by Property Owners for water line extensions and special assessments for the costs. 
Sec. 5-3-19. - Water line installations and special assessments for the costs thereof established by the Mayor and Commission.     In addition to the method provided in section 5-3-18, pursuant to the powers granted under the Charter of Athens-Clarke County section 7-101(b)(7) and section 8-114(31), Athens-Clarke County may provide for the installation of water lines and for special assessments for the costs thereof without the necessity of landowner petition, as follows: (a)  Generally. The Mayor and Commission of Athens-Clarke County may approve a water line installation and impose special assessments for the costs thereof as related to new development(s) of unimproved/undeveloped tract(s) upon receipt of a recommendation from the Manager, or designee, citing this section and designating by general description the water line project to be undertaken. A public hearing as provided in section 5-3-19(c) must be held, and such water line installation must be approved by ordinance upon a determination by the Mayor and Commission that such water line project is in the best interest of the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Athens-Clarke County. (b)  Method of calculation of cost to be assessed per parcel. For each project, the commission shall establish by ordinance an assessment method from among the methods set forth below which will most accurately assess each lot or parcel of land according to the benefit conferred upon it by the project. Assessments per parcel of land for the total costs, or a cost not to exceed, for the water line installation may be made on the basis of the following as determined by the commission for each project: (1)  The property frontage abutting on the project, by dividing the total cost of the project by the total frontage abutting the project to ascertain the cost per front foot and assessing each lot or parcel of abutting property according to its frontage on the project at an equal rate per foot of frontage, exclusive of connection fees; (2)  The area of land served, or subject to being served, by the project, at an equal rate per unit of area; or (3)  The number of lots served, or subject to being served, where the project involves a residential or commercial subdivision, at an equal rate per lot calculated by dividing the total cost of the project by the total number of parcels benefited by the project. In the event that the lots to be served include multifamily housing or platted subdivisions not yet built, then "lots" as used in this subpart (3) shall include said unbuilt subdivision lots or said multifamily housing with each multifamily dwelling unit counted as a lot. (c)  Ordinance and notice of hearing. The construction of each project and the assessment for the project shall be provided for by ordinance. Athens-Clarke County shall cause a legal notice to be published in the legal organ of Athens-Clarke County, at least ten days before and not more than 45 days from a public hearing, stating the time and place of such hearing concerning the adoption of an ordinance providing for a water line installation as defined above. The notice shall contain a project description of the proposed water line project, including the parcels to be benefited and a statement of the general character, material, size and total costs, or a cost not to exceed, for the water line. The hearing shall be for the purpose of receiving and considering the recommendation of the Public Utilities Department and public comment on the merits of the proposed water line project. The ordinance may be adopted at the next meeting after the notice has been published. Substantial compliance with this section as to notice shall be sufficient. (d)  The Director of Public Utilities shall file an Affidavit of Special Assessment Area in the real estate records of Athens-Clarke County to provide notice of the special assessment on the subject property. (e)  The assessment shall not be payable until an owner of a lot of record within the assessment area applies for water service, at which time the per parcel assessment with any applicable interest thereon shall be paid in full as a condition of provision of water service to the parcel. The Director of Public Utilities is authorized to provide for interest on the assessed amount per parcel based on prevailing interest rates, as set forth in the project ordinance per annum from the time of acceptance of the project by the Public Utilities Department to the time of application for water service. (Ord. of 5-1-2012, § 2) 
Secs. 5-3-20—5-3-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 2. - CONNECTION FEE 
Sec. 5-3-31. - Users subject to fee. (a)  The water connection fee basic rate shall be as set forth in section 5-3-76. (b)  Users of the water system shall pay a connection fee before new or additional water service can be made available. Users will be subject to the fee at the time new water service is requested through the purchase of a water meter. When a domestic service water meter and an outdoor water use water meter are installed on a common water service tap, the connection fee shall be that charged for a water meter size equal to the common water service tap size. All users shall be subject to the connection fee regardless of location of the water meter. (c)  Once a connection fee has been paid to Athens-Clarke County, it shall not be refunded. (d)  Users shall also be subject to a water connection fee described herein when their existing water meter size is increased. In such event the amount of the connection fee due shall be the difference between the fee stated for the size of the new meter as shown in section 5-3-76 less the fee stated therein for the size of the meter to be replaced. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1; Ord. of 5-6-2008, § 2; Ord. of 2-7-2017(3), § 6 ) 
Sec. 5-3-32. - Payment of fee.     Users shall pay the connection fee at the time the application is made with the building inspection department to increase the size of the existing water service tap or for a new or additional water meter. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1) 
Sec. 5-3-33. - Revenue restrictions.     All revenues received from the water system connection fee shall only be used for debt service payments, for capital improvements, or deposited into Athens-Clarke County's Water and Sewer Construction Fund for construction and purchase of capital improvements. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1) 
Secs. 5-3-34—5-3-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 3. - METERS 
Sec. 5-3-46. - Required; cost generally. (a)  The consumption of all water furnished by the Athens-Clarke County waterworks shall be measured by water meters approved by Athens-Clarke County. Every proposed patron of Athens-Clarke County waterworks shall pay a water service tap and meter fee which shall be arrived at by reflecting the cost of such water meter, necessary appliances required therewith and installation charge as provided for in section 5-3-47. (b)  The building official or public utilities director may make a determination of the number of meters that may be required for condominiums, apartment buildings, apartment complexes or townhouses, shopping centers and similar facilities. The owner of any such development shall submit plans and a layout of such development to the public utilities director or the building official in order to assist the official in making his determination under this section. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1) 
Sec. 5-3-47. - Installation costs, etc. (a)  The public utilities director shall not issue a permit for or install a water meter until he has a receipt from the water business office showing that the water service tap and meter fee has been paid in full by the owner of the premises to be serviced by Athens-Clarke County water. The water service tap and meter fee shall be as set forth in section 5-3-75. (b)  The public utilities director shall fix the costs of such water meter, necessary appliances required therewith and installation, taking into consideration and being guided by actual costs thereof to Athens-Clarke County. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1) 
Sec. 5-3-48. - Duty of Athens-Clarke County to furnish and install; failure to pay cost; avoiding metering. (a)  Upon the request of any consumer or proposed user of water to be furnished by the Athens-Clarke County waterworks and upon the payment of the water service tap and meter fee and installation cost, Athens-Clarke County shall install a water meter and all required appliances therewith. The water meter shall be and remain the property of Athens-Clarke County. New customers for water services at established locations may obtain said services upon application and payment of a turn-on fee as provided in section 5-3-75(c). (b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with or meddle with any water meter used to determine the amount due to Athens-Clarke County with the intent of causing the same to fail to properly register the use or consumption of water or to tamper with, tap into, connect with or meddle with any Athens-Clarke County water main or water stub with the intent of using or consuming Athens-Clarke County water without the same being metered. It shall be unlawful for any person without permission of Athens-Clarke County to consume or use Athens-Clarke County water without the same being metered as to the amount used. It shall be unlawful for any person to make or attempt to make a connection with or into a Athens-Clarke County water main or water stub without a water meter being installed to measure any Athens-Clarke County water used, proposed, or intended to be used. It shall be unlawful for any person to mutilate or remove without the authority of the public utilities director or the water business office any seal placed by authority of Athens-Clarke County on any water meter used by Athens-Clarke County to measure water used. If the violation occurs within Athens-Clarke County, any violator shall be punished as provided by section 1-1-5 and the Athens-Clarke County water service may be either refused or discontinued after notice and hearing by the administrative hearing officer. The violator shall be liable to a penalty of 50 percent of all sums plus interest from due date of bills for the estimated amount of water consumed for which Athens-Clarke County has not been paid, which shall be calculated by the public utilities director by the best means possible. If the violation occurs outside Athens-Clarke County, the violator shall be subject to the penalty of having Athens-Clarke County water service discontinued or refused after notice and hearing by the administrative hearing officer and likewise subject to the penalty of 50 percent of all sums plus interest from due date on the estimated amount of water consumed for which Athens-Clarke County has not been paid, which shall be calculated by the public utilities director by the best means possible. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1) 
Sec. 5-3-49. - Stop and waste cock.     There shall be a suitable stop and waste cock placed inside the premises of consumers, between the meter and the places of consumption, in order that the meter may be taken out for repairs as often as necessary and each meter set shall be enclosed in a suitable box for its protection. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1) 
Secs. 5-3-50—5-3-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 4. - CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL PROGRAM 
Sec. 5-3-60. - Adopted by reference. (a)  A certain document, one copy of which is on file in the office of the clerk of commission where it is available for public inspection, being marked and designated as "Program for Water Conservation and Cross-Connection Control for Athens-Clarke County, Georgia," is hereby adopted as the water conservation and cross-connection control program for Athens-Clarke County, and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of such program are hereby made a part of this article as though fully set out at length herein. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1) 
Sec. 5-3-61. - Administration.     The primary responsibility for the administration of this program is with the public utilities department under the direction of public utilities director. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1) 
Secs. 5-3-62—5-3-69. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 5. - WATER AND SEWER FEES 
Sec. 5-3-70. - Athens-Clarke County water contracts.     The water and sewer charges set forth in this chapter shall apply to all users of the waterworks system except those governmental jurisdictions which are a party to a contract with Athens-Clarke County. Such users shall pay at the rates set forth in the contract. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1) 
Sec. 5-3-71. - Installations requiring state encroachment permit.     There shall be a charge of $100.00 for all water and sewer service installations requiring a Georgia Department of Transportation right-of-way encroachment permit. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1) 
Sec. 5-3-72. - Paving cut and bull head charges.     Paving cut charges shall be a minimum of $425.00 and bull head shall cost a minimum of $100.00, plus such additional amounts as the public utilities director shall determine which shall reflect the cost of labor, equipment, and other materials required for such work. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1; Ord. of 3-1-2005, § 1) Note— See the editor's note to Chapter 5-3, Article 5.) 
Sec. 5-3-73. - Security deposits for new applicants—Water.     The security deposit fee for customers under section 5-3-9(h) shall be $30.00. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1) 
Sec. 5-3-74. - Same—Sewers.     The deposit for sewer service under section 5-1-43(l) shall be equal to at least a minimum of one month's sewer charge in advance in the case of each customer where such would exceed $50.00 per month based on previous or estimated usage. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1) 
Sec. 5-3-75. - Tap and meter charges. (a)  Tap and meter charges shall be as follows: (1)  ¾-inch water meter ..... $ 225.00 (2)  ¾-inch water stub ..... 215.00 (3)  1-inch water meter ..... 280.00 (4)  1-inch water stub ..... 225.00 (5)  1½-inch water meter ..... 450.00 (6)  1½-inch water stub ..... 495.00 (7)  2-inch water meter ..... 1,165.00 (8)  2-inch water stub ..... 530.00 (9)  4-inch sewer stub ..... 365.00* (10)  6-inch sewer stub ..... 445.00* *Plus casing and manhole. (b)  The public utilities director is hereby authorized to use his discretion in giving prices on sizes not referred to above and with the stipulation that at all times he shall ascertain the current cost and expense thereof when giving such quotation. (c)  The turn-on fee shall be $10.00. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1; Ord. of 3-1-2005, § 2) Note— See the editor's note to Chapter 5-3, Article 5. 
Sec. 5-3-76. - Water system connection fee. (a)  The water system connection fee shall be based on water meter size as listed below: Meter Sizes Inches      Fee ¾ ..... $ 1,600.00 1 ..... 4,000.00 1½ ..... 8,000.00 2 ..... 12,800.00 3 ..... 25,600.00 4 ..... 40,000.00 6 ..... 80,000.00 (b)  Multi-family structures or mixed commercial and multi-family structures shall pay a water connection fee that corresponds to the meter size. Multi-family structures or mixed but predominantly residential multi-family structures shall pay a water connection fee that corresponds to the meter size. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1; Ord. of 3-1-2005, § 3; Ord. of 5-4-2010, § 3; Ord. of 2-7-2017(3), § 7 ) Note— See the editor's note to Chapter 5-3, Article 5. 
Sec. 5-3-77. - Water rates. (a)  Residential rates for water consumed . Rates to be charged for the sale of water to consumers whose property is within the definition of residential user as defined in section 5-3-1 of this chapter shall pay a monthly customer service fee in accordance with subsection (d) herein and a base rate of $5.56 per 1,000 gallons. (b)  Nonresidential rates for water consumed . Rates to be charged for the sale of water to consumers whose property is not within the definition of residential user, as defined in section 5-3-1 of this chapter, shall pay a monthly customer service fee in accordance with subsection (d) herein and a base rate of $5.56 per 1,000 gallons. (c)  Monthly water usage charge. Calculation of a customer's monthly water usage charge shall be determined by incorporating the applicable base rate established in subsections (a) or (b) above into the water conservation rate structure methodology approved by the Mayor and Commission on April 1, 2008. (d)  Monthly customer service fee based on size of water meter. Provided, however, that the monthly customer service fee to each customer for the sale of water, as determined by the size of the water meter, shall be as follows: Meter Size     Monthly Customer      Service Fee        5/8 or ¾ ..... $8.90 1 ..... 9.33 1½ ..... 11.02 2 ..... 26.84 3 ..... 34.64 4 ..... 44.68 6 ..... 97.56     There shall be no additional monthly service fee for residential customers with an outdoor water use meter. (e)  Re-establishing service. A charge of not less than $10.00 plus any other expense will be made to re-establish service after water is cut off for nonpayment of an account or other violation. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1; Ord. of 7-6-93, §§ 1—3; Ord. of 7-5-95, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 7-2-96, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 7-1-97, §§ 1—3; Ord. of 6-2-98, § 15; Ord. of 6-1-99, §§ 13(A), (B); Ord. of 6-3-2003, §§ 1—3; Ord. of 5-3-2005, §§ 1—3; Ord. of 6-6-2006, §§ 1—3; Ord. of 6-5-2007, §§ 1—3; Ord. of 5-6-2008, § 3; Ord. of 6-19-2008, § 1; Ord. of 5-5-2009, § 1; Ord. of 5-4-2010, § 1; Ord. of 6-7-2011, § 1; Ord. of 6-5-2012, § 1; Ord. of 6-4-2013, § 1; Ord. of 6-3-2014, § 1; Ord. of 6-2-2015(2), § 1 ; Ord. of 6-7-2016(1), § 1 ; Ord. of 6-6-2017, § 1 ; Ord. of 6-5-2018(2), § 1 ) 
Sec. 5-3-78. - Fire sprinkler system(s) charges.     Charges on fire sprinkler systems are payable monthly at the following rates for each sprinkler system: (1)  1½" ..... $ 1.00 (2)  2" ..... 1.50 (3)  3" ..... 2.00 (4)  4" ..... 5.00 (5)  6" ..... 10.00 (6)  8" ..... 15.00 (7)  10" ..... 30.00 (8)  12" ..... 45.00 (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1; Ord. of 3-1-2005, § 4) Note— See the editor's note to Chapter 5-3, Article 5. 
Sec. 5-3-79. - Wastewater connection fee. (a)  The wastewater connection fee for all but multi-family development shall be based on the size of the water meter serving the wastewater user as listed below: Meter Sizes (inches)      Fee ¾ ..... $ 2,700.00 1 ..... 6,750.00 1½ ..... 13,500.00 2 ..... 21,600.00 3 ..... 43,200.00 4 ..... 67,500.00 6 ..... 135,000.00 (b)  Multi-family structures or mixed but predominantly residential multi-family structures shall pay a wastewater connection fee that is 0.6 multiplied by the ¾-inch sewer connection fee multiplied by the number of dwelling units served by the master meter. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1; Ord. of 3-1-2005, § 5; Ord. of 5-4-2010, § 4; Ord. of 2-7-2017(3), § 8 ) Note— See the editor's note to Chapter 5-3, Article 5. 
Sec. 5-3-80. - Sewer rates. (a)  Residential rates for wastewater discharged . Rates to be charged for wastewater discharged by customers of the Athens-Clarke County sewer system whose property is within the definition of residential user, as defined in section 5-1-32 of this chapter, shall be as follows: Monthly customer service fee ..... $8.55 Base rate per 1,000 gallons ..... $6.44 (b)  Nonresidential rates for wastewater discharged . Rates to be charged for wastewater discharged by customers of the Athens-Clarke County sewer system whose property does not fall within the definition of residential user, as defined in section 5-1-32 of this chapter, shall be as follows: Monthly customer service fee ..... $8.55 Base rate per 1,000 gallons ..... $6.44 (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1; Ord. of 7-6-93, § 4; Ord. of 7-5-95, § 3; Ord. of 7-2-96, § 3; Ord. of 7-1-97, § 4; Ord. of 6-2-98, § 15; Ord. of 6-1-99 § 13(C), (D); Ord. of 6-3-2003, §§ 4, 5; Ord. of 5-3-2005, §§ 4, 5; Ord. of 6-6-2006, §§ 4, 5; Ord. of 6-5-07, §§ 4, 5; Ord. of 5-6-2008, § 4; Ord. of 6-19-2008, §§ 2, 3; Ord. of 5-5-2009, § 2; Ord. of 5-4-2010, § 2; Ord. of 6-7-2011, § 2; Ord. of 6-5-2012, § 2; Ord. of 6-4-2013, § 2; Ord. of 6-3-2014, § 2; Ord. of 6-2-2015(2), § 2 ; Ord. of 6-7-2016(1), § 2 ; Ord. of 6-6-2017, § 2 ; Ord. of 6-5-2018(2), § 2 ) 
Sec. 5-3-81. - Same—Surcharge.     The wastewater surcharge rates for five-day BOD, suspended solids, and oil and grease shall be as follows: Implemented January 1 of each year Parameter Range 2010 Fee* 2011 Fee* 2012 Fee* BOD 5 (mg/l) 250-300 301-400 401-500 $100 $200 $300 $200 $250 $300 $300 $300 $300 TSS (mg/l) 250-300 301-400 401-500 $100 $200 $300 $200 $250 $300 $300 $300 $300 Oil & Grease (mg/l) 101-150 151-200 $80 $160 $120 $160 $160 $160  *All fees are $ per 1,000 pounds. Wastewater surcharges shall be charged by the Public Utilities Department's Water Business Office at the rates specified in this Section for Five Day BOD, Total Suspended Solids, and Oil and Grease which exceed the quantities contained within Section 5-1-42 of this Ordinance. The surcharge fees will be changed in accordance with the rate schedule listed in Section 5-3-81 with the 2010 fee beginning on January 1, 2010, the 2011 fee beginning on January 1, 2011, and the full 2012 fees beginning on January 1, 2012. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1; Ord. of 10-6-2009, § 3) 
Sec. 5-3-82. - Development plan review and system evaluation fees.     The following fees shall be charged for reviewing new development plans, for water system evaluations and for wastewater evaluations by the department of public utilities: (1)  Development plan review (per page reviewed) ..... $ 30.00 (2)  Water system evaluation ..... 35.00 (3)  Wastewater system evaluation ..... 115.00 (Ord. of 3-1-2005, § 6) Editor's note— Section 6 of an ordinance adopted March 1, 2005, repealed former § 5-3-82 of the Code and enacted new provisions as § 5-3-82. Former 5-3-82, pertained to charges for emptying septic tanks and portable toilets into the wastewater system and derived from an ordinance adopted Jan. 5, 1993, § 1. Note— See the editor's note to Chapter 5-3, Article 5. 
Sec. 5-3-83. - Reinstatement of sewer service.     The minimum fee for reinstatement of disconnected sewer service shall be $30.00. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1) 
Sec. 5-3-84. - Reserved. Editor's note— Ord. of 2-7-2017(3), § 9, repealed § 5-3-84, which pertained to high impact user fee. For prior history, see Code Comparative Table. 
Sec. 5-3-85. - Fire hydrant meter rental fee.     There shall be a charge of $135.00 for the rental of a fire hydrant meter. This fee includes 15 CCf's of water; usage above 15 CCf's shall be charged at the non-residential consumption rate. (Ord. of 3-1-2005, § 7) Note— See the editor's note to Chapter 5-3, Article 5. 
Sec. 5-3-86. - Inspection fees. (1)  Water main inspection fee (per linear foot) ..... $0.65* (2)  Sanitary sewer line inspection fee (per linear foot) ..... 1.50* *Minimum inspection fee is $250.00. (Ord. of 3-1-2005, § 8) Note— See the editor's note to Chapter 5-3, Article 5. 
Secs. 5-3-87—5-3-93. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 6. - DROUGHT/WATER SHORTAGE MANAGEMENT PLAN (DWSMP)[4] Footnotes: --- (4) --- Editor's note— Section 1 of an ordinance adopted July 6, 2004, deleted former art. 6 of ch. 5-3 in its entirety and added new provisions as art. 6 as herein set out. Former art. 6, §§ 5-3-94—5-3-101, pertained to water shortage management and derived from an ordinance adopted June 20, 2000, § 1. 
Sec. 5-3-94. - Purpose and intent.     The purpose of this article shall be to implement emergency measures and procedures in accordance with applicable law to prevent threats to public health, safety and welfare arising from periods of water shortage and drought and to prevent acts that cause, or can be reasonably expected to cause, harm to limited water resources. It is the intent of this article to adopt regulations that allow uses of potable water drawn from the Athens-Clarke County Department of Public Utilities water system during periods of drought or water shortage. (Ord. of 7-6-2004, § 1; Ord. of 12-4-2007, § 1; Ord. of 10-3-2017(2), § 1 ) 
Sec. 5-3-95. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Emergency Drought and Water Shortage Management Plan (EDWSMP) means a severe-drought response plan adopted by the Athens-Clarke County Unified Government to protect the water supply and which is developed according to the general purposes and intent of this chapter as set forth in section 5-3-94 and as may be required by the State of Georgia pursuant to EPD Rule 391-3-30-.07(4)(e) or other applicable law or regulation.     EPD Rule means an official rule or regulation promulgated by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources Environmental Protection Division.     Essential water use means water used strictly for fire-fighting purposes, for health and medical purposes, and to satisfy federal, state, and local public health and safety requirements.     Extraordinary hardship means a permanent damage to property or other personal or economic loss which is substantially more severe than the sacrifices borne by other similarly situated water users subject to the limitations.     Maximum allowed usage volume is calculated based on either the winter average daily use or annual average daily use multiplied by the numbers of days in the applicable billing period or enforcement schedule multiplied by the maximum allowance under an EDWSMP.     Outdoor water usage means lawn and garden watering; noncommercial vehicle washing; filling of private and public swimming pools, and other non-essential outdoor uses of water, such as hosing sidewalks and driveways. This definition includes residential, commercial, governmental, industrial and institutional outdoor water usage.     Upper Oconee Basin Water Authority (UOBWA) is a public authority created by Georgia Laws 1994, page 5123 (entitled "Upper Oconee Basin Water Authority - Creation") made up of Athens-Clarke, Barrow, Jackson, and Oconee Counties with the general purpose of acquiring and developing adequate sources of water supply, including but not limited to the construction of reservoirs, treatment of such water, and the transmission of water within the Upper Oconee Basin Area, and to the various counties, municipalities, and public authorities located therein; and other objectives as set forth in the 1994 Act. (Ord. of 7-6-2004, § 1; Ord. of 12-4-2007, § 1; Ord. of 10-3-2017(2), §§ 2—5 ) 
Sec. 5-3-96. - Drought and water shortage management measures for water usage.     Limitations on water use by all customers of the Athens-Clarke County department of public utilities water system during drought or anticipated drought or other periods of water shortage shall be enforced according to the provisions set forth below. These provisions are intended to be consistent with EPD Rule Section 391-3-30. In the event of a conflict between the EPD Rules and the Athens-Clarke County DWSMP the EPD Rules shall govern.     Mandatory drought and water shortage measures shall be implemented as denoted in this section. These levels are progressive and cumulative unless stated otherwise.     These measures shall be implemented according to the provisions of this section upon written recommendation by the director of public utilities and the manager and approved or modified by the Mayor, and ratified or modified by the Commission at its next business meeting or at a special called meeting. The approved water use restrictions within the steps and the associated outdoor use permits provided for in section 5-3-99 may be modified upon written recommendation by the director of public utilities and the manager and approved or modified by the Mayor, and ratified or modified by the Commission at its next business meeting or at a special called meeting. Any such modifications shall be in writing and available for public inspection in the administration offices of the Public Utilities Department located at 124 East Hancock Avenue, Athens, Georgia and the Clerk of Commission, Room 204, City Hall, 301 College Avenue, Athens, Georgia.     Level 1: Level 1 initiates an enhanced conservation outreach program. The public shall be notified through a public information campaign that shall include, at a minimum, public notice regarding drought conditions and drought specific public-service messages in one or more of the following ways: newspaper advertisements, bill inserts, website homepage, social media, and notices in public libraries. All of the water conservation provisions of Article 7 WATER CONSERVATION remain in effect during level 1.     Level 2: Level 2 curtails water usage, including certain day and hour limitations as set forth below.     Spray irrigation , including lawn sprinkling, is permitted only two days per week on an even-odd schedule. Hand watering and drip irrigation is allowed any day at any time. □ Even numbered addresses ending with the number 0, 2, 4, 6 or 8 may spray irrigate on Wednesday and Saturday each day between the morning hours immediately after midnight to 10:00 a.m., and between the evening hours from 4:00 p.m. to midnight. □ Odd numbered addresses ending with the number 1, 3, 5, 7 or 9 may spray irrigate on Thursday and Sunday each day between the morning hours immediately after midnight to 10:00 a.m., and between the evening hours from 4:00 p.m. to midnight. □ Sites without an address shall follow the even-number schedule.     The following outdoor uses are not allowed during level 2 unless necessary for health, safety, fire protection, or construction: □ Non-commercial washing of hard surfaces such as streets, gutters, sidewalks and driveways; □ Using water for ornamental purposes, such as fountains, reflecting pools, and waterfalls; □ Use of fire hydrants; □ Non-commercial washing of vehicles, boats, trailers, motorbikes, airplanes, or golf carts; □ Non-commercial washing or pressure washing of buildings or structures; □ Charity or non-commercial fund-raiser car washes.     Restaurants may serve water only upon request by a customer.     Level 3: Level 3 further curtails water usage and includes the restrictions of level 2 unless modified below.     Spray irrigation, including lawn sprinkling, is prohibited except as permitted in the following paragraph.     The outdoor water uses listed in EPD Rule 391-3-30-.03(1)(b) are allowed subject to the following additional requirements: □ Spray irrigation of personal food gardens may be conducted between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. Irrigation of personal food gardens using drip irrigation or soaker hoses may be done at any time of the day. □ Hand watering with a hose with automatic cutoff or handheld container may be conducted between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. □ Irrigation of athletic fields or public turf grass recreational areas may be conducted between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m., subject to the two-days a week even-odd schedule described in level 2. □ Irrigation of golf courses shall be conducted in accordance with EPD Rule 391-3-30-.07(4)(b)4. □ Use of reclaimed waste water by a designated user from a system permitted by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, Environmental Protection Division to provide reclaimed waste water shall not be allowed for general outdoor watering as described in EPD Rule 391-3-30-.03(1)(a). It shall be allowed for any use described in EPD Rule 391-3-30-.03(1)(b) subject to limitations in EPD Rule 391-3-30-.07(4)(b). □ Installation, maintenance, or calibration of irrigation of systems is allowed, provided that it is done by professional landscapers or golf course superintendents. □ Watering to maintain the level of water in swimming pools shall occur only when necessary. Draining of pools or refilling shall be done only for health or safety reasons. In general, pools shall be covered during level 3.     Commercial exceptions: In accordance with the Georgia Drought Management Rule the following commercial outdoor water uses are exempt from outdoor water use restrictions: □ Pressure washing; □ Permanent car wash facility, provided that it is connected to a sanitary sewer system of a political subdivision or local government authority or recycles used wash water; □ Construction site water usage; □ Watering-in of pesticides and herbicides on turf; □ Other activities essential to daily business.     Emergency Drought and Water Shortage Management Plan (EDWSMP). Athens-Clarke County Unified Government may seek targeted reductions in water usage through an EDWSMP in addition to reductions resulting from implementation of levels 1 through 3, inclusive. The director of public utilities and the manager may recommend a required reduction of water usage by some or all of the categories of water users in the following order of priority, as listed in the order given below from the highest priority of use to the lowest priority of use: 1 st  Medical and emergency facilities and emergency purposes such as fire suppression, and the use of water to satisfy federal, state, and local public health and safety requirements; 2 nd  Domestic and personal uses including drinking, cooking, washing, sanitary and health related uses and uses necessary to sustain domestic and livestock animals and personal food gardens; 3 rd  Commercial, industrial, and institutional uses; 4 th  Refilling of ponds which existed prior to the declared drought, and only to the level necessary to maintain aquatic life within the pond prior to the declared drought. Also, hand watering of non-lawn turf landscape plants and watering of golf course tee boxes and putting greens; 5 th  Uses such as lawn sprinkling (spray irrigation), irrigation of recreational/athletic fields and golf course fairways; 6 th  Uses that do not sustain plant, animal, or human life, health or well being and/or directly support established ongoing commercial, industrial, or institutional activities. Such uses include non-commercial and fund-raising car washing, filling of decorative water features, public fountains, water slides, wading pools, and topping off public and private swimming pools.     The targeted reductions may differ across the categories. An EDWSMP may state a maximum allowed usage volume and implementation schedule if such is consistent with the State of Georgia's numeric water usage reduction requirements per EPD Rule 391-3-30-.07(4)(e) or if included in a variance issued by the State of Georgia. The EDWSMP may then be approved by the Mayor to take immediate effect and ratified or modified by the Commission at its next regular business meeting or at a special called meeting.     In implementing the levels described in this section or a EDWSMP, the director of public utilities and the manager shall have the authority from time to time to submit applications to the Georgia Department of Natural Resources Environmental Protection Division for approval of variances for either more or less strict drought response measures or use reductions than required under EPD Rule 391-3-30. Variance requests may be submitted in accordance with EPD Rule 391-3-30-.08 as necessary to implement any of the provisions of this article or to conform to UOBWA drought management guidance. (Ord. of 7-6-2004, § 1; Ord. of 12-4-2007, § 1; Ord. of 4-1-2008, § 1; Ord. of 10-3-2017(2), § 6 ) 
Sec. 5-3-97. - Drought and water shortage emergencies.     The director of public utilities shall recommend emergency measures and procedures pursuant to this Article to address periods of water shortages and drought or other events that may have an adverse impact on Athens-Clarke County's potable water supply, and in making any recommendations the director of public utilities shall consider: (i) applicable law and regulation and mandatory directives from the State of Georgia, including the State's exercise of EPD Rule 391-3-30; (ii) Athens-Clarke County's responsibilities as a member of UOBWA and data and recommendations therefrom; and (iii) such other relevant sources of data that reasonably indicate and predict potential shortages of water and drought, including without limitation any factors that impair treatment capacity, low pressure in the distribution system or loss of service at the J.G. Beacham Water Treatment Plant. Any recommendation shall address compliance with applicable law and contractual obligations, the reasonable needs of customers of the system, and the responsibility to protect all resources, equipment and assets of the system. (Ord. of 7-6-2004, § 1; Ord. of 12-4-2007, § 1; Ord. of 10-3-2017(2), § 7 ) 
Sec. 5-3-98. - Enforcement.     Persons shall not violate the limitations on water usage provided for under levels 1 through 3 or an EDWSMP, as provided for in this article. Enforcement shall be as provided below: (a)  For violating level 1. During a Level 1 drought the requirements of Article 7 Water Conservation apply and shall be enforced according to this paragraph. Water consumers shall be given written notice of a first violation by the department of public utilities. After having been given the first notice of violation and upon a second violation, water consumers shall pay a Drought and Water Shortage Management Plan (DWSMP) surcharge of $200.00 and/or have the water supply terminated. Water supply shall not be restored until payment of the surcharge and a reconnection charge of not less than $10.00, plus any expense incurred to restore service. (b)  For violating level 2. Water consumers shall be given written notice of a first violation by the department of public utilities. After having been given the first notice and upon a second violation, water consumers shall pay a surcharge of $400.00 and/or have the water supply terminated. Water supply shall not be restored until payment of the DWSMP surcharge and a reconnection charge of not less than $10.00, plus any expense incurred to restore service. (c)  For violating level 3 . Water consumers shall be given written notice of the violation of the outdoor water usage ban by the department of public utilities. After the first notice upon a second violation, water consumers shall pay a surcharge of $1,000.00 and/or have their water supply terminated. Water supply shall not be restored until payment of the DWSMP surcharge and a reconnection charge of not less than $10.00, plus any expense incurred to restore service. (d)  For violating an EDWSMP. (1)  First violation. Water consumers shall be given written notice of the first violation by the department of public utilities, plus shall be charged ten times the existing unit charge for volumes in excess of the maximum allowed usage volume. (2)  Second violation. After the first notice and upon second violation, water consumers shall be charged ten times the existing unit charge for volumes in excess of the maximum allowed usage volume and shall pay a surcharge of $1,000.00. (3)  Third violation. Upon third violation water consumers shall be charged ten times the existing unit charge for volumes in excess of the maximum allowed usage volume and shall pay a surcharge of $1,000.00, and have their water supply terminated. Water supply shall not be restored until payment of the EDWSMP excess use unit price and surcharge and a reconnection charge of not less than $10.00, plus any expense incurred to restore service. (4)  Enforcement Schedule. Water meters will be read for each category of water user in Section 5-3-95 and will be subject to enforcement action based on the following schedule: a.  Residential: Monthly b.  Industrial: Weekly c.  Health and Safety: Monthly d.  Commercial: Monthly e.  Institutional: Every two weeks (e)  Enforcement procedures. (1)  Authority to enforce this article is hereby granted to any Athens-Clarke County Department of Public Utilities personnel, the code enforcement division, the marshal, deputy marshal, code enforcement officer, or police officer. Enforcement may consist of administrative warnings, administratively increased unit charges for volume of water used, administrative surcharges and/or administrative discontinuance of water service and payment of water reconnection fee or any combination of the foregoing. All administrative notices issued for violation of this article may be issued by personnel of the public utilities department, the Marshal, Deputy Marshal, code enforcement officer or Athens-Clarke County police officer. (2)  The director of public utilities shall have the authority to enforce the provisions of this article by charging ten times the existing unit charge for volumes in excess of the maximum allowed usage volume, by levying an administrative surcharge or by discontinuance of water service in the event any person violates the provisions of this article after receiving oral or written notice of the violation from personnel of the public utilities department, the Marshal or Deputy Marshal, code enforcement officer or police officer. (3)  Any person aggrieved by the levying of the additional unit charge for volumes in excess of the maximum allowed usage volume, the levying of an administrative surcharge as provided for above or by having the water supply terminated by the director of public utilities shall have the right to appeal to the public utilities director within three business days of the date of the administrative action or the termination of water service. The decision of the public utilities director may be appealed to the Administrative Hearing Officer pursuant to section 1-5-1 of the Code of Athens-Clarke County within three business days from the date of the decision of the public utilities director. ( Ord. of 10-3-2017(2), § 8 ) 
Sec. 5-3-99. - Adjustments with respect to Emergency Drought and Water Shortage Management Plan.     A person may apply for an adjustment to an individual account EDWSMP average day allowed consumption volume upon a showing of a change in circumstances requiring the need for such adjustment or for a residential water user upon a showing of extraordinary hardship based on the impact of the required reduction on the health or safety of individuals living in the residence. Such adjustment requests shall be submitted in writing to the water conservation officer (WCO). The request for an adjustment must be filed within 30 days of the special circumstances or within 30 days of the implementation of the reduction percentage established by the director of public utilities and the manager. The following procedures shall apply to the submission of such a request: (a)  The request shall include the following information: (1)  A detailed statement of the change in circumstances requiring the need for adjustment from the requirements of the EDWSMP for an individual account (for example, new child, marriage, new business, etc.) or (2)  A detailed statement explaining the adverse impact of the water reduction requirements on the health or safety of individuals living in a residence based on past maximization of the household water conservation efforts; and (3)  A declaration of the amount of the adjustment needed; and (4)  Any additional information necessary for the WCO to evaluate the request based on the standards set forth in (b). (b)  The WCO shall apply the following considerations in granting adjustments to the EDWSMP: (1)  Extent, amount and type of hardship caused or the extent, amount and type of change in circumstances; (2)  Impact on essential water uses; and (3)  The amount of adjustment requested. (c)  The WCO shall notify the applicant of its decision within ten business days. The WCO may grant the request, grant the request with conditions, or deny the request. (d)  The applicant may appeal the decision of the WCO within ten business days of the date of the WCO's decision to the Administrative Hearing Officer pursuant to section 1-5-1. ( Ord. of 10-3-2017(2), § 9 ) 
Sec. 5-3-100. - Reserved. Editor's note— Ord. of 10-3-2017(2) , § 10, repealed § 5-3-100, which pertained to adjustments with respect to Emergency Drought/Water Shortage Management Plan and derived from Ord. of 12-4-2007, § 1. 
Secs. 5-3-101—5-3-119. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 7. - WATER CONSERVATION 
Sec. 5-3-120. - Purpose and policy.     The implementation of Athens-Clarke County's comprehensive water conservation program serves two main purposes: to optimize the effective use of this essential natural resource and to decrease the amount of water used overall. Water conservation is not just for times of drought or water shortage. It is something citizens should do every day. Sound water use practices reduce the amount of stress placed on vital resources, both by limiting water withdrawals and by decreasing wastewater discharges. Conserving water reduces wear and tear on major infrastructure such as water and wastewater treatment plants and the distribution and collection systems that deliver water and collect wastewater, and can postpone or eliminate the need for making major investments in new infrastructure. Consistently using less water helps provide for greater flexibility and more alternatives during times when there is a water shortage. (Ord. of 4-6-2004, § 1) 
Sec. 5-3-121. - Application.     This article applies to all water drawn by residential and non-residential customers from the Athens-Clarke County water supply system. (Ord. of 4-6-2004, § 1) 
Sec. 5-3-122. - Outdoor watering schedule when using a public water system. (a)  Definitions. For the purposes of this section the following definition shall apply: "Outdoor watering" means watering from the public water system for the purposes of planting, growing, managing or maintaining ground cover, trees, shrubs, or other plants. (b)  Outdoor watering schedule. Except for those activities exempted in section 5-3-124, outdoor watering from the public water system is allowed as follows: Outdoor watering for purposes of planting, growing, managing, or maintaining ground cover, trees, shrubs, or other plants may occur only between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. (c)  During drought conditions determined in accordance with Chapter 5-3, Article 6 (Drought and Water Shortage Management Plan) of the Code of Athens-Clarke County or by the Georgia Environmental Protection Division and upon approval of the Georgia Environmental Protection Division, other schedules and/or limitations may be implemented. (Ord. of 4-6-2004, § 1; Ord. of 12-7-2010, § 1; Ord. of 10-3-2017(2), §§ 11, 12 ) Editor's note— Ord. of Dec. 7, 2010, § 1 changed the title of § 5-3-122 from Outdoor landscape watering schedule to Outdoor watering schedule when using a public water system. 
Sec. 5-3-123. - Prevention of water wasting.     The following uses of water are defined as "wasting water" and are prohibited at all times: (a)  Failure to repair or to isolate and by-pass a leak, including a broken sprinkler head or emitter, a leaking valve, faucet, pipe or toilet; (b)  Use of irrigation systems or watering methods that allow potable water to flow into the public rights-of-way such as alleys, streets, gutters, or storm water drainage system or onto any other person's property; (c)  Operation of an irrigation system: (1)  With a broken head or emitter, (2)  With a head directing spray onto an impermeable surface, or (3)  Operating an irrigation system during a rain event exceeding one-quarter inch. (d)  The use of water to wash down impermeable driveways, parking areas and sidewalks by direct hosing, except as permitted as follows: (1)  By use of a hose or pressure washer equipped with a positive action quick release shutoff valve or nozzle no more than twice a year; or (2)  When required properly to prevent or eliminate materials or conditions dangerous to the public health and safety. (e)  The use of water to wash any vehicle including, but not limited to, any automobile, truck, van, bus, motorcycle, boat or trailer, whether motorized or not, except by the use of a hand-held bucket or similar container, or a hose or pressure washer equipped with a positive action quick release shutoff valve or nozzle. (Ord. of 4-6-2004, § 1; Ord. of 10-3-2017(2), § 13 ) 
Sec. 5-3-124. - Exceptions to the restrictions of sections 5-3-122 and 5-3-123. (a)  The provisions of this article are not applicable to the uses of water which are necessary for essential government services, such as police, fire and other similar emergency services. (b)  Commercial raising, harvesting, or storing of crops; feeding, breeding, or managing livestock or poultry; the commercial production or storing of feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits, or for use in the production of poultry, including, but not limited to, chickens, hens, ratites, and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; or the commercial production of aqua cultural, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs, and apiarian products or as otherwise defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; (c)  Capture and reuse of cooling system condensate or storm water in compliance with applicable ordinances and state guidelines; (d)  Reuse of gray water in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.2 and applicable local board of health regulations; (e)  Use of reclaimed waste water by a designated user from a system permitted by the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources to provide reclaimed waste water; (f)  Watering personal food gardens; (g)  Watering new and replanted plant, seed, or turf in landscapes, golf courses, or sports turf fields during installation and for a period of 30 days immediately following the date of installation; (h)  Drip irrigation or irrigation using soaker hoses; (i)  Hand watering with a hose with automatic cutoff or handheld container; (j)  Use of water withdrawn from private water wells or surface water by an owner or operator of property if such well or surface water is on said property; (k)  Watering horticultural crops held for sale, resale, or installation; (l)  Watering athletic fields, golf courses, or public turf grass recreational areas; (m)  Installation, maintenance, or calibration of irrigation systems; or (n)  Hydroseeding. (Ord. of 4-6-2004, § 1; Ord. of 12-7-2010, § 2) 
Sec. 5-3-125. - Enforcement; civil surcharges; penalties. (a)  A customer of the Athens-Clarke County Public Water Utilities system shall be responsible for all violations of the provisions of this article that occur in connection with water that passes through the meter for which the customer is billed by the utility during non-drought periods. During times of drought as determined by Article 6, section 5-3-97 enforcement this section will be applied pursuant to Article 6, section 5-3-98. (b)  Authority to enforce this article is hereby granted to Athens-Clarke County Department of Public Utilities personnel, as designated by the director of public utilities, police officers, marshals, deputy marshals or code enforcement officers. (c)  Notification process. Whenever any Athens-Clarke County personnel with the authority to enforce this section has reasonable cause to believe that a person is violating any of the provisions of this article, a warning notice shall be issued to the customer or to the person responsible for the violation or its correction. The notice required by this paragraph shall be served by personal delivery or by certified mail/return receipt requested. The notice shall include a description of the violation, order that it be corrected, cured, or abated immediately or within such specified time as the department determines is reasonable under the circumstances. The notice shall also warn that more severe measures, such as surcharges added to the water bill and/or interruption of water service may be imposed unless the violation ceases within the time provided. The time given to cease the activity may range from a requirement for immediate compliance to a longer period, depending upon the facts and circumstances of each case. If the remedy is accomplished, then there shall be no further action against that person or customer as to that specific violation. (d)  If the warning notice to cease or abate is not complied with within the specified time period, the director of public utilities may impose a surcharge to the water bill as follows: (1)  First notice of continuing violation: $75.00 surcharge. (2)  Second notice of continuing violation: $150.00 surcharge. (3)  If the department determines that a user or the responsible party has failed to comply with the order to repair or abate, the director of public utilities may interrupt water service to that address, and service shall not be restored until the required action to cease the violation is complete and all surcharges and standard reconnection fees have been paid. Notice of interruption of service must be given at least one day prior to interruption. (e)  Athens-Clarke County will not be liable for damage to property resulting from the discontinuance of water service in accordance with this article. (f)  Appeals. Any person aggrieved by the levying of an administrative surcharge as provided for above or by having the water supply terminated by the director of public utilities shall have the right to appeal the surcharge or the termination to the administrative hearing officer pursuant to section 1-5-1 of the Code of Athens-Clarke County within three days from the date of the surcharge on the water bill is due or within three days of the date of termination of water service. If an appeal to the notice of termination is filed prior to termination, then the termination will be stayed pending appeal. (g)  The civil remedies provided for herein are not exclusive and in addition to such civil remedies, it is unlawful for any person to violate the provisions of this article, and any person who violates these provisions shall be subject to the punishment provided in section 1-1-5 of the Code of Athens-Clarke County. Each day such violation is committed or is permitted to continue shall be a separate offense. All citations issued for violation pursuant to section 1-1-5 of the Code of Athens-Clarke County shall be returnable to the municipal court of Athens-Clarke County. (Ord. of 4-6-2004, § 1; Ord. of 10-3-2017(2), §§ 14, 15 ) 
CHAPTER 5-4. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT[5] Article I. Stormwater Management Sec. 5-4-1. Purpose and intent. Sec. 5-4-2. Definitions. Sec. 5-4-3. Applicability. Sec. 5-4-4. Exemptions from requirements. Sec. 5-4-5. Variance procedure. Sec. 5-4-6. Permit procedures and requirements. Sec. 5-4-7. Post-development stormwater management performance criteria. Sec. 5-4-8. Construction inspections of post-development stormwater management system. Sec. 5-4-9. Ongoing inspection and maintenance of stormwater facilities and practices. Sec. 5-4-10. Violations, enforcement and penalties. Sec. 5-4-11. Severability. Secs. 5-4-12—5-4-19. Reserved. Article II. Illicit Discharge and Illegal Connection Sec. 5-4-20. General provisions. Sec. 5-4-21. Definitions. Sec. 5-4-22. Prohibitions. Sec. 5-4-23. Industrial or construction activity discharges. Sec. 5-4-24. Access and inspection of properties and facilities. Sec. 5-4-25. Notification of accidental discharges and spills. Sec. 5-4-26. Violations, enforcement and penalties. Sec. 5-4-27. Severability. Footnotes: --- (5) --- Editor's note— Section 1 of an ordinance adopted June 1, 2004, deleted former ch. 5-4 of the Code in its entirety and added new provisions as ch. 5-4 as herein set out. Former ch. 5-4, §§ 5-4-1—5-4-16, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from an ordinance adopted Sept. 1, 1992, § 1; and an ordinance adopted Dec. 5, 2000. 
ARTICLE I. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT[6] Footnotes: --- (6) --- Editor's note— An ordinance of October 3, 2006, § 1, amended the Code by dividing ch. 5-4 into two articles and adding the title for art. I. Additionally, the term "chapter" has been changed to "article" throughout art. I. 
Sec. 5-4-1. - Purpose and intent.     The purpose of this article is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety, environment and general welfare by establishing minimum requirements and procedures to control the adverse effects of increased post-development stormwater runoff and nonpoint source pollution associated with new development and redevelopment. It has been determined that proper management of post-development stormwater runoff will minimize damage to public and private property and infrastructure, safeguard the public health, safety, environment and general welfare of the public, and protect water and aquatic resources. This article seeks to meet that purpose through the following objectives: (1)  Establish decision-making processes surrounding land development activities that protect the integrity of the watershed and preserve the health of water resources; (2)  Require that new development and redevelopment maintain the pre-development hydrologic response in their post-development state as nearly as practicable in order to reduce flooding, streambank erosion, nonpoint source pollution and increases in stream temperature, and to maintain the integrity of stream channels and aquatic habitats; (3)  Establish minimum post-development stormwater management standards and design criteria for the regulation and control of stormwater runoff quantity and quality; (4)  Establish design and application criteria for the construction and use of structural stormwater control facilities that can be used to meet the minimum post-development stormwater management standards; (5)  Encourage the use of nonstructural stormwater management and stormwater better site design practices, such as the preservation of greenspace and other conservation areas, to the maximum extent practicable. Coordinate site design plans, with the county's greenspace program, parks and greenway network plan; (6)  Establish provisions for the long-term responsibility for and maintenance of structural stormwater control facilities and nonstructural stormwater management practices to ensure that they continue to function as designed, are maintained, and pose no threat to public safety or to the integrity of downstream water resources; and (7)  Establish administrative procedures for the submission, review, approval and disapproval of stormwater management plans, and for the inspection of approved active projects, and long-term follow up. (Ord. of 6-1-2004, § 1) 
Sec. 5-4-2. - Definitions.     Applicant means any person, firm, or governmental agency who executes the necessary forms and procedures to procure official approval of a project or a permit to carry out construction of a project.     Buffers means the riparian buffers as defined in Athens-Clarke County Protected Environmental Areas Chapter 8-6 and state waters buffers defined in Chapter 8-3.     Channel means a natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water.     Department means the Department of Transportation and Public Works of Athens-Clarke County.     Detention means the temporary storage of stormwater runoff in a stormwater management facility for the purpose of controlling the peak discharge.     Detention facility means a detention basin or structure designed for the detention of stormwater runoff and gradual release of stored water at controlled rates.     Developer means a person who undertakes land development activities.     Development means a land development or land development project.     Drainage easement means an easement appurtenant or attached to a tract or parcel of land allowing the owner of adjacent tracts or other persons to discharge stormwater runoff onto the tract or parcel of land subject to the drainage easement.     Erosion and sedimentation control plan means a plan that is designed to minimize the accelerated erosion and sediment runoff at a site during land disturbance activities.     Extended detention means the detention of stormwater runoff for an extended period, typically 24 hours or greater.     Extreme flood protection means measures taken to prevent adverse impacts from large low-frequency storm events with a return frequency of 100 years or more.     Flooding means a volume of surface water that is too great to be confined within the banks or walls of a conveyance or stream channel and that overflows onto adjacent lands.     Flood plain means any land area, such as lowland and relatively flat areas adjoining state water, susceptible to being inundated by water from any source including those areas identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) on flood insurance rate maps and identified or defined through standard engineering analysis by other government agencies or a licensed professional engineer, but not yet incorporated into a FEMA flood insurance rate map.     Greenspace or open space means permanently protected or other conservation areas of the site that are preserved in a natural state.     Hotspot means an area where the use of the land has the potential to generate highly contaminated runoff as determined by the Department, with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those typically found in stormwater, such as fueling station, vehicle repair and maintenance facilities. A list of these land uses is provided in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual.     Hydrologic soil group (HSG) means the U.S. Natural Resource Conservation Service (NRCS) classification system in which soils are categorized into four runoff potential groups. The groups range from group A soils, with high permeability and little runoff produced, to group D soils, which have low permeability rates and produce much more runoff. NRCS HSG information may be found in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual Appendix B.     Impervious cover means a surface composed of any material that significantly impedes or prevents the natural infiltration of water into soil. Impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, rooftops, buildings, streets and roads, and any concrete or asphalt surface.     Industrial stormwater permit means a national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit issued to an industry or group of industries which regulates the pollutant levels associated with industrial stormwater discharges or specifies on-site pollution control strategies.     Infiltration means the process of percolating stormwater runoff into the subsoil.     Land development means any land change, including, but not limited to, clearing, digging, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, building construction, paving, or any other installation of impervious cover.     Land development activities means those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land development.     Land development project means a discrete land development undertaking.     Inspection and maintenance agreement means a written agreement providing for the long-term inspection and maintenance of stormwater management facilities and practices on a site or with respect to a land development project, which when properly recorded in the deed records constitutes a restriction on the title to a site or other land involved in a land development project.     New development means a land development activity on a previously undeveloped site.     Nonpoint source pollution means a form of water pollution that does not originate from a discrete point such as a sewage treatment plant or industrial discharge, but involves the transport of pollutants such as sediment, fertilizers, pesticides, heavy metals, oil, grease, bacteria, organic materials and other contaminants from land to surface water and groundwater via mechanisms such as precipitation, stormwater runoff, and leaching. Nonpoint source pollution is a by-product of land use practices such as agricultural, silvicultural, mining, construction, subsurface disposal and urban runoff sources.     Nonstructural stormwater management practice or nonstructural practice means any natural or planted vegetation or other nonstructural component of the stormwater management plan that provides for or enhances stormwater quantity and/or quality control or other stormwater management benefits, and includes, but is not limited to, riparian buffers, open and greenspace areas, overland flow filtration areas, natural depressions, and vegetated channels.     Off-site facility means a stormwater management facility located outside the boundaries of the site.     On-site facility means a stormwater management facility located within the boundaries of the site.     Overbank flood protection means measures taken to prevent an increase in the frequency and magnitude of out-of-bank flooding (i.e. flow events that exceed the capacity of the channel and enter the floodplain), and that are intended to protect downstream properties from flooding for the two-year through 25-year frequency storm events.     Owner means the legal or beneficial owner of a site, including but not limited to, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in operational control of the site.     Permit means the permit issued by the Department to the applicant which is required for undertaking any land development activity.     Person means, except to the extent exempted from this article or by state or federal law, any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity.     Post-development refers to the time period, or the conditions that may reasonably be expected or anticipated to exist based on the proposed project, after completion of the land development activity on a site as the context may require.     Pre-development refers to the time period, or the conditions that exist, on a site prior to the commencement of a land development project and at the time that plans for the land development of a site are approved by the plan approving authority. Where phased development or plan approval occurs (preliminary grading, roads and utilities, etc.), the existing conditions at the time prior to the first item being approved or permitted shall establish pre-development conditions.     Previously developed site means a site that has been altered by paving, construction, and/or land use that would typically have required regulatory permitting to have been initiated (alterations may exist now or in the past).     Project means a land development project.     Redevelopment means the creation or addition of impervious surfaces, replacement of impervious surface not as part of routine maintenance, and land development activities associated with impervious development on a previously developed site. Redevelopment does not include such activities as exterior remodeling.     Regional stormwater management facility or regional facility means stormwater management facilities designed to control stormwater runoff from multiple properties, where the owners or developers of the individual properties may assist in the financing of the facility, and the requirement for on-site controls is either eliminated or reduced.     Runoff means stormwater runoff.     Site means that portion of a parcel or parcels of land on which the land development project is located.     Stormwater better site design means nonstructural site design approaches and techniques as listed in the most recent edition of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual that can reduce a site's impact on the watershed and can provide for nonstructural stormwater management. Stormwater better site design includes conserving and protecting natural areas and greenspace, reducing impervious cover and using natural features for stormwater management.     Stormwater management means the collection, conveyance, storage, treatment and disposal of stormwater runoff in a manner intended to prevent increased flood damage, streambank channel erosion, habitat degradation and water quality degradation, and to enhance and promote the public health, safety and general welfare.     Stormwater management facility means any infrastructure that controls or conveys stormwater runoff.     Stormwater management measure means any stormwater management facility or nonstructural stormwater practice.     Stormwater management plan means a document describing how existing runoff characteristics will be affected by a land development project and containing measures for complying with the provisions of this article.     Stormwater management manual means the most recent edition of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, Volume II ( Technical Handbook), produced by the Atlanta Regional Commission (hereinafter in this article referred to as the "Georgia Stormwater Management Manual").     Stormwater management system means the entire set of structural and nonstructural stormwater management facilities and practices that are used to capture, convey and control the quantity and quality of the stormwater runoff from a site.     Stormwater retrofit or retrofit means a stormwater management practice designed for a currently developed site that previously had either no stormwater management practice in place or a practice inadequate to meet the stormwater management requirements of the site.     Stormwater runoff means the flow of surface water resulting from precipitation.     Structural stormwater control means a structural stormwater management facility or device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow of such runoff. (Ord. of 6-1-2004, § 1; Ord. of 12-5-2017(3), §§ 1—4 ) 
Sec. 5-4-3. - Applicability.     This article shall be applicable to all land development, including, but not limited to, site plan applications, subdivision applications, and land disturbance activity applications, unless exempt pursuant to section 5-4-4. (a)  New development and redevelopment sites. These standards apply to any new development or redevelopment site that meets one or more of the following criteria: (1)  New development that involves the creation of 5,000 square feet or more of impervious cover, or that involves other land development activities of 5,000 square feet or greater; (2)  Redevelopment that includes the creation or addition of 5,000 square feet or more of impervious cover, or that involves replacement of one acre or more of impervious cover or other land development activity of one acre or more, including projects less than one acre if they are part of a larger common plan of development or sale; (3)  Any new development or redevelopment, regardless of size, that is determined by the transportation and public works director to be a hotspot land use; or (4)  Any development or redevelopment project that is upstream of a known public flooding problem as identified by the Department of Transportation and Public Works in the Area-Wide Stormwater Master Plan, as amended from time to time, on file and available for public inspection at the Department of Transportation and Public Works. (b)  Compatibility with other regulations. This article is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law. The requirements of this article are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive shall control. (c)  Stormwater design manual. The Department will utilize the policy, criteria and information including technical specifications and standards in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual and any relevant local requirements, for the proper implementation of the requirements of this article. This includes any addenda or updates to the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual or local design guidelines as approved by the Department. (Ord. of 6-1-2004, § 1; Ord. of 12-3-2013, § 1; Ord. of 12-5-2017(3), § 5 ) 
Sec. 5-4-4. - Exemptions from requirements.     The following activities are exempt from this article: (1)  Platted individual single-family or duplex residential lots that are not part of a subdivision or phased development project; (2)  Additions or modifications to existing single-family or duplex residential structures provided that they do not result in the creation or addition of 5,000 square feet of impervious cover; (3)  Agricultural or silvicultural land management activities within areas zoned for these activities; (4)  Land disturbing activities conducted for the purpose of restoration of streams, streambanks, riparian zones, or other environmentally protected areas; (5)  Repairs to any stormwater management facility deemed necessary by the transportation and public works director; and (6)  Sidewalks or trails 15 feet wide or less where runoff is directed via sheet flow toward vegetated areas at least twice as wide as the paved area, provided that the potential for erosion is adequately addressed. (Ord. of 6-1-2004, § 1; Ord. of 12-3-2013, § 2; Ord. of 12-2-2014, § 1 ) 
Sec. 5-4-5. - Variance procedure.     The Athens-Clarke County Hearings Board shall sit in a quasi-judicial capacity to hear and decide all variance requests from the requirements of this article. A formal written application for a variance shall be filed with the public works director for submittal to the Athens-Clarke County Hearings Board. (a)  The following procedures shall apply to all applications: (1)  The application for variance shall state the specific variances sought and the reasons for their granting. (2)  It shall be the applicant's responsibility to provide sufficient justification for granting the variance. (3)  The Public Works Department shall prepare an evaluation statement concerning each application for variance. The evaluation shall consider the circumstances and supporting documents supplied by the applicant and other generally available technical information pertaining to the variance request. The evaluation statement may include recommendations by the Department concerning the variance to the Hearings Board. (4)  In passing upon such applications, the Athens-Clarke County Hearings Board shall consider all technical evaluation and relevant factors presented by the applicant and the government and the standards specified in other sections of this article. (5)  After hearing and upon consideration of the application, evidence and applicable law, the Athens-Clarke County Hearings Board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose of this article. (b)  If a variance is granted, it shall be granted upon findings by the Hearings Board that the following standards have been met: (1)  That failure to grant the variance could result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and (2)  That granting the variance will not result in increased stormwater pollution, increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, or create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public; (3)  That the necessity for a variance is not the result of conditions on the property which have been self-imposed by the applicant; and (4)  That the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the adverse impacts of stormwater runoff. (Ord. of 6-1-2004, § 1) 
Sec. 5-4-6. - Permit procedures and requirements.     It shall be unlawful for any owner or developer to perform any land development activities without first meeting the requirements of this article and obtaining a stormwater permit prior to commencing the proposed activity. (a)  Permit application requirements. Unless specifically exempted by this article, any owner or developer proposing a land development activity shall submit to the Department a stormwater permit application on a form provided by the Department for that purpose. Unless otherwise exempted by this article, a permit application shall be accompanied by the following items in order to be considered: (1)  Stormwater concept plan and consultation meeting certification in accordance with section 5-4-6(2); (2)  Stormwater management plan in accordance with section 5-4-6(3); (3)  Inspection and maintenance agreement in accordance with section 5-4-6(4), if applicable; and (4)  Permit application and plan review fees in accordance with section 5-4-6(5). (b)  Stormwater concept plan and consultation meeting. Before any stormwater management permit application is submitted and prior to the preliminary plan review, as required under Title 9, the developer or the developer's representative shall meet with the Department to review the concept plan and to discuss the post-development stormwater management measures necessary for the proposed project, as well as to discuss and assess constraints, opportunities and potential ideas for stormwater management designs before the formal site design engineering is commenced. The following information shall be included in the concept plan which shall be submitted in advance of the meeting: (1)  Existing conditions/proposed site plans. Existing conditions and proposed site layout sketch plans, which illustrate at a minimum: existing and proposed topography; perennial and intermittent streams; mapping of predominant soils from soil surveys (when available); boundaries of existing predominant vegetation and proposed limits of clearing and grading; and location of existing and proposed roads, buildings, parking areas and other impervious surfaces. (2)  Natural resources inventory. A written and/or graphic inventory of the natural resources at the site and surrounding area of properties adjoining the site as it exists prior to the commencement of the project. This description should include a discussion of soil conditions, forest cover, topography, wetlands, and other native vegetative areas on the site, as well as the location and boundaries of other natural feature protection and conservation areas such as wetlands, lakes, ponds, floodplains, stream buffers and other setbacks (e.g., drinking water well setbacks, septic setbacks, etc.). Particular attention should be paid to environmentally sensitive features that provide particular opportunities or constraints for development. (3)  Stormwater management system concept plan. A written or graphic concept plan of the proposed post-development stormwater management system including: preliminary selection and location of proposed structural stormwater controls; location of existing and proposed conveyance systems such as grass channels, swales, and storm drains; flow paths; location of floodplain/floodway limits; relationship of site to upstream and downstream properties and drainages; and preliminary location of proposed stream channel modifications within the site, such as bridge or culvert crossings. If applicable, local watershed plans, the Athens-Clarke County greenspace program or greenway network plan, any park development, and any relevant resource protection plans will be consulted in the discussion of the concept plan. (c)  Stormwater management plan requirements. The stormwater management plan shall detail how post-development stormwater runoff will be controlled or managed and how the proposed project will meet the requirements of this article, including the performance criteria set forth in Section 5-4-7. This plan shall be in accordance with the criteria established in this section and must be submitted with the stamp and signature of a professional engineer (PE) or landscape architect licensed in the state of Georgia, who must verify that the design of all stormwater management facilities and practices meet the submittal requirements outlined in the submittal checklist(s) found in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual . The stormwater management plan must ensure that the requirements and criteria in this article are being complied with and that opportunities are being taken to minimize adverse post-development stormwater runoff impacts from the development. The plan shall consist of maps, narrative, and supporting design calculations (hydrologic and hydraulic) for the proposed stormwater management system. The plan shall include all of the information required in the Stormwater Management Site Plan checklist found in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual . This includes: (1)  Common address and legal description of site. (2)  Vicinity map. (3)  Existing conditions hydrologic analysis. The existing condition hydrologic analysis for stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and velocities, which shall include: a topographic map of existing site conditions with the drainage area boundaries indicated; acreage, soil types and land cover of areas for each sub-drainage areas affected by the project; all perennial and intermittent streams and other surface water features as noted through field investigation; all existing stormwater conveyances and structural control facilities that impact design and/or construction of proposed development; direction of flow and inputs to and exits from the site; analysis of runoff provided by off-site areas upstream of the project site; and methodologies, assumptions, site parameters and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology. For redevelopment sites, predevelopment conditions shall be modeled using the established guidelines determined by the Department for the portion of the site undergoing land development activities. (4)  Post-development hydrologic analysis. The post-development hydrologic analysis for stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and velocities, which shall include: a topographic map of developed site conditions with the post-development drainage area boundaries indicated; total area of post-development impervious surfaces and other land cover areas for each sub-drainage area affected by the project; calculations for determining the runoff volumes that need to be addressed for each sub drainage area for the development project to meet the post-development stormwater management performance criteria in section 5-4-7; location and boundaries of proposed natural feature protection and conservation areas; documentation and calculations for any applicable site design credits that are being utilized; methodologies, assumptions, site parameters and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology. (5)  Stormwater management system. The description, scaled drawings and design calculations for the proposed post-development stormwater management system, which shall include: A map and/or drawing or sketch of the stormwater management facilities, including the location of nonstructural site design features and the placement of existing and proposed structural stormwater controls, including design water surface elevations, storage volumes available from zero to maximum head, location of inlet and outlets, location of bypass and discharge systems, and all orifice/restrictor sizes; a narrative describing how the selected structural stormwater controls will be appropriate and effective; cross-section and profile drawings and design details for each of the structural stormwater controls in the system, including supporting calculations to show that the facility is designed according to the applicable design criteria; a hydrologic and hydraulic analysis of the stormwater management system for all applicable design storms (including stage-storage or outlet rating curves, and inflow and outflow hydrographs); documentation and supporting calculations to show that the stormwater management system adequately meets the post-development stormwater management performance criteria in section 5-4-7; drawings, design calculations, elevations and hydraulic grade lines for all existing and proposed stormwater conveyance elements including stormwater drains, pipes, culverts, catch basins, channels, swales and areas of overland flow; and where applicable, a narrative describing how the stormwater management system corresponds with any watershed protection plans and/or local greenspace program, greenway network plan, and park development. (6)  Post-development downstream flow analysis. A downstream flow analysis will be prepared by the applicant to provide an overview of potential impacts from post development run-off from the site. At a minimum the downstream flow analysis will include: a.  A map of each and every point or area along the project site's boundaries at which runoff will exit the property. b.  The analysis shall focus on the portion of the drainage channel or watercourse immediately downstream from the project. This area shall extend downstream from the project to a point in the drainage area where the project area is ten percent of the total downstream drainage area. c.  Delineation of all downstream structures and property adjacent or within the flow path of the downstream flow analysis. d.  Identification of known flooding problems from Athens-Clarke County Stormwater Master Plan or other sources. e.  If determined through this preliminary review of the items above that the potential exists for downstream flooding resulting from post development conditions, the Director of the Department can require the applicant to conduct and submit a downstream hydrologic assessment in accordance with the criteria listed in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual criteria for post development downstream analysis. (7)  Reserved. (8)  Landscaping and open space plan. A detailed landscaping and vegetation plan describing the woody and herbaceous vegetation that will be used within and adjacent to stormwater management facilities and practices. The landscaping plan must also include: the arrangement of planted areas, natural and greenspace areas and other landscaped features on the site plan; information necessary to construct the landscaping elements shown on the plan drawings; descriptions and standards for the methods, materials and vegetation that are to be used in the construction; density of plantings; descriptions of the stabilization and management techniques used to establish vegetation; and a description of who will be responsible for ongoing maintenance of vegetation for the stormwater management facility and what practices will be employed to ensure that adequate vegetative cover is preserved. (9)  Operations and maintenance plan. Detailed description of ongoing operations and maintenance procedures for stormwater management facilities and practices to ensure their continued function as designed and constructed or preserved. These plans will identify the parts or components of a stormwater management facility or practice that need to be regularly or periodically inspected and maintained, and the equipment and skills or training necessary. The plan shall include an inspection and maintenance schedule, maintenance tasks, responsible parties for maintenance, funding, access and safety issues. Provisions for the periodic review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the maintenance program and the need for revisions or additional maintenance procedures shall be included in the plan. (10)  Maintenance access easements. The applicant must ensure access from public right-of-way to stormwater management facilities and practices requiring regular maintenance at the site for the purpose of inspection and repair by securing all the maintenance access easements needed on a permanent basis. Such access shall be sufficient for all necessary equipment for maintenance activities. Upon final inspection and approval, a plat or document indicating that such easements exist shall be recorded and shall remain in effect even with the transfer of title of the property. (11)  Inspection and maintenance agreements. Unless an on-site stormwater management facility or practice is dedicated to and accepted by the Unified Government of Athens-Clarke County as provided in section 5-4-6(d), the applicant must execute an easement and an inspection and maintenance agreement binding on all subsequent owners of land served by an on-site stormwater management facility or practice in accordance section 5-4-6(d). (12)  Evidence of acquisition of applicable local and non-local permits. The applicant shall certify and provide documentation to the Department that all other applicable environmental permits have been acquired for the site prior to approval of the stormwater management plan. (d)  Stormwater management inspection and maintenance agreements. Prior to the issuance of any permit for a land development activity requiring a stormwater management facility or practice hereunder and for which the Department requires ongoing maintenance, the applicant or owner of the site must, unless an on-site stormwater management facility or practice is dedicated to and accepted by the Unified Government of Athens-Clarke County, execute an inspection and maintenance agreement, if applicable, that shall be binding on all subsequent owners of the site. The inspection and maintenance agreement, if applicable, must be approved by the Department prior to plan approval, and recorded in the deed records upon final plat approval. The inspection and maintenance agreement shall identify by name or official title the person(s) responsible for carrying out the inspection and maintenance. Responsibility for the operation and maintenance of the stormwater management facility or practice, unless assumed by a governmental agency, shall remain with the property owner and shall pass to any successor owner. If portions of the land are sold or otherwise transferred, legally binding arrangements shall be made to pass the inspection and maintenance responsibility to the appropriate successors in title. These arrangements shall desig nate, for each portion of the site, the person to be permanently responsible for its inspection and maintenance. As part of the inspection and maintenance agreement, a schedule shall be developed for when and how often routine inspection and maintenance will occur to ensure proper function of the stormwater management facility or practice. The agreement shall also include plans for annual inspections to ensure proper performance of the facility between scheduled maintenance and shall also include remedies for the default thereof. Copies of routine inspection summaries will be submitted in accordance with approved maintenance plan. In addition to enforcing the terms of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the Department may also enforce all of the provisions for ongoing inspection and maintenance in section 5-4-9 of this article. The Mayor and Commission of Athens-Clarke County, in lieu of an inspection and maintenance agreement, may consider dedication to the Unified Government of Athens-Clarke County of any existing or future stormwater management facility for maintenance, upon recommendation by the Director of the Department, provided such facility meets all the requirements of this article and includes adequate and perpetual access and sufficient area, by easement or otherwise, for inspection and regular maintenance. (e)  Application review fees. The fee for review and inspection of any stormwater management application shall be based on the fee schedule in Section 7-1-560. The fee shall be paid by the applicant prior to the issuance of the stormwater management permit for the development. (f)  Modifications for off-site facilities. The stormwater management plan for each land development project shall provide for stormwater management measures located on the site of the project, unless provisions are made to manage stormwater by an off-site or regional facility. The off-site or regional facility must be located on property legally dedicated for the purpose, must be designed and adequately sized to provide a level of stormwater quantity and quality control that is equal to or greater than that which would be afforded by on-site practices and there must be a legally-obligated entity responsible for long-term operation and maintenance of the off-site or regional stormwater facility. In addition, on-site measures shall be implemented, where necessary, to protect upstream and downstream properties and drainage channels from the site to the off-site facility. A stormwater management plan must be submitted to the Department, which shows the adequacy of the off-site or regional facility. To be eligible for a modification, the applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Department that the use of an off-site or regional facility will not result in the following impacts to upstream or downstream areas: (1)  Increased threat of flood damage to public health, life, and property; (2)  Deterioration of existing culverts, bridges, dams, and other structures; (3)  Accelerated streambank or streambed erosion or siltation; (4)  Degradation of in-stream biological functions or habitat; or (5)  Water quality impairment in violation of state water quality standards, and/or violation of any state or federal regulations. (Ord. of 6-1-2004, § 1; Ord. of 11-3-2009, § 1) 
Sec. 5-4-7. - Post-development stormwater management performance criteria.     The following performance criteria shall be applicable to all stormwater management plans, unless otherwise provided for in this article: (1)  Water quality. All stormwater runoff generated from a site shall be adequately treated before discharge. Adequately treated is designed to remove 80 percent of the average annual post-development total suspended solids (TSS) load. It will be presumed that a stormwater management system complies with this requirement if: a.  It is sized to treat the prescribed water quality treatment volume from the site, as defined in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual ; b.  Appropriate structural stormwater controls or nonstructural practices are selected, designed, constructed or preserved, and maintained according to the specific criteria in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual ; and c.  Runoff from hotspot land uses and activities identified by the Department are adequately treated and addressed through the use of appropriate structural stormwater controls, nonstructural practices and pollution prevention practices. (2)  Groundwater recharge. Annual groundwater recharge rates shall be maintained by promoting infiltration through the use of structural and non-structural methods. The following standards apply only to those projects that disturb one acre or more of land: a.  At a minimum, the annual recharge from post development site conditions shall mimic the annual recharge from pre-development site conditions. b.  The criteria for maintaining recharge is based on the average annual recharge rate of the hydrologic soil group(s) (HSG) present at a site as determined from USDA, NRCS soil surveys and from detailed site investigations. c.  The recharge volume criterion does not apply to any portion of a site designated as a stormwater hotspot nor any project considered as redevelopment. d.  In addition, the appropriate local review authority may alter or eliminate the recharge volume requirement if the site is situated on unsuitable soils. The applicant must provide a professional geo-technical investigation demonstrating the site has unsuitable non-permeable soils. (3)  Stream channel protection. Protection of stream channels from bank and bed erosion and degradation shall be provided by using all of the following three approaches: a.  Preservation, restoration and/or reforestation with native vegetation of the applicable stream buffer; b.  24-hour extended detention storage of all stormwater runoff generated from a site by the one-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event; and c.  Post development erosion prevention measures such as energy dissipation and velocity control. These measures shall take into consideration location and size of outlet control structure. (4)  Overbank flood protection. Downstream overbank flood protection and property protection shall be provided by controlling the site's post-development peak discharge rate to the pre-development rate for the 25-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event. If control of the one-year, 24-hour storm under section 5-4-7(3) is exempted, then peak discharge rate attenuation of the two-year through the 25-year return frequency storm event must be provided. (5)  Extreme flooding protection. Extreme flood and public safety protection shall be provided by controlling and safely conveying the site's 100-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event such that flooding is not exacerbated. (6)  Structural stormwater controls. All structural stormwater management facilities shall be selected and designed using the appropriate criteria from the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual and any local addenda. All structural stormwater controls must be designed appropriately to meet their intended function. For other structural stormwater controls not included in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual , or for which pollutant removal rates have not been provided, the effectiveness and pollutant removal of the structural control must be documented through prior studies, literature reviews, or other means and receive approval from the Department before being included in the design of a stormwater management system. Applicants shall consult the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual for guidance on the factors that determine site design feasibility when selecting and locating a structural stormwater control. (7)  Stormwater credits for nonstructural measures. The use of one or more site design measures by the applicant may allow for a reduction in the water quality treatment volume required under section 5-4-7(1). The applicant may, if approved by the Department, take credit for the use of stormwater better site design practices and reduce the water quality volume requirement. Credits shall be made available pursuant to the provisions governing credits in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual . (8)  Drainage system guidelines. Stormwater conveyance facilities, which may include but are not limited to culverts, stormwater drainage pipes, catch basins, drop inlets, junction boxes, headwalls, gutter, swales, channels, ditches, and energy dissipaters shall be provided when necessary for the protection of public right-of-way, public properties, and private properties adjoining project sites and/or public right-of-ways. Stormwater conveyance facilities that are designed to carry runoff from more than one parcel, existing or proposed, shall meet the following requirements: a.  Methods to calculate stormwater flows shall be in accordance with the stormwater design manual; b.  All culverts, pipe systems and open channel flow systems shall be sized in accordance with the stormwater management plan using the methods included in the stormwater design manual; and c.  Design and construction of stormwater conveyance facilities shall be in accordance with the criteria and specifications found in the stormwater design manual. (9)  Dam design guidelines. Any land disturbing activity that involves a site which proposes a dam shall comply with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-5-370 et seq. (the "Georgia Safe Dams Act") and the rules for dam safety promulgated thereunder, as applicable. (Ord. of 6-1-2004, § 1; Ord. of 12-5-2017(3), §§ 6—8 ) 
Sec. 5-4-8. - Construction inspections of post-development stormwater management system. (a)  Inspections to ensure plan compliance during construction. Periodic inspections of the stormwater management system construction shall be conducted by the staff of the Department or conducted and certified by a professional engineer who has been approved by the Department. Construction inspections shall utilize the approved stormwater management plan for establishing compliance.     All inspections shall be documented with written reports that contain the following information: (1)  The date and location of the inspection; (2)  Whether construction is in compliance with the approved stormwater management plan; (3)  Variations from the approved construction specifications; and (4)  Any other variations or violations of the conditions of the approved stormwater management plan.     If any violations are found, the applicant shall be notified in writing of the nature of the violation and the required corrective actions. (b)  Final inspection and as-built plans. Upon completion of a project and before a certificate of occupancy shall be granted, the applicant is responsible for certifying that the completed project is in accordance with the approved stormwater management plan. All applicants are required to submit actual "as built" plans for any stormwater management facilities or practices after final construction is completed. The plan must show the final design specifications for all stormwater management facilities and practices and must be certified by a professional engineer. A final inspection by the Department is required before the release of any performance securities can occur. (Ord. of 6-1-2004, § 1) 
Sec. 5-4-9. - Ongoing inspection and maintenance of stormwater facilities and practices. (a)  Long-term maintenance inspection of stormwater facilities and practices. Stormwater management facilities and practices included in a stormwater management plan which are subject to an inspection and maintenance agreement must undergo ongoing inspections to document maintenance and repair needs and ensure compliance with the requirements of the agreement, the plan and this article.     A stormwater management facility or practice shall be inspected on a periodic basis by the responsible person in accordance with the approved inspection and maintenance agreement. In the event that the stormwater management facility has not been maintained and/or becomes a danger to public safety or public health, or threatens downstream water resources, the Department shall notify the person responsible for carrying out the maintenance plan by registered or certified mail to the person specified in the inspection and maintenance agreement. The notice shall specify the measures needed to comply with the agreement and the plan and shall specify the time within which such measures shall be completed. If the responsible person fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the Department may correct the violation as provided in subsection 5-4-9(d) hereof.     Inspection programs by the Department may be established on any reasonable basis, including but not limited to: routine inspections; random inspections; inspections based upon complaints or other notice of possible violations; and joint inspections with other agencies inspecting under environmental or safety laws. Inspections may include, but are not limited to: reviewing maintenance and repair records; sampling discharges, surface water, groundwater, and material or water in stormwater management facilities; and evaluating the condition of stormwater management facilities and practices. (b)  Right-of-entry for inspection. The terms of the inspection and maintenance agreement shall provide for the Department to enter the property at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner for the purpose of inspection. This includes the right to enter a property for general inspections or when the Department has a reasonable basis to believe that a violation of this article is occurring or has occurred and to enter when necessary for abatement of a public nuisance or correction of a violation of this article. (c)  Records of maintenance activities. Parties responsible for the operation and maintenance of a stormwater management facility shall provide records of all maintenance and repairs to the Department. (d)  Failure to maintain. If a responsible person fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the Department, after 30 days' written notice by certified mail (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours notice shall be sufficient), may correct a violation of the design standards or maintenance requirements by performing the necessary work to place the facility or practice in proper working condition. The costs of the repair work shall be billed to the owner(s) of the facility. Failure of the owner(s) to pay the costs within 30 days of receipt of the bill shall result in 1.5 percent late charge on the unpaid balance of any bill that becomes delinquent. Suits for collection shall be commenced by Athens-Clarke County in the county of the owner's residence; provided, however, if the owner is not a resident of this state, suit may be filed in the Superior Court of Athens-Clarke County. (Ord. of 6-1-2004, § 1) 
Sec. 5-4-10. - Violations, enforcement and penalties.     Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this article or the requirements of an approved stormwater management plan or permit, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. (1)  Notice of violation. If the applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved stormwater management plan or the provisions of this article, the Department shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. The violator shall have the amount of time specified in the written notice to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within the time specified in the written notice, the Department shall issue a stop work order requiring that all land disturbing activities on the project be stopped. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this article without having first secured a stormwater permit, the Department shall issue an immediate stop work order in lieu of a written notice. (2)  Penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to correct the violation by the date set forth in the notice of violation, any one or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. a.  Stop work order. The Department may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. A stop work order shall mean that all work on the project must stop unless the work pertains to correcting the violation or installing/maintaining erosion control best management practices in accordance with applicable local ordinances and state law. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. b.  Withhold certificate of occupancy. The Department may request that the Athens-Clarke County Building Permits and Inspections Department refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. c.  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The Department may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the land development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated upon such conditions as the Department may deem necessary to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. d.  Criminal penalties. Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-1-5 of this Code. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. of 6-1-2004, § 1) 
Sec. 5-4-11. - Severability.     If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article shall be adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article. (Ord. of 6-1-2004, § 1) 
Secs. 5-4-12—5-4-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ILLICIT DISCHARGE AND ILLEGAL CONNECTION 
Sec. 5-4-20. - General provisions. (a)  Title . This article shall be known as the "Illicit Discharge and Illegal Connection Ordinance." (b)  Findings . It is hereby determined that: (1)  The Athens-Clarke County separate storm sewer system as defined in this article was designed and installed to manage stormwater so as to prevent localized flooding, damage to property and risk to public safety; (2)  The Athens-Clarke County separate storm sewer system was not designed or installed as a receiving system for non-stormwater discharges; (3)  Discharges to the Athens-Clarke County separate storm sewer system that are not composed entirely of stormwater contribute to increased nonpoint source pollution and degradation of receiving waters; (4)  These non-stormwater discharges occur due to spills, dumping and improper connections to the county separate storm sewer system from residential, industrial, commercial or institutional establishments; (5)  These non-stormwater discharges not only impact local waterways individually, but geographically dispersed, small volume non-stormwater discharges can have cumulative impacts on receiving waters; (6)  The impacts of these non-stormwater discharges adversely affect public health and safety, drinking water supplies, recreation, fish and other aquatic life, property values and other uses of lands and waters; (7)  These impacts can be minimized through the regulation of spills, dumping and discharges into the Athens-Clarke County separate storm sewer system; (8)  Localities in the State of Georgia are required to comply with a number of state and federal laws, regulations and permits which require a locality to address the impacts of non-point source pollution caused by non-stormwater discharges to the county separate storm sewer system; (9)  The Clean Water Act requires the management and maintenance of the Athens-Clarke County separate storm sewer system and the management of discharges to that system; (10)  Therefore, in order to prohibit such non-stormwater discharges to the Athens-Clarke County separate storm sewer system, it is determined that the regulation of spills, improper dumping and discharges to the Athens-Clarke County separate storm sewer system is in the public interest and will prevent threats to public health and safety, and the environment. (c)  Purpose and intent . The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety, environment and general welfare through the regulation of non-stormwater discharges to the Athens-Clarke County separate storm sewer system to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal law. This article establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the Athens-Clarke County separate storm sewer system in order to comply with requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process. The objectives of this article are to: (1)  Regulate the contribution of pollutants to the Athens-Clarke County separate storm sewer system by any user; (2)  Prohibit illicit discharges and illegal connections to the Athens-Clarke County separate storm sewer system; (3)  Prevent non-stormwater discharges, generated as a result of spills, inappropriate dumping or disposal, to the Athens-Clarke County separate storm sewer system; and, (4)  To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance, monitoring and enforcement procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this article. (d)  Applicability . The provisions of this article shall apply throughout Athens-Clarke County. (e)  Compatibility with other regulations . This article is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law. The requirements of this article are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. (f)  Responsibility for administration . (1)  The Athens-Clarke County Manager or his designee shall have the power to administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this article and any procedures, standards and guidelines established under authority of this article. Such power shall include the right to maintain an action or procedure in any court of competent jurisdiction to compel compliance with or restrain any violation of this article. (2)  The department shall be responsible for the conservation, management, maintenance (where applicable), extension and improvement of the Athens-Clarke County separate storm sewer system, including activities necessary to control stormwater and activities necessary to administer and implement the stormwater management programs incorporated by reference into Athens-Clarke County's NPDES stormwater permit. (3)  The department or its designee may: (a)  Inspect private systems which discharge to the Athens-Clarke County separate storm sewer system; and (b)  Develop programs or procedures to control the discharge of pollutants into the Athens-Clarke County separate storm sewer system. (Ord. of 10-3-2006, § 1) 
Sec. 5-4-21. - Definitions.     Accidental discharge means a discharge prohibited by this article which occurs by chance and without planning or thought prior to occurrence.     Athens-Clarke County shall mean Athens-Clarke County and such of its departments, employees and agents as may have duties and responsibilities for administering and enforcing all storm water management activities and implementation of the provisions of this article.     Clean Water Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto.     Construction activity means activities subject to the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act or NPDES General Construction Permits. These include construction projects resulting in land disturbance. Such activities include but are not limited to clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition.     Conveyance shall mean an aboveground or underground natural or man-made drainage feature, that provides for the collection and movement of stormwater, and shall include but not be limited to concrete or metal pipes, ditches, depressions, swales, roads with drainage systems, highways, county streets, curbs, gutters, inlets, catch basins, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, structural stormwater controls, drainage channels, reservoirs, rights-of-way, storm drains, culverts, street gutters, oil/water separators, modular pavements and other similar drainage structures.     Department shall mean, unless otherwise specified, the Department of Transportation and Public Works or their authorized agent.     Discharge shall mean the direct or indirect release of water, fluid, materials or other matter to a conveyance or surface that drains to a conveyance.     Illegal connection means either of the following: (a)  Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illicit discharge to enter the storm drain system including, but not limited to, any conveyances which allow any non-stormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain system, regardless of whether such pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance has been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency; or (b)  Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance connected to the Athens-Clarke County separate storm sewer system which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency regardless of whether such pipe, open channel, drain or other conduit, whether natural or man-made, was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time the connection was made, or has been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by the Athens-Clarke County or any other authorized enforcement agency. "Illegal connection" expressly includes, without limitation, those connections made in the past.     Illicit discharge means any direct or indirect non-stormwater discharge to the Athens-Clarke County separate storm sewer system, except as exempted in section 5-4-22 of this article.     Industrial activity means activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as defined in 40 CFR, Section 122.26 (b)(14).     National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Stormwater Discharge Permit means a permit issued by the Georgia EPD under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC § 1342(b) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis.     Non-stormwater discharge means any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater.     Person means, except to the extent exempted from this article, any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity.     Pollutant means anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; petroleum hydrocarbons; automotive fluids; cooking grease; detergents or cleaning chemicals (biodegradable or otherwise); degreasers; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; liquid and solid wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; sediment, as defined in section 8-3-2 of this Code; concrete and cement; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind.     Pollution means the contamination or other alteration of any water's physical, chemical or biological properties by the addition of any constituent and includes but is not limited to, a change in temperature, taste, color, turbidity, or odor of such waters, or the discharge of any liquid, gaseous, solid, radioactive, or other substance into any such waters as will or is likely to create a nuisance or render such waters harmful, detrimental or injurious to the public health, safety, welfare, or environment, or to domestic, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational, or other legitimate beneficial uses, or to livestock, wild animals, birds, fish or other aquatic life.     Premises means any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.     Procedure shall mean a procedure adopted by the department, by and through the director, to implement a regulation or regulations adopted under this article, or to carry out other responsibilities as may be required by this Code or other codes, ordinances or resolutions of Athens-Clarke County or other agencies.     Separate storm sewer system means any facility designed or used for collecting and/or conveying stormwater, including but not limited to any roads with drainage systems, highways, county streets, curbs, gutters, inlets, catch basins, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, structural stormwater controls, ditches, swales, natural and man-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures, and which is: (a)  Owned or maintained by Athens-Clarke County; (b)  Not a combined sewer; and (c)  Not part of a publicly-owned treatment works (POTW).     State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface and subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the State of Georgia which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single person.     Stormwater runoff or stormwater means any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation.     Structural stormwater control means a structural stormwater management facility or device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow.     Violator means any person, business, or commercial entity violating any provision of this article or allowing any person or persons under their control or authority to violate any provision of this article. (Ord. of 10-3-2006, § 1; Ord. of 12-3-2013, § 1) 
Sec. 5-4-22. - Prohibitions. (a)  Prohibition of illicit discharges. It shall be a violation of this article for any person to throw, drain, or otherwise discharge, cause, or allow others under its control to throw, drain, or otherwise discharge into the Athens-Clarke County separate storm sewer system any pollutants or waters containing any pollutants, other than stormwater. (b)  Exemptions. The following discharges are exempt from the prohibition provision above: (1)  Water line flushing performed by a government agency, other potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, non-commercial washing of vehicles, diverted stream flows, rising ground water, ground water infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped ground water, foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows, and any other water source not containing pollutants; (2)  Discharges or flows from fire fighting, and other discharges specified in writing by the department as being necessary to protect public health and safety; (3)  The prohibition provision above shall not apply to any non-stormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit or order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the State of Georgia and the Federal Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the Athens-Clarke County separate storm sewer system. (c)  Prohibition of illegal connections. It shall be a violation of this Article for any person to construct, connect, use, maintain or suffer or allow the continued existence of any illegal connection to the Athens-Clarke County separate storm sewer system. (1)  This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illegal connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. (2)  A person violates this article if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the Athens-Clarke County separate storm sewer system, or allows such a connection to continue. (3)  Improper connections in violation of this article must be disconnected and redirected, if necessary, to an approved onsite wastewater management system or the sanitary sewer system upon approval of the public utilities department. (4)  Any drain or conveyance that has not been documented in plans, maps or equivalent, and which may be connected to the storm sewer system, shall be located by the owner or occupant of that property upon receipt of written notice of violation from Athens-Clarke County requiring that such locating be completed. Such notice will specify a reasonable time period within which the location of the drain or conveyance is to be completed, that the drain or conveyance be identified as storm sewer, sanitary sewer or other, and that the outfall location or point of connection to the storm sewer system, sanitary sewer system or other discharge point be identified. Results of these investigations are to be documented and provided to the department. (Ord. of 10-3-2006, § 1) 
Sec. 5-4-23. - Industrial or construction activity discharges.     Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the department prior to allowing discharges to the Athens-Clarke County separate storm sewer system. (Ord. of 10-3-2006, § 1) 
Sec. 5-4-24. - Access and inspection of properties and facilities.     The department shall be permitted to enter and inspect properties and facilities at reasonable times as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this article. (a)  If a property or facility has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the owner or operator shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of the department. (b)  The owner or operator shall allow the department ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, photography, videotaping, examination and copying of any records that are required under the conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater. (c)  The department shall have the right to set up on any property or facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the department to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of flow discharges. (d)  The department may require the owner or operator to install monitoring equipment and perform monitoring as necessary, and make the monitoring data available to the department. This sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the owner or operator at his/her own expense. All devices used to measure flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy. (e)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the property or facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the owner or operator at the written or oral request of the department and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be paid by the owner or operator. (f)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the department access to a facility is a violation of this article. (g)  If the department has been refused access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and the department is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this article or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, environment and welfare of the community, then the department may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. of 10-3-2006, § 1) 
Sec. 5-4-25. - Notification of accidental discharges and spills. (a)  Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility, activity or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility, activity or operation has information of any known or suspected release of non-stormwater from that facility or operation which is resulting or may result in a discharge of that non-stormwater into the Athens-Clarke County separate storm sewer system, state waters, or waters of the United States, said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release so as to minimize the effects of the discharge. (b)  Said person shall notify the department by phone, facsimile or in person within 24 hours of discovering the discharge. Such notification shall detail the nature, quantity and time of occurrence of the discharge. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the department within three business days of the phone or in person notice. If the discharge emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years. Said person shall also take immediate steps to ensure no recurrence of the discharge or spill. (c)  In the event of such a release of hazardous materials, emergency response agencies and/or other appropriate agencies shall be immediately notified. (d)  Failure to provide notification of a release or discharge as provided above is a violation of this article. (Ord. of 10-3-2006, § 1) 
Sec. 5-4-26. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. (a)  Violations . It shall be a violation of this article for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this article. Any person who has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this Article may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section. Each day of noncompliance is considered a separate offense. The department may institute appropriate action or proceedings at law or equity for the enforcement of this article. Any court of competent jurisdiction may have the right to issue restraining orders, temporary or permanent injunctions, and other appropriate forms of remedy or relief. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the department from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation, including application for injunctive relief. In the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, the department has the right but not the duty, to enter upon the subject private property or premises, without giving prior notice, and take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. (b)  Notice of violation. Whenever the department finds that a violation of this Article has occurred, the department may, but is not required to, order compliance by written notice of violation. (1)  The notice of violation shall contain: a.  The name and address of the alleged violator when available; and b.  The address when available or a description of the building, structure, premises or land upon which the violation is occurring, or has occurred; and c.  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; and d.  A description of the remedial measures necessary to restore compliance with this article and a time schedule for the completion of such remedial action; and e.  A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and f.  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the department by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days of service of notice of violation. (2)  Such notice of violation may require without limitation: a.  The performance of monitoring, analysis, and reporting; b.  The elimination of illicit discharges and illegal connections; c.  That violations of this article shall cease and desist; d.  The abatement of non-stormwater discharges, the remediation of land or the effects of pollution, and the restoration of any affected property to its unaffected condition; e.  Payment of costs to cover administrative and abatement costs; f.  The implementation of pollution prevention practices; g.  The development and provision to the department of written remediation or action plans; h.  The development and provision to the department of documents showing the location and discharge points of conveyances, pipes, channels, or drains; and i.  Any other actions that will lead to the remedy of a condition of violation of this article. (c)  Appeal of notice of violation . Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of the director or his designee. The notice of appeal must be received by the department within 30 days from the date of the notice of violation. Hearing on the appeal before the director shall take place within 15 days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of the director shall be appealed to the Administrative Hearing Officer pursuant to section 1-5-1. (d)  Criminal penalties . For violations of this article, the department may issue a citation to the alleged violator requiring such person to appear in the Municipal Court of Athens-Clarke County to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished pursuant to section 1-1-5 of this Code. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. (e)  Violations deemed a public nuisance . In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this article is a threat to public health, safety, welfare, and environment and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief as provided by law. (f)  Remedies not exclusive . The remedies listed in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law, and the department may seek cumulative remedies. The department may recover attorney's fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement of this article, including sampling and monitoring expenses. If the amount due is not paid within 30 days after receipt of a notice requiring payment of such costs, or if an appeal is taken, within 30 days after a decision on said appeal, the charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment. (Ord. of 10-3-2006, § 1) 
Sec. 5-4-27. - Severability.     If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article shall be adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article. (Ord. of 10-3-2006, § 1) 
CHAPTER 5-5. - STORMWATER UTILITY Sec. 5-5-1. Purpose. Sec. 5-5-2. Findings. Sec. 5-5-3. Definitions. Sec. 5-5-4. Stormwater utility established. Sec. 5-5-5. Enterprise fund established. Sec. 5-5-6. Scope of responsibility for systems and facilities. Sec. 5-5-7. Service charges, user fees, etc. Sec. 5-5-8. Service charge rates. Sec. 5-5-9. Stormwater service areas. Sec. 5-5-10. Exemptions. Sec. 5-5-11. Procedure for applying for credits and adjustments to service charges. Sec. 5-5-12. Service charge billing, delinquencies and collections, appeals. 
Sec. 5-5-1. - Purpose.     Athens-Clarke County is authorized by the State constitution, including, without limitation, Article IX, Section II, Paragraphs I(a) and III(a)(6) thereof and state law, to provide stormwater management services, systems and facilities throughout Athens-Clarke County, which services, systems and facilities contribute to the protection and preservation of the public health, safety and welfare, and protection of the natural resources of Athens-Clarke County. The Federal Clean Water Act, as amended by the Water Quality Act of 1987 (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), other amendments and rules promulgated by the United States Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to the Act, place increased emphasis on the role of local governments in developing, implementing, conducting and making available to its citizens and property owners stormwater management services which address water quality and volume impacts of stormwater runoff. The Athens-Clarke County Commission has determined that development in Athens-Clarke County to date, and the outlook for continued development at an increasing rate in the future, has created and will continue to create additional needs for stormwater management services, systems and facilities within Athens-Clarke County. Athens-Clarke County has engaged a consultant to perform Professional Engineering and Financial Analyses of Athens-Clarke County's stormwater management needs and the alternatives available to Athens-Clarke County for dealing with stormwater management, and has received, reviewed and considered the results of the consultant's analyses which identify stormwater management needs, propose strategic program goals and priorities, estimate the cost of stormwater management services, systems and facilities, examine reasonable charges by Athens-Clarke County for providing such services and facilities and project the rate base available within Athens-Clarke County to support such costs. The Athens-Clarke County Commission finds and concludes from the Professional Engineering and Financial Analyses that it would be desirable to provide for additional stormwater management services, systems and facilities within Athens-Clarke County. Athens-Clarke County Commission finds and concludes from the Professional Engineering and Financial Analyses that a fair and equitable rate structure for those owners of developed property in Athens-Clarke County receiving the benefits of stormwater management services, systems and facilities, the proceeds of which will be dedicated to Athens-Clarke County stormwater utility for carrying out its purposes, will be essential if Athens-Clarke County is to provide the level of stormwater management services, systems and facilities that would be desirable to meet the existing and future stormwater management needs of Athens-Clarke County. (Ord. of 12-7-2004, § 1) 
Sec. 5-5-2. - Findings.     The Athens-Clarke County Commission makes the following findings of fact: (a)  Athens-Clarke County is authorized by the state constitution, including, without limitation, Article IX, Section II, Paragraphs I(a) and III(a)(6) thereof and state law to provide stormwater management services, systems and facilities throughout Athens-Clarke County. (b)  The management of stormwater and other surface water discharges within and beyond Athens-Clarke County is a matter that affects the health, safety and welfare of all residents and businesses in Athens-Clarke County. (c)  Improper management of stormwater runoff may cause erosion of lands, threaten businesses and residences, and other facilities with water damage and may create environmental damage to the rivers, streams and other bodies of water within and adjacent to Athens-Clarke County. (d)  A system for the collection, conveyance, storage, treatment and disposal of stormwater provides services to all properties within Athens-Clarke County and surrounding areas. (e)  Failure to effectively manage stormwater affects the operations of sanitary sewer operated by Athens-Clarke County by, among other things, increasing the likelihood of infiltration and inflow into the sanitary sewer system. (f)  Failure to effectively manage stormwater contributes to the further degradation of the water quality in area waterbodies which may result in higher levels of treatment requirements imposed on Athens-Clarke County's wastewater treatment facilities and increased water treatment cost of potable water supplies. (g)  The Federal Clean Water Act, as amended by the Water Quality Act of 1987 (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.) (the "Act"), and rules promulgated by the United States Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to the Act imposed by regulatory obligations of its national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit require Athens-Clarke County to reduce pollution in its stormwater discharge and increase water quality to the maximum extent practicable. (h)  Proper management of stormwater is a key element of having clean water with adequate assimilative capacity for treated wastewater discharges and adequate potable drinking water that are essential to support existing and future development in Athens-Clarke County. Athens-Clarke County has several rivers and streams listed on the list of impaired waters produced by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, Environmental Protection Division, or other appropriate authorities pursuant to Section 303(d) of the Act. (i)  Compliance with the regulatory obligations of the NPDES permit will substantially increase the cost of stormwater management above that which is currently spent for drainage and flood control. (j)  The cost of operating and maintaining the Athens-Clarke County stormwater management system and financing necessary repairs, replacements, improvements and extensions thereof should, to the extent practicable, be allocated in relationship to the services received from the system. (k)  In order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public, the unified government of Athens-Clarke County hereby exercises its authority to establish a stormwater utility and establish rates for stormwater management services. (l)  In promulgating the regulations contained in this section, Athens-Clarke County is acting pursuant to authority granted by the Constitution of the State of Georgia and the Charter of Athens-Clarke County to provide for stormwater collection and disposal. Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(6). (m)  The unified government of Athens-Clarke County fully incorporates by reference into these findings the Stormwater Utility Development and Implementation Plan dated May 2004, the Funding Action Strategy dated September 2003, the Stormwater Areawide Master Plan dated March 2001 (hereinafter collectively referred to as the "Professional Engineering and Financial Analyses"), said documents on file in the office of the transportation and public works department. (n)  The Professional Engineering and Financial Analyses conducted on behalf of and submitted to Athens-Clarke County assess and define the stormwater management issues, needs, goals, program priorities and operational opportunities of Athens-Clarke County. (o)  Given the issues, needs, goals, priorities and operational opportunities identified in the Professional Engineering and Financial Analyses submitted to Athens-Clarke County, Athens-Clarke County determines to establish a stormwater utility within Athens-Clarke County that is dedicated specifically to the management, maintenance, protection, control, regulation, use and enhancement of stormwater management services, systems and facilities in Athens-Clarke County in concert with other water resource management programs. (p)  Stormwater management is applicable and needed throughout Athens-Clarke County. Development in Athens-Clarke County has altered the natural hydrology with some natural elements having been replaced or augmented by man-made facilities. Even areas of Athens-Clarke County that remain less densely developed and rural in character with natural stormwater drainage predominating demand services along roads where ditches and culverts have been installed. As a result, stormwater management services systems and facilities needs apply to all areas of Athens-Clarke County. (q)  The stormwater needs in Athens-Clarke County include, but are not limited to, protecting the public health, safety and welfare. Provision of stormwater management services, systems and facilities and regulation of the use therefore renders and/or results in both service and benefit to individual properties, property owners, citizens and residents of Athens-Clarke County, and to all properties, property owners, citizens and residents of Athens-Clarke County concurrently in a variety of ways as identified in the Professional Engineering and Financial Analyses. (r)  The service and benefit rendered or resulting from the provision of stormwater management services, systems and facilities may differ over time depending on many factors and considerations, including, but not limited to, location, demands and impacts imposed upon the stormwater management services, systems and facilities, and risk exposure. It is practical and equitable to allocate the cost of stormwater management among the owners of properties in proportion to the long-term demands the properties owned impose on Athens-Clarke County's stormwater management services, systems and facilities which render or result in services and benefits to such properties and the owners thereof. (s)  Athens-Clarke County presently owns and operates stormwater management systems and facilities which have been developed, installed and acquired through various mechanisms over many years. The future usefulness and value of the existing stormwater management systems and facilities owned and operated by Athens-Clarke County, and of future additions and improvements thereto, rests on the ability of Athens-Clarke County to effectively manage, protect, control, regulate, use and enhance the stormwater management systems and facilities in Athens-Clarke County in concert with the management and regulation of other water resources in Athens-Clarke County. In order to do so, Athens-Clarke County must have adequate and stable funding for its stormwater management services, systems and facilities. (t)  A stormwater utility provides the most practical and appropriate means of properly delivering stormwater management services, systems and facilities throughout Athens-Clarke County, and the most equitable means to regulate the use of a higher level of stormwater management services, systems and facilities in Athens-Clarke County through stormwater service charges, user fees and other mechanisms as described more fully herein. (u)  A schedule of stormwater utility service charges based in part on the area of impervious surface located on each property is the most appropriate and equitable means of allocating the cost of stormwater management services, systems and facilities throughout Athens-Clarke County. Such service charges may be complemented by other types of charges which address specific needs, including, but not limited to, special service fees, special assessments, use of proceeds from special purpose local option sales taxes and other forms of revenue, as deemed appropriate by Athens-Clarke County Commissioners. (v)  The existence of privately owned and maintained on-site or off-site systems, facilities, activities or assets which significantly reduce or otherwise mitigate the impact of a particular property on Athens-Clarke County's stormwater utility's cost of providing stormwater management services and/or stormwater management systems and facilities should be taken into account to reduce the service charge on that property either in the form of a direct reduction or credit, and that such reduction or credit should be conditional upon continuing provision of such services, systems, facilities, activities or assets in a manner complying with the standards and codes as determined by Athens-Clarke County and as set forth herein. (w)  The area of impervious surfaces on each property is the most important factor influencing the cost of the stormwater management services, systems and facilities provided by Athens-Clarke County or to be provided by Athens-Clarke County in the future, and the area of impervious surfaces on each property is therefore the most appropriate parameter for calculating a periodic stormwater service charge. (x)  In addition to impervious area, the amount and types of pollutants that are carried by stormwater runoff is closely tied to the use of the property. Sampling of stormwater runoff from across the United States has demonstrated that the runoff from the more heavily used property, such as commercial and industrial developments, contain greater quantities of pollutants than less intensely developed residential properties. The water quality component of Athens-Clarke County's stormwater program will concentrate more heavily in those areas where the land use of the properties generates the greatest quantity of pollutants and will be reflected in the stormwater quality charge of those properties. (y)  It is imperative that the proceeds from all service charges for stormwater management services, systems and facilities, together with any other revenues raised or otherwise allocated specifically to stormwater management services, systems and facilities, be dedicated solely to those purposes, and the commission directs that such proceeds of service charges and revenues shall therefore be deposited into the enterprise accounting fund of the Athens-Clarke County stormwater utility and shall remain in that fund and be disbursed only for stormwater management capital, operating and non-operating costs, lease payments and debt service of bonds or other indebtedness for stormwater management purposes. (Ord. of 12-7-2004, § 1) 
Sec. 5-5-3. - Definitions. (a)  Generally. The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter, unless otherwise specifically stated or where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Act means and refers to the Clean Water Act, as amended by the Water Quality Act of 1987 (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), as amended, and the rules and regulations promulgated by the United States Environmental Protection Agency pursuant thereto.     Agriculture means a developed property other than a single-family property that is zoned AR and has ten percent or less impervious area on the parcel. If a property is not zoned AR, but the property's primary use is agriculture, the owner may make application for the agriculture customer designation, provided that the agricultural operation has an approved farm plan from the Natural Resource Conservation Service (NRCS).     Base charge means a charge to all developed property based on the annual administrative and management costs of the stormwater utility. The base charge recognizes that all developed property in Athens-Clarke County contributes to the stormwater discharge that Athens-Clarke County must manage and that all developed property in Athens-Clarke County receives services from the stormwater management activities that Athens-Clarke County provides.     Credit means a reduction in the amount of a stormwater service charge to the owner of a particular parcel for the existence and use of significantly owner maintained and operated on-site or off-site stormwater systems or facilities, or continuing provision of services or activities that reduce or mitigate the Athens-Clarke County stormwater utility's cost of providing stormwater management services, systems and facilities for that particular parcel.     Developed property means a parcel that has been altered from its natural state by the addition of any improvement, such as a building, structure or other impervious surface with a footprint greater than 300 square feet and where a certificate of occupancy has been issued, or upon completion of construction or final inspection if no such certificate is issued; or where construction of an improvement is at least 50 percent complete and construction is halted for a period exceeding three months. Developed property includes but is not limited to, transient rentals (such as hotels and motels), multifamily apartment buildings or condominiums, commercial or industrial developments, institutional schools, hospitals and churches, federal, state, and local governmental properties, and parking parcels.     Director means the director of the Athens-Clarke County Department of Public Works and Transportation or his designees.     Duplex means a detached residential structure containing two dwelling units, designed for occupancy by not more than two families living independent of each other.     Equivalent runoff unit (ERU) means the statistical average horizontal impervious area of a single-family property between 1,500 and 4,000 square feet of impervious area within Athens-Clarke County as of the date of adoption of this article. The horizontal impervious area includes, but is not limited to, all areas covered by structures, roof extensions, patios, porches, driveways and sidewalks. The average square footage of horizontal impervious surface for a single-family property is determined to be 2,628 square feet.     Impervious area means those areas which prevent or impede the infiltration of stormwater into the soil in the manner in which it entered the soil, in natural conditions, prior to development.     Large single-family means a single-family property with more than 4,000 square feet of impervious area.     Medium single-family means a single-family property with at least 1,500 square feet but less than 4,000 square feet of impervious area.     Other developed property means any developed property which is not a small, medium or large single-family property, a duplex, or a triplex.     Parcel means a discrete unit of land created by subdivision, which complies with all applicable laws at the time such parcels were created, as identified in the Athens-Clarke County deed and/or tax records, that is developed property.     Quantity charge means a charge that may be imposed on all developed property in Athens-Clarke County based on the impervious area and/or other factors that Athens-Clarke County determines reasonably reflect services provided to manage and/or mitigate the effect of the volume and rate of stormwater runoff.     Quality charge means a charge that may be imposed on all developed property in Athens-Clarke County to reasonably reflect services provided to treat or compensate for the difference in pollutants from properties of different land use.     Service area means those portions of Athens-Clarke County which receive stormwater management services, systems and facilities, and the Commission designates as a service area, or a part thereof. The Commission, from time to time, in its discretion, may add areas of Athens-Clarke County to a service area or remove areas from a service area. Service areas are identified generally and for informational purposes only on the stormwater utility service area map prepared and maintained by the director.     Single-family property means a parcel containing a detached residential dwelling unit functioning as the only residential unit and designed for and occupied by one family only. A residential unit may include a house, manufactured or mobile home.     Small single-family means a single-family property with less than 1,500 square feet of impervious area.     Stormwater Management Manual means the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual Volume II (Technical handbook), dated August 2001, promulgated by the Atlanta Regional Commission, as officially revised and amended by the Atlanta Regional Commission from time to time (hereinafter referred to as the "Georgia Stormwater Management Manual").     Stormwater management services means all services provided by Athens-Clarke County which relate to the: (1)  Transfer, control, conveyance or movement of stormwater runoff through Athens-Clarke County; (2)  Maintenance, repair and replacement of existing stormwater management systems and facilities; (3)  Planning, development, design and construction of additional stormwater management systems and facilities to meet current and anticipated needs; (4)  Regulation of the use of stormwater management services, systems and facilities; and (5)  Education of the public as to stormwater issues. Stormwater management services may address the quality and/or the quantity of stormwater runoff.     Stormwater service charge means the periodic service charge imposed pursuant to this article by the Athens-Clarke County stormwater utility for providing the stormwater management services, systems and facilities. This term may also include special charges to the owners of particular properties for services, systems or facilities related to stormwater management, including, but not limited to, charges for development plan review, inspection of development projects and on-site stormwater control systems, and enhanced levels of stormwater service above the threshold level.     Stormwater management systems and facilities means those natural and manmade channels, swales, ditches, rivers, streams, creeks, branches, reservoirs, ponds, drainageways, inlets, catchbasins, pipes, head walls, storm sewers, lakes and other physical works, properties and improvements which transfer, control, convey or otherwise influence the movement of stormwater runoff, which are owned by Athens-Clarke County or through which Athens-Clarke County has an easement or other legally binding right of use for stormwater drainage, and for which Athens-Clarke County has the obligation of maintenance for stormwater drainage purposes.     Triplex mean a detached residential structure containing three dwelling units, designed for occupancy by not more than three families living independent of each other.     Undeveloped means a parcel which does not have any improvements such as a building, structure, or impervious surface and contains no more than 300 square feet of impervious area.     Water quality factor means a statistically generated modifier to the base charge developed to represent the relative differences in the level of pollutants in stormwater from general categories of land use on an average annual basis. The average annual pollutant loads from the general land use categories were estimated using the Source Loading and Management Model (SLAMM) developed by PV & Associates. (b)  Construction of undefined terms. Terms not herein specifically defined shall be construed in the manner commonly accepted, and the interpretation of the same will be furnished by the public works director upon application. (Ord. of 12-7-2004, § 1) 
Sec. 5-5-4. - Stormwater utility established.     There is established a stormwater utility to be known as the Athens-Clarke County stormwater utility, which shall be responsible for stormwater management services, systems and facilities throughout Athens-Clarke County, and which shall provide for the management, protection, control, regulation, use and enhancement of Athens-Clarke County's stormwater management services, systems and facilities. (Ord. of 12-7-2004, § 1) 
Sec. 5-5-5. - Enterprise fund established. (a)  Creation. There is established a stormwater utility enterprise fund in Athens-Clarke County budgeting and accounting systems for the purpose of dedicating and protecting all funding applicable to the purposes and responsibilities of the stormwater utility, including, but not limited to, rentals, rates, charges, fees and licenses, as may be established by the commission from time to time, and other funds that may be transferred or allocated to the stormwater utility. All revenues and receipts of the stormwater utility shall be placed in the stormwater utility enterprise fund, and all expenses and capital investments of the stormwater utility shall be paid from the stormwater utility enterprise fund; provided, however, that other revenues, receipts and resources not accounted for in the stormwater utility enterprise fund may be applied to stormwater management services, systems and facilities as deemed appropriate by the commission. (b)  Funding and budget. (1)  The commission shall place within the Athens-Clarke County stormwater utility the responsibility for operation, maintenance and regulation of the existing stormwater management services, systems and facilities previously performed, owned and operated or maintained by Athens-Clarke County, and other related assets, including, but not limited to, properties, other than road rights-of-way, upon which such stormwater management systems and facilities are located, easements, rights-of-entry and access and certain equipment used solely for stormwater management. This responsibility shall be placed with the Athens-Clarke County stormwater utility as the commission has determined that the Athens-Clarke County stormwater utility has been sufficiently organized, staffed and funded adequately to carry out such responsibilities. The commission shall determine which division of Athens-Clarke County's governing body organization in which to place the stormwater utility, and the commission may move the stormwater utility to other divisions from time to time as it sees fit. (2)  Finance director or designee shall prepare an annual budget, which is to include all operation and maintenance costs, debt service and other costs related to the operation of the stormwater utility. The budget is subject to approval by the Athens-Clarke County Commission. (3)  The costs shall be spread over the rate classifications as determined by the commission. (Ord. of 12-7-2004, § 1) 
Sec. 5-5-6. - Scope of responsibility for systems and facilities. (a)  Athens-Clarke County owns or has rights established by written agreements which allow it to operate, maintain, improve and access those stormwater management systems and facilities which are located: (1)  Within public road rights-of-way and easements; (2)  On private property as provided for in Department of Transportation and Public Works Policy and Procedure Statement PW-002 as adopted by the Mayor and Commission January, 1992; or (3)  On public land which is owned by Athens-Clarke County or another governmental entity, and to which Athens-Clarke County has agreements providing for the operation, maintenance, improvement and access to the stormwater management systems and facilities. (b)  Operation, maintenance and/or improvement of stormwater management systems and facilities which are located on private or public property not owned by Athens-Clarke County, and for which there has been no written agreement granting easements, rights-of-entry, rights-of-access, rights-of-use or other form of dedication thereof to Athens-Clarke County for operation, maintenance, improvement and access of such stormwater management and systems and facilities, shall be and remain the legal responsibility of the property owner, except as otherwise provided for by the laws of the state and the United States. (c)  It is the express intent of this chapter to protect the public health, safety and welfare of people and property in general, but not to create any special duty or relationship with any individual person, or to any specific property within or outside the boundaries of Athens-Clarke County. Athens-Clarke County expressly reserves the right to assert all available immunities and defenses in any action seeking to impose monetary damages or equitable remedies upon Athens-Clarke County, its commissioners, officers, employees and agents arising out of any alleged failure or breach of duty or relationship. (Ord. of 12-7-2004, § 1) 
Sec. 5-5-7. - Service charges, user fees, etc. (a)  It shall be the policy of Athens-Clarke County that service charges and user fees for the stormwater management services, systems and facilities to be provided by the stormwater utility in the service areas shall be equitably derived through methods which have a demonstrable relationship to the varied demands and impacts imposed on the stormwater management services, systems and facilities by individual properties and/or the level of service rendered by or resulting from the provision of stormwater management services, systems and facilities. Stormwater service charge rates shall be structured so as to be fair and reasonable, and the resultant service charges shall bear a substantial relationship to the cost of providing stormwater management services, systems and facilities. Similarly situated properties shall be charged similar rates, charges or fees. Service charge rates shall be coordinated with the use of other rates, charges or fees employed for stormwater management within Athens-Clarke County, whether within or outside the defined service areas, including, but not limited to, plan review and inspection fees, special fees for services, fees in lieu of regulatory requirements and special assessments. In setting the rentals, rates, charges, fees or licenses for stormwater management services, systems and facilities, Athens-Clarke County Commission shall also take into consideration the impact such will have in regulating the use of such services, systems and facilities. (b)  The cost of stormwater management services, systems and facilities may include operating expenses, capital investments and reserve accounts. (c)  Service areas shall be established to reflect significant variations in services provided to stormwater utility customers. The boundaries of the service areas are described herein and depicted generally and for informational purposes only on the official map of Athens-Clarke County stormwater utility service areas prepared and maintained by the director, and amended from time to time, referred to in this section as the "map." (d)  To the extent practicable, credits against stormwater service charges and/or other methods of funding stormwater management shall be provided for on-site stormwater control systems and activities constructed, operated, maintained and performed to Athens-Clarke County's standards by private property owners which eliminate, mitigate or compensate for the impact that the property or person may have upon stormwater runoff discharged to public stormwater management systems and facilities or to private stormwater management systems and facilities which impact the proper function of public stormwater management systems and facilities. (Ord. of 12-7-2004, § 1) 
Sec. 5-5-8. - Service charge rates. (a)  Stormwater service charge rates shall be set and may be modified from time to time by the Athens-Clarke County Commission. In setting or modifying such rates it shall be the goal of the Athens-Clarke County Commission to establish rates that are fair and reasonable, reflect the value of the stormwater management services, systems and facilities to those property owners who benefit therefrom, and which, together with other sources of support available to Athens-Clarke County stormwater utility, are sufficient to support the cost of the stormwater management services, systems and facilities, including, but not limited to, the payment of principal and interest on debt obligations, lease payments, operating expenses, capital outlays, nonoperating expenses, provisions for prudent reserves and other costs as deemed appropriate by the Athens-Clarke County Commission. (b)  The basis for computation of the charge for stormwater services to all developed property within Athens-Clarke County is established under this section. The amount of charge to be imposed, the establishment of formulas for the calculation of charges, the creation of customer classifications for the imposition of charges, and changes in such charges, formulas and customer classifications may be made by further resolution of the Athens-Clarke County Commission. All charges established pursuant to this section shall be fair and reasonable. (c)  The director shall assign a customer classification to all developed property within Athens-Clarke County. The director shall be responsible for determining the impervious area, land area, land use or other factors as may be needed for the fair, reasonable and equitable allocation of the stormwater fee based on the best available information, including, but not limited to, data supplied by the county board of assessors, aerial photography, the property owner, tenant or developer. The director may require additional information as necessary to make the determination. The billing amount shall be updated by the director based on any additions to the impervious area as approved through the building permit process. (d)  Charges shall be imposed to recover all or a portion of the costs of the stormwater utility. Such charges, established herein, may include the following components: (1)  Base charge. A base charge may be imposed on all developed property in Athens-Clarke County. The base charge is established in recognition of the fact that all properties in Athens-Clarke County receive services from the stormwater management activities provided by Athens-Clarke County and that all developed property contributes to the stormwater discharge that Athens-Clarke County must manage. The base charge shall be charged to collect the administrative costs of the stormwater utility and may include capital, operating and maintenance costs of the stormwater utility which are not recovered by other means. The base charge is based on the ERU and is calculated using the formula identified below. (2)  Quantity charge. A quantity charge may be imposed on all developed property in Athens-Clarke County. The quantity charge shall be charged based upon the impervious area and/or other factors affecting the volume and rate of stormwater runoff as reasonably determined by the Athens-Clarke County. The quantity charge is based on ERU and is calculated using the formula identified below. (3)  Quality charge. A quality charge may be charged to all developed property in Athens-Clarke County. The quality charge reflects the services provided to treat stormwater or compensate for the difference in pollutants from properties of different land use. The quality charge is determined by multiplying the base charges by a water quality factor as described below. (e)  Calculation of charges. The monthly stormwater utility charges imposed to recover the cost of the stormwater utility program are as follows: Base Charge ..... $ 2.07 × ERU Quantity Charge ..... $ 0.86 × ERU Quality Charge ..... $ 0.57 × ERU × Water Quality Factor  (1)  Base charges and quantity charges. a.  The basis of the stormwater utility fee for the base and quantity charges shall be the equivalent runoff unit (ERU). b.  An ERU will represent 2,628 square feet of impervious area. c.  The director shall be responsible for determining the impervious area and other required information for each developed property in Athens-Clarke County based on the best available information, including, but not limited to, data supplied by the county board of assessors, aerial photography, the property owner, developer or other method as may be required. The number of ERUs that will form the basis of the base charge and quantity charge shall be established in the following manner: 1.  Small single-family —The charges shall be equal to 0.6 ERUs. 2.  Medium single-family —The charges shall be equal to 1.0 ERU. 3.  Large single-family —The charges shall be equal to 1.8 ERUs. 4.  Agriculture —The base and quantity charges shall be equal to 2.0 ERUs. The quality charge ERUs shall be equal to the total impervious area of the property divided by the square footage of an ERU. 5.  Duplex and triplex —The charges shall be equal to 1.0 ERU. 6.  Other developed property ("other") —The charges shall be equal to the total impervious area of the property divided by the square footage of an ERU. 7.  Undeveloped —The charges shall be equal to 0 ERUs and will not receive a stormwater utility bill. (2)  The quality charge. a.  The director shall assign all parcels within Athens-Clarke County one of the following water quality land use classifications based upon the Athens-Clarke County Comprehensive Plan, as amended: 1.  Low density residential. 2.  Agriculture. 3.  Medium density residential. 4.  High density residential/institutional/public. 5.  Commercial/industrial development. 6.  Undeveloped. b.  The water quality factors for each of the water quality land use classifications are as follows: 1. Low density residential 0.5 2. Agriculture 1.0 3. Medium density residential 1.0 4. High density residential/institutional/public 1.3 5. Commercial/industrial development 1.9 6. Undeveloped 0.0  (Ord. of 12-7-2004, § 1) 
Sec. 5-5-9. - Stormwater service areas.     The following stormwater service areas shall be established to reflect significant variations in services provided to stormwater utility customers: (a)  The Riparian Stormwater Service Area. The Riparian Stormwater Service Area shall be comprised of parcels that drain directly into the hereinafter designated riparian waters or a portion of parcels that drain directly into designated waters without entering Athens-Clarke County's stormwater system. Designated waters include: North Oconee River, Middle Oconee River, McNutt Creek and the lower portions of Shoal Creek and Cedar Creek. The director shall be responsible for designating the properties in the Riparian Stormwater Service Area based on the best available information, including, but not limited to, data supplied by the county board of assessors, aerial photography, the property owner, developer or other method as may be required. The director shall designate said properties and provide a map of designated properties in the department of public works and transportation office. A parcel owner that wishes to challenge the inclusion or exclusion of a property in the riparian stormwater service area can file an appeal as provided in section 1-5-1 of the Athens-Clarke County Code. (b)  The University of Georgia Stormwater Service Area. The University of Georgia Service Area shall be comprised of those parcels draining directly into designated waters (riparian) or a portion of properties that drain directly to the University of Georgia stormwater system without entering Athens-Clarke County's stormwater system. The University of Georgia Stormwater Service Area means those portions of Athens-Clarke County bordered generally by the North Oconee River to the east, Lumpkin Street to the west, College Station Road to the south and Baldwin Street to the north: (1)  Containing a significant impervious area and stormwater management system owned, maintained and operated by the University of Georgia; (2)  Receiving stormwater from non-university properties and facilitated in Athens-Clarke County; and (3)  Stormwater which flows generally to the Oconee River without entering other stormwater management systems in Athens-Clarke County. The director shall be responsible for designating the properties in the University of Georgia Stormwater Service Area based on the best available information, including, but not limited to, data supplied by the county board of assessors, aerial photography, the property owner, developer or other method as may be required. The director shall designate said properties and provide a map of designated properties in the department of public works and transportation office. A parcel owner that wishes to challenge the inclusion or exclusion of a property in the University of Georgia Stormwater Service Area can file an appeal as provided in section 1-5-1 of the Athens-Clarke County Code. (c)  Non-Athens-Clarke County NPDES Stormwater Phase II MS4 Service Areas. These areas represent parcels at least a portion of which are within the geographic boundaries of Athens-Clarke County that have obtained and are in compliance with a separate NPDES Stormwater Phase II Small Municipal Separate Storm Sewer Systems (MS4) Permit issued by the State of Georgia that requires the permit holder entity to develop and conduct its own stormwater management program similar in requirements to that of Athens-Clarke County and thus reduces the demand of service from Athens-Clarke County's stormwater utility. (d)  The Athens-Clarke County General Service Area. All remaining parcels located within the jurisdictional boundaries of Athens-Clarke County which have not been designated as parcels within the Riparian or University of Georgia Stormwater Service Area. (Ord. of 12-7-2004, § 1) 
Sec. 5-5-10. - Exemptions.     Except as provided in this section, no public or private property located in a service area shall receive a credit or offset against such stormwater service charges. No credit, offset or other reduction in stormwater service charges shall be granted based on the tax status, economic status, race, religion, age or sex of the owner of the property being served, or based on any other condition unrelated to the provision of stormwater management services, systems and facilities. There shall be four categories of exemptions as follows: (a)  Type I exemption. The following parcels shall be automatically exempt from all stormwater service utility charges. Parcel owners do not need to apply for an exemption pursuant to section 5-5-11. (1)  Railroad tracks and the rights-of-way shall be exempt from stormwater service charges. However, railroad stations, maintenance buildings or other developed land used for railroad purposes shall not be exempt from stormwater service charges. (2)  Public and private roadways, not including driveways, shall be exempt from stormwater service charges. (b)  Type II exemption. The following parcels shall be automatically exempt from the quantity charges. Parcel owners do not need to apply for an exemption pursuant to section 5-5-11. (1)  Parcels located in the Riparian Stormwater Service Area. (2)  Parcels located in the University of Georgia Stormwater Service Area. (c)  Type III exemption. The following parcels shall be automatically exempt from the water quality charges and may be eligible for further reduction in charges by providing in-kind services to Athens-Clarke County that reduce the cost of service for the Athens-Clarke County Stormwater Utility. However, the permittee of the MS4 must first apply for a credit or adjustment pursuant to the procedures identified in section 5-5-11 and submit a copy of their permit and stormwater management program for review and comparison with Athens-Clarke County services. (1)  Parcels located in a non-Athens-Clarke County NPDES Stormwater Phase II Service Area. (d)  Type IV exemption. The following parcels may be exempt from the quantity and/or quality charges. However, parcel owners must first apply for a credit or adjustment pursuant to the procedures identified in section 5-5-11. (1)  Parcels with on-site stormwater management and treatment facilities that are designed to properly manage the stormwater runoff from impervious surface areas in accordance with (a.) and one or more of the stormwater quantity criteria described by the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual may be eligible to be exempted from a portion of the quantity charge. a.  In order to receive this credit, a maintenance plan must be on file with the department and be in compliance with it. b.  Facilities designed to meet the channel protection standard in accordance with the Athens-Clarke County Code and the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, each as may be updated or amended from time to time will be eligible for one-third reduction in the quantity charge for the property. c.  Facilities designed to meet the channel protection and the over bank standard in accordance with the Athens-Clarke County Code and the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, each as may be updated or amended from time to time, will be eligible for two-thirds reduction in the quantity charge for the property. d.  Facilities designed to meet the channel protection, over bank and flood protection standard in accordance with the Athens-Clarke County Code and the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, each as may be updated or amended from time to time, will be eligible for total exemption of the quantity charge for the property. (2)  Parcels with on-site stormwater management and treatment facilities and parcels serviced by such facilities that are designed to properly manage the stormwater runoff from impervious surface areas in accordance with the stormwater quality criteria described by the Georgia Stormwater Manual as may be updated or amended from time to time may be eligible to be exempted from a portion of the quality charge. a.  Facilities designed to remove no less than 40 percent of the average annual sediment load from stormwater runoff from the site may be eligible for a 20 percent reduction in the quality charge for the property. b.  Facilities designed to remove no less than 65 percent of the average annual sediment load from stormwater runoff from the site may be eligible for a 60 percent reduction in the quality charge for the property. c.  Facilities designed to remove no less than 80 percent of the average annual sediment load from stormwater runoff from the site will be eligible for total exemption of the quality charge for the property. (3)  The owner of property which is used as a site for a public or private school and which agrees to teach a general environmental science curriculum that includes water protection measures at the primary or secondary level may receive a credit against the stormwater service charge applicable to the property of five percent of the service charge applicable to the property. If a specific water protection program is agreed to be taught in all grades at such school including the Water Wise Program, the River Kids Program, Enviroscape Program, GLOBE (Global Learning and Observation to Benefit the Environment) Program or another such program approved by the director, which will result in benefits to Athens-Clarke County as a result of teaching such program, the amount of the credit against stormwater service charges which may be received may be increased up to an additional 15 percent of the service charge applicable to the property for a total of a 20 percent total educational credit. The amount of credits given shall be as determined by the director based on the number of contact hours and the curriculum being taught. The educational credit may be taken in addition to any other credit available under this section. Prior to July 1 of each year, the superintendent of the Athens-Clarke County School System or in the case of private schools the chief executive officer of the school, shall certify to the director, the water protection measures curriculum being taught in each school for which an educational credit is being claimed and the extent to which such curriculum is being taught. For purposes of this educational credit a public school shall be any school operated by the Athens-Clarke County School District and a private school shall be a school operated by a private entity teaching some or all of the grades K through 12 at which are taught subject[s] commonly taught in the public schools operated by the Athens-Clarke County School District. (4)  Properties classified as agricultural customers that have an approved farm plan from the Natural Resource Conservation Service (NRCS) will be eligible for exemption from the water quality charge. These farm plans require implementation of best farm practices including but not limited to: Crop Management Channel Management Nutrient Management Contour Plowing Stream/Channel Stabilization Manure Management No Till Vegetated Buffers Stream Fencing Strip Cropping Grassed Waterways Barnyard Runoff Control  (5)  Groups of detached single-family dwelling units or improvements on other developed land which are developed as part of a common development plan which includes within the development, but not on the Parcels on which the detached single-family dwelling units or the improvements on other developed land are located, privately owned, maintained or operated stormwater control systems, facilities, assets, services or activities that reduce Athens-Clarke County stormwater utility's cost of providing stormwater management services, systems and facilities, may receive a credit based on attaining and continuing compliance with the technical requirements and performance standards referenced in 5-5-10(d)(1) and 5-5-10(d)(2). Such credits shall be proportionately allocated among all properties using such stormwater control systems or facilities, the owners of which are contributing to their costs of ownership, operation and maintenance. (Ord. of 12-7-2004, § 1) 
Sec. 5-5-11. - Procedure for applying for credits and adjustments to service charges. (a)  The director shall establish specified technical and procedural criteria by which credits or adjustments will be granted. Copies of such technical and procedural criteria will be maintained by and available from the transportation and public works department. (1)  In order to obtain a credit, the property owner must make application to the director on forms provided by the director for such purpose. (2)  Customers must apply for any credits or adjustments that they believe apply. (3)  The application for any credit or adjustment must be in writing and must include the information necessary to establish eligibility for the credit or adjustment, any application fee, and be in the format established by the director. Incomplete applications will not be accepted by the director. (4)  Stormwater utility fees may be adjusted retroactively to the date the director received the completed application. (5)  Applicants must have an approved maintenance plan on file with the director, and the applicant's property must have on-site stormwater management and treatment facilities. (b)  When an application for a credit is deemed complete by the director, he shall have 30 days from the date the complete application is accepted to: (a) grant the credit in whole; (b) grant the credit in part; or (c) deny the credit within 30 days thereafter. Credits applied for by the property owner in the year 2005, and granted in whole or in part, shall apply to all stormwater service charges accruing in the year 2005. Beginning January 1, 2006 credits applied for by the property owner, and granted in whole or in part, shall apply from the first day of the calendar month immediately following the date on which a complete application for the credit has been filed with Athens-Clarke County. The property owner may appeal such determination pursuant to section 1-5-1 of the Athens-Clarke County Code. (c)  A property owner shall not have to reapply annually for the credit granted, but the director may review the credit and the basis therefor no more frequently than annually, and may terminate the credit if the director finds grounds therefor. If such credit is terminated, the property owner may appeal such determination pursuant to section 1-5-1 of the Athens-Clarke County Code, or may, if possible, correct the deficiencies which caused the termination and reapply for the credit. A property owner with a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Stormwater Phase II MS4 permit, however, must submit the report prescribed in the NPDES permit to the director to continue to receive the credit from Athens-Clarke County associated with the NPDES Stormwater Phase II MS4 permit. (Ord. of 12-7-2004, § 1) 
Sec. 5-5-12. - Service charge billing, delinquencies and collections, appeals. (a)  Billing. (1)  Stormwater service charges shall begin to accrue July 1, 2005, and shall be billed in arrears. A bill for stormwater service charges may be sent through the United States Postal Service or by alternative means, notifying the owner of the property being billed of the amount of the stormwater service charge, less credits, the date the payment is due and the date when payment is past due. (2)  The stormwater service charge may be billed and collected separately or along with water and sanitary sewer charges, or along with other fees for services, as deemed most effective and efficient by the Athens-Clarke County Manager. (3)  Frequency of the billing of stormwater service charges shall be specified by the Athens-Clarke County Manager. (4)  Failure to receive a bill shall not be justification for nonpayment. Regardless of the party to whom the bill is initially directed, the owner of each developed property subject to stormwater service charges shall be obligated to pay stormwater service charges and any interest on delinquent stormwater service charge payments. (5)  If a property owner is underbilled, or if no bill is sent for a particular tract of developed land, the Athens-Clarke County stormwater utility may backbill for a period of up to one year, but shall not be entitled to any interest for any delinquency during the backbilled period. (b)  Delinquencies and collections. (1)  Unpaid stormwater service fees shall be collected by filing suit to collect on an unpaid account and by using all methods allowed by Georgia law to collect on any judgment obtained thereby, including enforcement of any lien resulting from any such judgment. In no instance shall the unpaid service charge constitute a direct lien against the property. (2)  A one percent per month late charge shall be assessed against the owner for the unpaid balance of any stormwater utility service charge that becomes delinquent. (c)  Adjustments/appeals. (1)  All requests for adjustments shall be submitted to the director of the transportation and public works department, who shall have the authority to develop and administer the procedures and standards for the adjustment of the stormwater fee. a.  Customers may seek an adjustment of the stormwater fee allocated to a Parcel at any time by submitting the request in writing and setting forth in detail the grounds upon which relief is sought. b.  Customers requesting the adjustments may be required, at his, her or its own expense, to provide supplemental information to the director, including, but not limited to, survey data approved by a registered land surveyor (R.P.L.S.) and engineering reports approved by a professional engineer (P.E.). Failure to provide such information within the time limits established by the director, as may be reasonably extended, may result in denial of the adjustments request. c.  Once a completed adjustments request and all required information are received by the director, the director shall have 30 calendar days within which to render a written decision. Concurrent payment of any charges allocated to the property is not required as a condition precedent to this request for review. d.  In considering an adjustment request, the director shall consider whether the calculation of the stormwater fee for the property is correct. e.  The director's decision shall be mailed to the address provided on the adjustments request, and service shall be complete upon mailing. (2)  The decision of the director is final unless the property owner appeals the decision pursuant to section 1-5-1 of Athens-Clarke County Code. (3)  If the result of an appeal is that a refund is due the appellant, the refund will be applied as a credit on the appellant's next stormwater bill. (Ord. of 12-7-2004, § 1) 