Title 7 - BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Charter reference— Powers of unified government to condemn property and to regulate the building trades and construction of buildings and to adopt and enforce building codes, § 8-114(8), (13). 
CHAPTER 7-1. - BUILDING REGULATIONS Article 1. In General Sec. 7-1-1. Codes adopted. Sec. 7-1-2. Violation and penalties. Sec. 7-1-3. Officials. Sec. 7-1-4. Organization. Sec. 7-1-5. Prohibited acts by licensees. Sec. 7-1-6. Permits generally. Sec. 7-1-7. Discontinuance of services for violations. Sec. 7-1-8. Invalidity of sections. Secs. 7-1-9—7-1-35. Reserved. Article 2. Building Code Sec. 7-1-36. Additions, insertions, deletions, and changes; chief building official. Sec. 7-1-37. Review of building permit applications, subdivisions proposals, etc., to determine safety from flooding, etc. Sec. 7-1-38. Certain permits and fees not required. Sec. 7-1-39. Fire limits. Sec. 7-1-40. Amendments to the building code. Secs. 7-1-41—7-1-55. Reserved. Article 3. Electrical Code Sec. 7-1-56. Athens-Clarke County Electrical Code. Sec. 7-1-57. Powers and duties of the chief building official. Sec. 7-1-58. Application for permit. Sec. 7-1-59. Permits. Sec. 7-1-60. Violations and penalties. Sec. 7-1-61. Temporary service. Sec. 7-1-62. Special rules. Sec. 7-1-63. Definitions. Sec. 7-1-64. Appeals. Secs. 7-1-65—7-1-74. Reserved. Article 4. Fire Codes Sec. 7-1-75. Fire Prevention Bureau. Secs. 7-1-76—7-1-115. Reserved. Article 5. Housing Code Division 1. Generally Secs. 7-1-116—7-1-125. Reserved. Division 2. Amendments Sec. 7-1-126. Amendments to the Housing Code. Secs. 7-1-127—7-1-145. Reserved. Article 6. Mechanical Code Sec. 7-1-146. Provisions cumulative. Sec. 7-1-147. Installation of equipment under combustible stairs. Sec. 7-1-148. Placement of radiators, heat producing appliances, etc. Secs. 7-1-149, 7-1-150. Reserved. Sec. 7-1-151. Dangerous or unsafe systems, appliances or equipment—Generally. Sec. 7-1-152. Same—Notice; compliance. Sec. 7-1-153. Conditioned air contracting. Sec. 7-1-154. Definitions. Sec. 7-1-155. Conditioned air permit required. Secs. 7-1-156—7-1-165. Reserved. Article 7. Plumbing Code Sec. 7-1-166. Provisions cumulative. Sec. 7-1-167. Licensing of plumbers. Sec. 7-1-168. Utility contractors. Sec. 7-1-169. Maintenance. Sec. 7-1-170. Violations and penalties. Sec. 7-1-171. Requirements. Sec. 7-1-172. Permits and fees. Sec. 7-1-173. Name, license or bond used to obtain permit fraudulently. Sec. 7-1-174. Sewage disposal; proposed buildings. Secs. 7-1-175—7-1-224. Reserved. Article 8. Swimming Pools Sec. 7-1-225. Code adopted. Sec. 7-1-226. Definitions. Sec. 7-1-227. Exceptions. Sec. 7-1-228. Residential family swimming pool; application for building permit. Sec. 7-1-229. Fences, walls, gates and latches; other protective devices or structures. Secs. 7-1-230—7-1-444. Reserved. Article 9. Underground Utilities Sec. 7-1-445. Definitions. Sec. 7-1-446. Findings; purpose. Sec. 7-1-447. Exceptions. Sec. 7-1-448. Connection to system where available; time for compliance. Sec. 7-1-449. Failure to make connection. Secs. 7-1-450—7-1-554. Reserved. Article 10. Permit Fees Sec. 7-1-555. General building fees. Sec. 7-1-556. Electrical codes. Sec. 7-1-557. Plumbing codes. Sec. 7-1-558. Heating, ventilating and air conditioning fees. Sec. 7-1-559. Special type permit fees. Sec. 7-1-560. User Fees—Department of Transportation and Public Works Land Development Services. Sec. 7-1-561. Fire marshal; reinspection fee. Secs. 7-1-562—7-1-599. Reserved. Article 11. Manufactured Homes Sec. 7-1-600. Scope. Sec. 7-1-601. Additions, alterations, and repairs. Sec. 7-1-602. Existing homes. Sec. 7-1-603. Property maintenance. Sec. 7-1-604. Location. Sec. 7-1-605. Permits. Sec. 7-1-606. Inspections. Sec. 7-1-607. Final inspection. Sec. 7-1-608. Footings and foundations. Sec. 7-1-609. Skirting. Sec. 7-1-610. Landings and steps. Sec. 7-1-611. Anchorage. 
ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 7-1-1. - Codes adopted. (a)  Athens-Clarke County shall enforce the latest editions of the following Georgia State Minimum Standard Codes as adopted by the State of Georgia and as amended from time to time by the State of Georgia: (1)  International Building Code (ICC). (A)  Appendix D: Fire District. (2)  International Mechanical Code (ICC). (3)  International Fuel Gas Code (ICC). (4)  International Property Maintenance Code. (5)  National Electrical Code (NFPA). (6)  International Plumbing Code (ICC). (7)  International Energy Conservation Code (ICC). (8)  International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings (ICC). (9)  International Existing Building Code (ICC). (10)  Any other codes deemed appropriate by the Georgia Board of Community Affairs for the safety and welfare of Georgia citizens. (b)  The codes adopted in paragraph (a) shall apply, except such portions as may be deleted, modified or amended in this chapter. At least one copy of such codes is filed in the office of the clerk of commission and is authenticated by his or her signature and by the seal of the commission. The provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of Athens-Clarke County. (c)  Should any provision of the above adopted codes conflict with any provision of this Code of Ordinances, that provision which is most restrictive shall control. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1; Ord. of 3-2-93, § 1; Ord. of 1-3-95, § 1; Ord. of 10-3-95, § 1; Ord. of 2-1-2000, § 1; Ord. of 8-3-2004, § 1) 
Sec. 7-1-2. - Violation and penalties. (a)  Notice of discontinuance. Whenever the chief building official is satisfied that systems, appliances or equipment are being erected, installed, altered or repaired in violation of the provisions or requirements of this chapter, or the codes adopted in this chapter, or in violation of plans or specifications submitted and approved thereunder, the chief building official shall serve a written notice or order upon the responsible person directing the discontinuance of such illegal work and the immediate correction of violations. (b)  Stoppage of work. Upon notice from the chief building official that work on any installation is being done contrary to the provisions of this chapter or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, such work shall be immediately stopped. Such notice shall be in writing, and/or oral, and shall be given to the owner of such property, his agent, or the person doing the work and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. Where any emergency exists, oral notice given by the chief building official shall be sufficient. (c)  Forfeiture of license or certificate. Any person who shall continue to or persistently violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall forfeit his license or certificate issued under this Code and the reissuance of any license or certificate so forfeited shall only be after recommendation by the mayor and commission. (d)  Punishment for violations. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter or any code adopted in this chapter or fail to comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made thereunder, or who shall build in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued thereunder, shall for each such failure, violation or noncompliance be punished as provided in section 1-1-5 of this Code. Any person found by the Athens-Clarke County Municipal Court to be in violation of this chapter or a code adopted herein shall also correct or remedy all violations or defects within a reasonable time; and, when not otherwise specified, each day that prohibited conditions exist shall constitute a separate offense. (e)  Application of penalties to prohibited conditions. The application of the penalties in this section shall not prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. (f)  Institution of proper actions. The penalties imposed in this section shall not preclude the chief building official from instituting an appropriate action or proceeding to prevent an unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair or maintenance. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1; Ord. of 7-2-96, § 1; Ord. of 7-6-99, § 1) 
Sec. 7-1-3. - Officials.     The chief building official shall be the ex officio building official, as referred to in this Code of Ordinances. The chief building official, with the approval of the manager, may designate inspectors or other duly authorized representatives to perform any inspections or other duties or services as may be required to enforce such codes. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1) 
Sec. 7-1-4. - Organization. (a)  Generally. The department of building inspection shall be in charge of administration and enforcement of this chapter and the codes adopted in this chapter. (b)  License. Any person, limited liability company, partnership, or corporation located in Athens-Clarke County and engaged in any work covered by this chapter shall have a valid Athens-Clarke County business license before doing any work. (c)  Rules. The chief building official shall promulgate rules of procedure reasonably necessary to administer this chapter. (d)  Records. The chief building official shall keep or cause to be kept comprehensive records of applications, permits, inspections and other such activities of the Department of Building Inspection. (e)  Reports. The chief building official shall submit a report annually to the manager covering the work of the department of building inspection during the preceding year. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1; Ord. of 5-6-2003, § 1) 
Sec. 7-1-5. - Prohibited acts by licensees. (a)  Any person engaged in a business regulated by this chapter whose work does not conform to the rules and regulations herein set out, or whose workmanship or materials are of inferior quality, shall, on notice from the chief building official, make necessary changes or corrections at once. If necessary changes or corrections have not been made after ten days' notice, the chief building official shall then refuse to issue any more permits until such work has fully complied with the rules and regulations of this chapter. The chief building official may appear before the administrative hearing officer and request that all licenses or permits be revoked because of continuous violations. When such revocation is to be considered, the person to whom the license or permits have been issued shall have at least three days' notice in writing of the time and place of such hearing, together with a statement of the grounds upon which the revocation is being proposed. (b)  No person engaged in a business regulated by this chapter shall allow any other person to use his name directly or indirectly to obtain a permit or for the construction of any work nor shall any person make misrepresentations or omissions in his application. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1) 
Sec. 7-1-6. - Permits generally. (a)  Permit required. (1)  Except as specified in paragraph (b) below, no building, structure, or building service equipment regulated by this code and the technical codes shall be erected, constructed, enlarged, altered, repaired, moved, improved, removed, converted, or demolished unless a separate, appropriate building permit for each building, structure or building service equipment has first been obtained from the building official. (2)  A special building permit for a limited time shall be obtained before the erection of temporary structures such as construction sheds, office trailers, seats, canopies, tents, and fences used in construction work or for temporary purposes such as reviewing stands. Such structures shall be completely removed upon the expiration of the time limit stated in the temporary permit. (b)  Exemptions. A permit shall not be required for the types of work in each of the separate classes of permit as listed below. Exemption from the permit requirements of this code shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in violation of the provisions of the technical codes or any other laws or ordinances. (1)  Building permits. A building permit shall not be required for the following: a.  Replacement of asphalt shingles on roofs or mineral-surfaced roll roofing. b.  Movable cases, counters, and partitions not over five feet high. c.  Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets, counter tops and similar finish work, and interior moldings, but not including replacement of interior wall coverings or exterior wall coverings. d.  Swings and other playground equipment accessory to a one or two-family dwelling. The above exemptions from a building permit do not exempt the requirement for obtaining a sub-trade permit for work associated with the above referenced construction activities except as follows. (2)  Plumbing permits. A plumbing permit shall not be required for the following: a.  The stopping of leaks in drains, soil, waste or vent pipe; provided, however, that should any concealed trap, drainpipe, soil, waste or vent pipe become defective and it becomes necessary to remove and replace the same with new material, the same shall be considered as new work and a permit shall be procured and inspection made as provided in this code. b.  The clearing of stoppages or the repairing of leaks in pipes, valves, or fixtures, and for the removal and reinstallation of water closets; provided, however, such repairs do not involve or require the replacement or rearrangement of valves and/or pipes. (3)  Electrical permits. An electrical permit shall not be required for the following: a.  Portable motors or other portable appliances energized by means of a cord or cable having an attachment plug end to be connected to an approved receptacle when that cord or cable is permitted by the Electrical Code. b.  Repair or replacement of fixed motors, transformers, or fixed approved appliances of the same type and rating in the same location. c.  Temporary decorative lighting. d.  Repair or replacement of current-carrying parts of any switch, contactor, lamp, receptacle, lighting fixture, or control device. e.  Reinstallations of attachment plug receptacles. f.  Repair or replacement of any overcurrent device or breaker of the required capacity in the same location. g.  Repair or replacement of electrodes or transformers of the same size and capacity for signs or gas tube systems. h.  Taping joints. i.  Removal of electrical wiring. j.  Temporary wiring for experimental purposes in suitable experimental laboratories. k.  The wiring for temporary theater, motion picture or television stage sets. l.  Low-energy power, control and signal circuits of Classes II and III as defined in the Electrical Code. m.  Installation, alteration, or repair of electrical wiring, apparatus, or equipment or the generation, transmission, distribution or metering of electrical energy or in the operation of signals or the transmission of intelligence by a public or private utility in the exercise of its function as a serving utility. (4)  Mechanical permits. A mechanical permit shall not be required for the following: a.  Any portable heating, cooking or clothes drying appliance. b.  Any portable ventilating equipment. c.  Any portable cooling unit. d.  Any portable evaporative cooler. e.  Replacement of any component part of assembly of an appliance which does not alter its original approval and complies with other applicable requirements of technical codes. f.  Self-contained refrigeration systems containing ten pounds (4.5kg) or less of refrigerant or that are actuated by motors of one horsepower (746 W) or less. (5)  Emergency Repairs. Where equipment replacement and repairs must be performed in an emergency situation, the permit application shall be submitted to the building official within the next two working business days following the completion of such repairs. (6)  Repairs. Application or notice to the building official is not required for ordinary repairs to structures, replacement of lamps or the connection of approved portable electrical equipment to approved permanently installed receptacles. Such repairs shall not include the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion thereof, the removal or cutting of any structural beam or load bearing support, or the removal or change of any required means of egress, or rearrangement of parts of a structure affecting egress requirements; nor shall any ordinary repairs include addition to, alteration of, replacement or relocation of any standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas, soil, waste, vent or similar piping, electric wiring or mechanical or other work affecting public health or general safety. (c)  Applications. The chief building official shall furnish application for permits under this chapter. Such forms shall be completed in full. The application for a permit shall include the name and address of the applicant and the names and addresses of all contractors and subcontractors who will perform any service in connection with the works for which the permit is sought. (d)  Drawings and specifications. Plans, drawings and specifications to show the nature and character of the work for which the application is made shall be furnished to the chief building official upon request. These plans, drawings and specifications shall be drawn to scale and submitted in duplicate. Such plans, drawings and specifications shall be in sufficient detail to provide an understanding of the scope of the work. All such other information, as required by this chapter, shall be included on the plans, drawings and specifications. The chief building official shall examine each application for a permit and the plans, drawings and specifications which may be filed therewith, and shall determine whether the installation indicated and described is in accordance with the requirements of this chapter and all other pertinent laws or ordinances. If approved, one set shall be returned to the applicant, marked "Reviewed for Code Compliance," and one set shall be retained and filed as a permanent record in the office of the chief building official. The applicant's approved set shall remain on the job at all times. (e)  Special historic buildings. The provisions of this chapter relating to the construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation or moving of buildings or structures shall not be mandatory for existing buildings or structures identified and classified by the state or local jurisdiction as historic buildings when any proposed construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation or moving of buildings is judged by the chief building official to be safe. The applicant must submit complete architectural and engineering plans and specifications bearing the seal of a professional engineer or architect licensed in Georgia unless waived by the chief building official. (f)  Action on application. (1)  If the chief building official is satisfied that the work described in an application for permit and the plans, drawings and specifications which may be filed therewith conforms to the requirements of this chapter and all other pertinent laws or ordinances, he shall issue a permit therefor to the applicant. (2)  If the application for permit and the plans, drawings and specifications which may be filed therewith describe work which does not conform to the requirements of this chapter or other pertinent laws or ordinances, the chief building official shall not issue a permit, but shall return the plans, drawings and specifications to the applicant with his refusal to issue permit. Such refusal shall be documented in writing and shall contain the reasons for refusing said permit. (3)  The approval of any permit shall not prevent the building official from thereafter preventing building operations being carried on thereunder when the permittee is in violation of the building code, the zoning ordinance of Athens-Clarke County, any other ordinances of Athens-Clarke County, or any other law or when the permit has been erroneously issued based on a mistake of law or fact. (g)  Revocation of permit. After notice and hearing pursuant to section 1-5-1 of the Code of Athens-Clarke County, the chief building official may revoke a permit or license issued under the provisions of this chapter if there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to the material facts in the application, plans, drawings or specifications on which the permit or license was based. In all such cases no permit fees shall be refunded. (h)  Expiration and cancellation. (1)  Maximum time to begin. If the work described in any permit has not begun within six months from the date of issuance thereof, such permit shall expire and all fees shall be forfeited. It shall be cancelled by the building official and written notice thereof shall be given to the persons affected. Construction is said to have commenced at the time when the initial inspection is made prior to installation of the foundation system. (2)  Maximum time to discontinue. Once construction is underway, discontinuation for a period in excess of six months shall result in cancellation of the building permit after notification to the property owner and opportunity for a hearing pursuant to section 1-5-1 of the Code of Athens-Clarke County. (3)  Maximum time to complete. If the work described in any building permit has not been substantially completed within two years of the date of issuance thereof, such permit shall expire and be cancelled by the building official; and written notice thereof shall be given to the persons affected, together with notice that further work as described in the cancelled permit shall not proceed unless and until a new building permit has been obtained. (i)  Certificate required. It shall be unlawful to use or occupy or permit the use or occupancy of any building or premises, or both, or part thereof hereafter created, erected, changed, converted, or wholly or partly altered or enlarged in its use of structure until a certificate of occupancy or completion shall have been issued therefore by the building official stating that the building, use, or land conforms to the requirements of this chapter and all other pertinent laws or ordinances. (j)  Temporary certificates. A temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued by the building official for a period not exceeding six months during alterations or partial occupancy of a building pending its completion; provided, that such temporary certificate may include such conditions and safeguards as will protect the safety of the occupants and the public. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1; Ord. of 4-3-2001, § 1; Ord. of 8-7-2007, § 1) 
Sec. 7-1-7. - Discontinuance of services for violations. (a)  The chief building official may request the appropriate department head to withhold services, such as water, garbage collection, sewer services or any other service of similar nature rendered by Athens-Clarke County, from any property on which any structure, house or building is being erected or maintained in violation of the provisions of the National Electrical Code, Standard Building Code, Georgia State Plumbing Code, Standard Mechanical Code, Standard Gas Code, and Standard Swimming Pool Code adopted in this chapter, or in violation of any other law or ordinance of Athens-Clarke County pertaining to health, safety or morals. (b)  The chief building official shall notify the person in charge or in possession of such property, or the owner thereof, of the violations and shall fix a reasonable time for the correction of such violations. If the violations continue after the expiration of such given time, the chief building official is authorized to request the appropriate department head to disconnect the water and sewer lines and discontinue all services so long as such violations continue. Any person interfering with the chief building official or the agents or employees of Athens-Clarke County in disconnecting the sewer or water line or in the performance of their duties shall be guilty of an offense under this Code and punished as provided by section 1-1-5 herein. (c)  The chief building official may also request, in writing, all public utility corporations to discontinue or refuse services to such property maintained in violation of Athens-Clarke County laws or ordinances, and such public utility corporations, after the time fixed by the chief building official, shall not render any services to such property. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1) 
Sec. 7-1-8. - Invalidity of sections.     The invalidity of any section or provision of this chapter shall not invalidate other sections or provisions thereof. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1) 
Secs. 7-1-9—7-1-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 2. - BUILDING CODE 
Sec. 7-1-36. - Additions, insertions, deletions, and changes; chief building official. (a)  The chief building official shall be ex officio building official under the building code adopted in section 7-1-1(1). (b)  Any firm, corporation or agent that violates a provision of this code, or fails to comply therewith, or fails to comply with any of the requirements or amendments thereof, shall be guilty of an offense. Any person who erects, constructs, alters, demolishes or moves any structure or has erected, constructed, altered, repaired, moved or demolished a building or structure in violation of a detailed statement or drawing submitted and approved under this code shall be guilty of an offense. Such offenses set out herein shall be punished as provided for by section 1-1-5 of the Code of Athens-Clarke County. (c)  Building department. (1)  Building official qualifications. The building official shall have at least ten years experience or equivalent, as an architect, engineer, inspector, contractor, superintendent, or contractor, or any combination of these. The building official should be certified as a building official through a recognized certification program. (2)  Inspector qualifications. The building official, with the approval of the manager, may appoint or hire such number of officers, inspectors, assistants and other employees as shall be authorized from time to time. A person appointed or hired as an inspector of construction should have a minimum of five years experience in the construction field. (3)  Deputy building official qualifications. The building official may designate as his deputy an employee in the department who shall, during the absence or disability of the building official, exercise all the powers of the building official. The deputy building official should have the same qualifications as listed for the chief building official. (4)  Notwithstanding the provisions in section 7-1-36(c)(1), (2), and (3) relating to qualifications, the chief building official, with approval of the manager, may waive the required qualifications where he satisfies himself that the appointee possesses sufficient knowledge, study, training, or experience as may be necessary to make any inspection or perform any duty assigned to him. Any such deputy building official or inspector is authorized and empowered to perform or exercise any duty or power vested in the chief building official. (d)  Construction board of appeals. (1)  Membership and terms; compensation. There is hereby established a board to be called the construction board of appeals. The board shall consist of five members, who shall reside in Athens-Clarke County. Such board shall be composed of one construction (general) contractor, one plumbing contractor, one electrical contractor, one heating, ventilating and air conditioning contractor and one architect or engineer. The members of such board shall elect a chairman and vice-chairman who shall serve for one year. All members of such board shall be appointed by majority vote of the mayor and commission of Athens-Clarke County. Such members shall be licensed and actively participating within the construction industry. "Licensed" shall mean the following: The building contractor member shall be actively and currently engaged in the field of building construction for at least five years. The plumbing contractor member shall hold a State of Georgia Unrestricted Plumbing Contractor's License. The electrical contractor member shall hold a State of Georgia Unrestricted Electrical Contractor's license. The heating, ventilating and air conditioning contractor member shall hold a State of Georgia Unrestricted Conditioned Air Contractor's License. The architect/engineer shall hold the appropriate State of Georgia Professional License. A compensation fee of $10.00 per meeting shall be paid to each member for attendance at meetings of the construction board of appeals. (2)  Terms. Terms of appointments for the board members shall be five years each. Implementation of the initial terms of appointment shall be as follows: The heating, ventilating and air conditioning contractor appointee shall initially serve for a three-year term; The electrical contractor appointee shall initially serve a three-year term; The plumbing contractor appointee shall initially serve for a two-year term; The general contractor appointee shall initially serve for a four-year term; The architect (or engineer) appointee shall initially serve for a five-year term. All appointees after this initial appointment term shall then serve for one five-year term. Members may be re-appointed for one additional term. Vacancies shall be filled for an unexpired term in the manner in which original appointments are required to be made. Continued absence of any member from regular meetings of the board shall, at the discretion of the applicable governing body, render any such member liable to immediate removal from office. (3)  Procedures of the board. The board shall establish rules and regulations for its own procedure not inconsistent with the provisions of this code. The meeting time and dates of the board shall be set by the chief building official and approved by the chairman, as needed, but not more than two times in any one month. (4)  Secretary of board. The building official shall act as secretary of the board and shall make a detailed record of all its proceedings, which shall set forth the reasons for its decisions, the vote of each member, the absence of a member and any failure of a member to vote. (5)  Powers. The construction board of appeals shall have the power, as further defined in subsections (6), (7) and (10), to hear appeals of decisions and interpretations of the building official and consider variances of the technical code. (6)  Variances. The construction board of appeals, when so appealed to and after a hearing, may vary the application of any provision of this code to any particular case when, in its opinion, the enforcement thereof would do manifest injustice and would be contrary to the spirit and purpose of this or the technical codes or public interest, and also finds all of the following: a.  That special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the building, structure or service system involved and which are not applicable to others. b.  That the special conditions and circumstances do not result from the action or inaction of the applicant. c.  That granting the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by this code to other buildings, structures or service system. d.  That the variance granted is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of the building, structure or service system. e.  That the grant of the variance will be in harmony with the general intent and purpose of this code and will not be detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare. (7)  Conditions of the variance. In granting the variance, the board may prescribe a reasonable time limit within which the action for which the variance is required shall be commenced or completed or both. In addition, the board may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this code. Violation of the conditions of a variance shall be deemed a violation of this code. (8)  Notice of appeal. Notice of appeal shall be in writing and filed within 30 calendar days after the decision is rendered by the building official. Appeals shall be in a form acceptable to the building official. (9)  Unsafe or dangerous buildings or service systems. In the case of a building, structure or service system which, in the opinion of the building official, is unsafe, unsanitary or dangerous, the building official may, in his order, limit the time for such appeals to a shorter period. (10)  Decisions of the building official. The owner of a building, structure or service system, or his duly authorized agent, may appeal a decision of the building official to the construction board of appeals whenever any one of the following conditions are claimed to exist: a.  The building official rejected or refused to approve the mode or manner of construction proposed to be followed or materials to be used in the installation or alteration of a building, structure or service system. b.  The provisions of this code do not apply to this specific case. c.  That an equally good or more desirable form of installation can be employed in any specific case. d.  The true intent and meaning of this code or any of the regulations thereunder have been misconstrued or incorrectly interpreted. (11)  Quorum and voting. A simple majority of the board shall constitute a quorum. (12)  Decisions. The construction board of appeals shall, in every case, reach a decision without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. Each decision of the board shall also include the reasons for the decision. If a decision of the board reverses or modifies a refusal, order, or disallowance of the building official or varies the application of any provision of this code, the building official shall immediately take action in accordance with such decision. Every decision shall be promptly filed in writing in the office of the building official and shall be open to public inspection. Certified copy of the decision shall be sent by mail or otherwise to the appellant. Every decision of the board shall be final, subject however to such remedy as any aggrieved party might have at law or in equity. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1; Ord. of 7-2-96, § 1; Ord. of 7-6-99, § 1; Ord. of 5-6-2003, § 2) 
Sec. 7-1-37. - Review of building permit applications, subdivisions proposals, etc., to determine safety from flooding, etc.     The chief building official shall review all building permit applications for compliance with the Athens-Clarke County Flood Protection Ordinance. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1) 
Sec. 7-1-38. - Certain permits and fees not required. (a)  No building permit or sewerage, water, or electrical inspection shall be required by Athens-Clarke County and no fee for such permit or inspection shall be charged to any contractor for making any improvement to property owned by the Regents of the University System of Georgia or by the Government of the United States of America. (b)  Reserved. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1; Ord. of 8-7-2007, § 2) 
Sec. 7-1-39. - Fire limits.     The fire limits of Athens-Clarke County shall be bounded on the north by Dougherty Street and by Dougherty Street projected; on the east by the Central of Georgia Railroad; on the south by Wray Street and by Wray Street projected; and on the west by Pulaski Street and by Pulaski Street projected. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1) 
Sec. 7-1-40. - Amendments to the building code.     In order to protect public safety, health, and welfare, the International Building Code (ICC) adopted in section 7-1-1, paragraph (a), subparagraph (1) is hereby amended by deleting section 3303.1 in its entirety and substituting the following section 3303.1 in lieu thereof and by adding a new section 3301.3 thereto as follows: Section 3303.1 Construction Documents. Construction documents and a schedule for demolition must be submitted when required by the building official. Where such information is required, no work shall be done until such construction documents or schedule, or both, are approved. The following information shall be provided as part of the documentation required for obtaining a demolition permit: 1.  A plan reflecting all construction and demolition safeguards required by this chapter. 2.  An asbestos inspection survey. 3.  A copy of the Asbestos Project Notification submitted to Georgia EPD. 4.  A Best Management Practices plan for Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control that is in compliance with Chapter 8-3 of the Athens-Clarke County Code. 5.  A Best Management Practices plan for the control of fugitive dust. 6.  A plan for the handling and disposal of building components that contain lead-based paint that is in compliance with Georgia EPD regulations. 7.  Location of all 100-year flood plain on the subject property and adjacent area features such as streams, lakes, residential areas, etc. located within 200 feet of the boundaries of the project area. 8.  Location of all required buffers on the subject property. 9.  Location of all storm drain outlets on the subject property. 10.  Additional information when deemed necessary by the Chief Building Official to clarify the location, nature, or extent of the work proposed and show in detail that it will conform to the provisions of this code and relevant laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations. The Chief Building Official is authorized to waive the submission of any construction documentation listed above when it is found that the nature of the work applied for is such that reviewing of construction documents is not necessary to obtain compliance with this code and relevant laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations. Section 3301.3 Best Management Practices for the Control of Fugitive Dust. All persons responsible for any demolition, handling of materials resulting from demolition, or the transportation or storage of materials resulting from demolition, which may result in fugitive dust shall take all reasonable precautions to prevent such dust from becoming airborne. Some reasonable precautions which could be taken to prevent dust from becoming airborne include, but are not limited to, the following: 1.  Use, where possible, of water or chemicals for control of dust in the demolition of existing buildings or structures, construction operations, the grading or clearing of land; 2.  Application of water or suitable chemicals on dirt roads, dirt drives, construction entrances, materials, stockpiles, and other surfaces which can give rise to airborne dust; 3.  Installation and use of hoods, fans, fabric filters to enclose and vent the handling of dusty materials. Adequate containment methods can be employed during sandblasting or other similar operations; 4.  Covering, at all times when in motion, open bodied trucks, transporting materials likely to give rise to airborne dust; 5.  The prompt removal of earth or other material from paved streets onto which earth or other material has been deposited. (Ord. of 2-1-2005, § 1) 
Secs. 7-1-41—7-1-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 3. - ELECTRICAL CODE 
Sec. 7-1-56. - Athens-Clarke County Electrical Code. (a)  Title. This code shall be known and may be cited as "The Athens-Clarke County Electrical Code Update," hereinafter referred to as "this code." (b)  Purpose. The purpose of this code is to provide minimum standards and/or regulations to safeguard life, limb, health, property, and public welfare of citizens of Athens-Clarke County. (c)  New work to conform. New electrical work performed in Athens-Clarke County shall conform to the following provisions: (1)  No equipment, appliance, or system as specified in this code shall be installed, altered, or repaired unless in compliance with the provisions of this code. (2)  No equipment, appliance or system as specified in this code shall be altered in any manner that would be in violation of the provisions of this code. (3)  The provisions of this code shall apply to any equipment, appliance, or system installed, altered, repaired, maintained, or used in Athens-Clarke County, including that located in Athens-Clarke County owned buildings, except as may be otherwise specifically provided for by statue or ordinance, and except that this code shall not apply to property owned by the Georgia State Board of Regents, the State of Georgia, or the United States of America. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1; Ord. of 5-6-2003, § 3) 
Sec. 7-1-57. - Powers and duties of the chief building official. (a)  Duties. It shall be the duty of the chief building official to receive applications required by this code, issue permits, and furnish the prescribed certificates. He shall make necessary inspections to see that the provisions of this code are met. He shall, when requested by proper authority, or when the interest of Athens-Clarke County so requires, make investigations in connection with matters referred to in this code and render written reports on the same to enforce compliance with this code. He shall issue such notices or orders as may be necessary to remove illegal or unsafe conditions or to secure the necessary safeguard. (b)  Inspections. Inspections of work performed shall conform to the following provisions: (1)  Inspections required under the provisions of this code shall be made by the chief building official. Upon presentation of proper credentials, he may enter, at reasonable hours, any building, structure, or premises in Athens-Clarke County to perform any duty imposed upon him by this code. (2)  All installations of any equipment, appliance or system for which a permit has been issued as prescribed in this code shall be subject to inspection by the chief building official. (3)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation, their agents or employees to conceal any electrical wiring until it has been inspected and approved. (4)  Electrical power shall not be turned on until a final inspection has been made and approval is granted by the chief building official. This section shall not prevent the issuance of temporary approvals. Where electrical power has been turned on to any installation which violates this code, the chief building official may cause such electrical power to be immediately terminated. (c)  Records. The chief building official shall keep complete records of applications or permits issued, of inspections made, of reports rendered, and of notices or orders issued, as required by this code. A complete report shall be made to the manager on or before December fifteenth of each year. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1) 
Sec. 7-1-58. - Application for permit. (a)  Permit required. It shall be unlawful to install, alter, or repair any equipment, appliance, or system provided for in this code without first filing an application in writing with the chief building official and obtaining a formal permit. (b)  Application forms. An application for permit shall be submitted in such form as the chief building official may prescribe. The following provisions apply to the application for permit: (1)  Names and addresses. Such application shall contain the full names and addresses of the applicant, contractor, and owner of property. (2)  Description of work. Such application shall describe the proposed work and shall give such information as may be required by the chief building official. (3)  Plans and specifications. Before any work is started, a complete set of plans and specifications must be submitted to the chief building official for his approval except for one- and two-family dwellings. Once approval is given, a permit may be issued and work may begin. All such plans and specifications shall bear the name and address of the designer. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1) 
Sec. 7-1-59. - Permits. (a)  Application for permit shall be examined within a reasonable time after filing. If, after examination, no objection is found to same and if it appears that the work will be in compliance with the code, the application shall be approved and a permit issued. If examination reveals otherwise, such application shall be rejected and applicant notified by a written report or otherwise. (b)  (1)  No person shall engage in the electrical contracting business as an electrical contractor unless such person has a valid electrical contractors license issued by the State Construction Industry Licensing Board, Division of Electrical Contractors. (2)  No partnership, limited liability company, or corporation shall have the right to engage in the business of electrical contracting unless there is regularly connected with such partnership, limited liability company, or corporation a person actually engaged in the performance of such business on a full-time basis that has a valid license issued to them by the State Construction Industry Licensing Board, Division of Electrical Contractors. (c)  Condition of permit. All work for which the permit was issued shall conform to the approved application, plans, and this code. All work shall be performed by the contractor whose name appears on the permit or his bona fide, full-time employees. (d)  Expiration of a permit. A permit under which no work has commenced within six months after the permit has been issued, or where work is abandoned for six months, shall expire and all fees shall be forfeited. Before work begins again, another permit must be approved and issued. It shall be the responsibility of the electrical contractor to notify the chief building official when an electrical installation is ready to be inspected. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1; Ord. of 5-6-2003, § 4) 
Sec. 7-1-60. - Violations and penalties. (a)  Violation. When a person, firm or corporation violates a section of this code, the chief building official may order that no additional permits be issued to such person, firm, or corporation until such violation has been corrected and approved. (b)  Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation who violates any of the provisions of this code or fails to comply therewith or who violates or fails to comply with any order made hereunder, or who builds in violation of any detailed statement of specification or plans submitted and approved hereunder, or any certificate or permit issued hereunder, shall for each and every such failure, violation, or noncompliance, be punished as provided in section 1-1-5. Where any offense continues from day to day, each day's continuance thereof shall be deemed a separate offense. The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1) 
Sec. 7-1-61. - Temporary service. (a)  Temporary electrical service may be installed at a location when proper forms have been submitted to the chief building official for the following purposes: (1)  To supply power for the purpose of hoisting material used in building under construction or remodeling and for the purpose of lighting such building or structure during the construction of such building. (2)  The lighting of tents or buildings used for temporary gatherings or performances where such tents or buildings will only be used for a short duration. In addition, temporary service may be installed where lighting is to be used for decorative purposes for a short duration. (3)  To allow electrical service to be part of wiring installations which have been made safe to the satisfaction of the chief building official so that testing of certain electrical equipment may occur and in order to allow tenants, lessees, or owners the use of certain completed parts of buildings before all the work is completed. (b)  Time allowed for temporary service. The application for temporary service shall state the period of time the service is required and the necessity for same. No temporary approval shall be issued for a period of more than 90 days except when specifically authorized by the chief building official. Requests for extensions shall be made in writing to the chief building official by the person, firm, or corporation holding the permits. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1) 
Sec. 7-1-62. - Special rules.     The following rules are in addition to and shall take precedence over the National Electrical Code, 1990 Edition: (1)  Branch circuits/residential. Branch circuits shall serve only one room and no circuit shall extend into another room except for control purposes, unless approved by the chief building official. (2)  Electrical fences. So called "electrical fences," consisting of an electrically charged conductor or other electrically charged devices, intended to enclose, exclude, or restrict persons or animals by electric shock, shall not be installed or used regardless of its source of supply except by special permission granted after written application to the chief building official. (3)  Reserved. (4)  Wiring method: a.  All wires installed for electric lights, heat, or power in or on buildings or structures shall be installed in iron conduits, electric metallic tubing, steel covered cables, nonmetallic tubing, or metal raceways. Nonmetallic wiring may be installed in single family residences, duplexes, apartments, and for temporary purposes. b.  Open wiring on insulators shall not be permitted in or on the building except by special permission from the chief building official. c.  Concealed knob and tube wiring shall not be permitted. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1; Ord. of 4-3-2001, § 1) 
Sec. 7-1-63. - Definitions.     The following defined terms shall apply to this article: (1)  Chief building official: The person duly appointed to fill that position or such person's authorized representative. (2)  Licensed electrician: The term "licensed electrician," as used herein, shall mean any person who shall have a current business license from Athens-Clarke County to engage in electrical contracting. A licensed electrician is also defined as a person who holds a current electrical contractor Class 1 or Class 2 certificate from the State of Georgia. A licensed electrician is also defined as a person who assumes the responsible charge, either for himself or directing of other persons, in the installation of wiring for light, heat, and power. (3)  Electrical contracting. The installation, maintenance, alteration, or repair of any electrical equipment, apparatus, control system, or electrical wiring device which is attached to or incorporated in any building or structure in this county. (4)  Electrical contractor. Any person who engages in the business of electrical contracting under express or implied contract or who bids for, offers to perform, purports to have the capacity to perform, or does perform electrical contracting services under express or implied contract. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1; Ord. of 5-6-2003, § 5) 
Sec. 7-1-64. - Appeals.     Appeals may be made from the chief building official to the construction board of appeals. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1) 
Secs. 7-1-65—7-1-74. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 4. - FIRE CODES[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- Editor's note— An ordinance of July 3, 2007, § 6, amended the Code by repealing former Art. 4, §§ 7-1-75 and 7-1-76, in its entirety and adding a new Art. 4. Former Art. 4 pertained to the Fire Prevention Code and the Life Safety Code, and derived from ordinances of January 5, 1993 and March 2, 1993. 
Sec. 7-1-75. - Fire Prevention Bureau. (a)  The Fire Codes, adopted in Section 3-7-1 shall be enforced by the Fire Prevention Bureau, which shall be operated under the supervision of the chief of the fire department. (b)  The fire marshal shall be the head of the Fire Prevention Bureau and the other members or inspectors of the Fire Prevention Bureau shall be designated as Assistant Fire Marshals for such duty by the chief of the fire department. (c)  A report of the Fire Prevention Bureau shall be made annually and transmitted to the Fire Chief of Athens-Clarke County; it shall contain all proceedings under this article and the codes referred to herein, with such statistics as the chief of the fire department may wish to include therein. The chief of the fire department shall also recommend any amendments to such codes, which, in his judgment, shall be desirable. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1; Ord. of 3-2-93, § 2, Ord. of 7-3-2007, § 6) 
Secs. 7-1-76—7-1-115. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 5. - HOUSING CODE 
Division 1. - Generally 
Secs. 7-1-116—7-1-125. - Reserved. 
Division 2. - Amendments[3] Footnotes: --- (3) --- Editor's note— Section 1 of an ordinance adopted Nov. 4, 2003, deleted former §§ 7-1-126—7-1-128 of the Code and added new provisions to the Code as § 7-1-126. Former §§ 7-1-126—7-1-128 pertained to right of entry, violations and penalties, and garbage disposal, respectively, and derived from § 1 of an ordinance adopted Jan. 5, 1993. 
Sec. 7-1-126. - Amendments to the Housing Code.     Sections 101.1, 102.3, 102.4, 102.6, 103.1, 103.2, 103.3, 103.4, 103.5, 104.4, 106.3, 106.4, 107.1, 109.5, 109.6, 111.1, 111.2, 111.2.1, 111.2.2, 111.2.3, 111.2.4, 111.2.5, 111.3, 111.4, 111.4.1, 111.5, 111.6, 111.6.1, 111.6.2, 111.7, 111.8 of Chapter 1, entitled "Administration," Section 201.3 of Chapter 2, entitled "Definitions," Sections 302.4, 304.3, and 304.14 of Chapter 3, entitled " General Requirements," and Sections 602.3, 602.4, and 604.2 of Chapter 6, entitled "Mechanical and Electrical Requirements," of the Housing Code (also known as "the Property Maintenance Code") adopted in section 7-1-1, are not adopted as a part hereof, but are deleted in their entirety and the sections set forth below are substituted and adopted in lieu thereof: 101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Property Maintenance Code of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia, hereinafter referred to as "this code". 102.3 Application of other codes. Repairs, additions or alterations to a structure, or changes of occupancy, shall be done in accordance with the procedures and provisions of the International Existing Building Code. Nothing in this code shall be construed to cancel, modify or set aside any provision of the Code of Athens-Clarke County. 102.4 Existing remedies. The provisions in this code shall not be construed to abolish or impair existing remedies of the jurisdiction or its officers or agencies relating to the removal or demolition of any structure which is dangerous, unsafe or unsanitary. 102.6 Historic buildings. The provisions of this code shall not be mandatory for existing buildings or structures designated as historic buildings by the state or local jurisdiction when such buildings or structures are judged by the code official to be safe and in the public interest of health, safety, and welfare. 103.1 General. The executive official in charge of the Department of Building Inspections shall be known as the Code Official. 103.2 Appointment. The code official shall be appointed by the manager. 103.3 Deputies. With the concurrence of the manager, the code official shall have the authority to appoint a deputy code official, other related technical officers, inspectors and other employees. With the concurrence of the manager, the Fire Marshal shall be delegated the responsibilities for enforcement of the provisions of chapter 7. 103.4 Liability. The code official, officer or employee charged with the enforcement of this code, while acting for the jurisdiction, shall not thereby be rendered liable personally, and is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage accruing to persons or property as a result of an act required or permitted in the discharge of official duties. Any suit instituted against any officer or employee because of an act performed by that officer or employee in the lawful discharge of duties and under the provisions of this code shall be defended by the legal representative of the jurisdiction until the final termination of the proceedings. The code official or any subordinate shall not be liable for costs in an action, suit or proceeding that is instituted in pursuance of the provisions of this code; and any officer of the department of building inspection, acting in good faith and without malice, shall be free from liability for acts performed under any of its provisions or by reason of any act or omission in the performance of official duties in connection therewith. 103.5 Fees. The fees for activities and services performed by the department in carrying out its responsibilities under this code shall be indicated in Article 10 of Title 7 of the Code of Athens-Clarke County. 104.4 Right of entry. The code official is authorized to enter the structure or premises at reasonable times with consent of either the occupant, the owner, or person in charge to inspect subject to constitutional restrictions on unreasonable searches and seizures. If entry is refused or not obtained, the code official is authorized to pursue recourse as provided by law. 104.4.1 Inspection Warrant. The code official, in addition to other procedures provided, may obtain an inspection warrant under the conditions specified in this article. The warrant shall authorize the director or agents thereof to conduct a search or inspection of property, either with or without the consent of the person whose property is to be searched or inspected, under the conditions set out below. 104.4.2 Warrant issued. Inspection warrants may be issued by the Municipal Court when the issuing judge is satisfied that all of the following conditions are met. A.  The person seeking the warrant must establish under oath or affirmation that the property to be inspected is to be inspected as part of a legally authorized program of inspections which includes that property or that there is probable cause for believing that there is a condition, object, activity, or circumstance which legally justifies such an inspection of that property. B.  The issuing judge determines that the issuance of the warrant is authorized by this code. 104.4.3 Warrant valid. The inspection warrant shall be validly issued only if it meets all of the following requirements: A.  The warrant is attached to the affidavit required to be made in order to obtain the warrant. B.  The warrant describes, either directly or by reference to the affidavit, the property upon which the inspection is to occur and is sufficiently accurate that the executor of the warrant and the owner or possessor of the property can reasonably determine from it the property for which the warrant authorizes an inspection. C.  The warrant indicates the conditions, objects, activities, or circumstances which the inspection is intended to check or reveal. D.  The warrant refers, in general terms, to the ordinance provisions sought to be enforced. E.  The warrant shall specify the dates and time for making such inspection. 106.3 Prosecution of violation. If the notice of violation is not complied with, the code official shall institute the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to require the removal or termination of the unlawful occupancy of the structure in violation of the provisions of this code or of the order or direction made pursuant thereto. Any action taken by the authority having jurisdiction on such premises shall be charged against the real estate upon which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real estate. 106.4 Violation Penalties. Any person who shall violate a provision of this code, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof shall be prosecuted within the limits provided by Athens-Clarke code section 7-1-2(d), (e), and (f). Each day that a violation continues after the date for corrective action specified in a notice of violation shall be deemed a separate offense. 107.1 Notice to owner or to person or persons responsible. Whenever the code official determines that there has been a violation of this code or has grounds to believe that a violation has occurred, notice shall be given to the owner or the person or persons responsible therefore in the manner prescribed in sections 107.2 and 107.3. Notices for condemnation procedures shall also comply with section 108.3. 109.5 Costs of emergency repairs. Costs incurred in the performance of emergency work shall be paid by the jurisdiction. The legal counsel of the jurisdiction may institute appropriate action against the owner of the premises where the unsafe structure is or was located for the recovery of such costs. 109.6 Hearing. Any person ordered to take emergency measures shall comply with such order forthwith. Any affected person shall thereafter, upon petition directed to the Administrative Hearing Officer, be afforded a hearing pursuant to the provisions of Athens-Clarke County Code section 1-5-1. 110.5 Demolition of Structures. Demolition of any structure shall not begin until all of the following conditions are satisfied: A.  Permit. A permit for demolition has been secured from the code official. If the structure is designated an historic property, then a certificate of appropriateness must be obtained pursuant to the provisions of section 8-5-6 of the Code of Athens-Clarke County. B.  Utilities. All utilities are cut off and capped at the street. (2)  Demolition Permit. A.  Cleared site. Within the time specified in the demolition permit, all debris, trash, litter, rubbish, rubble and foundation exposed above the ground level shall be removed from the premises. B.  Grading. Within the time specified in the demolition permit, any excavation or other depression must be filled to existing grade with clean dirt containing no more than twenty-five (25) percent stone or masonry, and all filled areas must be adequately sloped and drained. C.  Erosion Control. During demolition activities, erosion control best management practices must be utilized. After demolition is completed, the site must be stabilized as quickly as practicable, and permanent vegetation and structural erosion control measures installed as soon as practicable. 111.1 Application for appeal. Any person directly affected by a decision of the code official or a notice or order issued under this article shall have the right to appeal to the Administrative Hearing Officer pursuant to the provisions of Athens-Clarke County Code section 1-5-1, provided that a written application for appeal is filed within ten (10) days after the day the decision, notice or order was served. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this article or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this article do not fully apply, or the requirements of this article are adequately satisfied by other means. 111.2. Reserved. 111.2.1. Reserved. 111.2.2. Reserved. 111.2.3. Reserved. 111.2.4. Reserved. 111.2.5. Reserved. 111.3 Reserved. 111.4 Open hearing. All hearings before the Administrative Hearing Officer shall be open to the public. The appellant, the appellant's representative, the code official and any person whose interests are affected shall be given an opportunity to be heard. 111.4.1. Reserved. 111.5 Reserved. 111.6 Administrative Hearing Officer Decision. The decision of the Administrative Hearing Officer shall be recorded. Copies shall be served on the appellant by registered mail and furnished to the code official. The code official shall take immediate action in accordance with the decision of the Administrative Hearing Officer. 111.6.1 Reserved. 111.6.2 Reserved. 111.7 Court review. Any aggrieved person, whether or not a previous party of the appeal, shall have the right to apply to the appropriate court for a writ of certiorari to correct errors of law. Application for review shall be made in the manner and time required by law following the filing of the decision by the Administrative Hearing Officer. 111.8 Stays of enforcement. Appeals of notice and orders (other than Imminent Danger notices) shall stay the enforcement of the notice and order until the appeal is heard by the Administrative Hearing Officer. 201.3 Terms defined in other codes. Where terms are not defined in this code and are defined in the International Building Code, International Fire Code, The Code of Athens-Clarke County, International Plumbing Code, International Mechanical Code, International Existing Building Code, or the National Electrical Code, (NFPA 70) such terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them as in those codes. 302.4. Reserved. 304.3 Premises identification. Buildings shall have approved address numbers placed in a position to be plainly legible and visible from the street or road fronting the property. These numbers shall contrast with their background. Address numbers shall conform to the requirements listed in section 7-3-12(b)5 of the Code of Athens-Clarke County. 304.14 Insect screens. During the period from January 1 to December 31, every door, window and other outside opening required for ventilation of habitable rooms, food preparation areas, food service areas or any areas where products to be included or utilized in food for human consumption are processed, manufactured, packaged, or stored, shall be supplied with approved tightly fitting screens of not less than 16 mesh per inch (16 mesh per 25 mm) and every swinging door shall have a self-closing device in good working condition. Exception: Screens shall not be required where other approved means, such as air curtains or insect repellant fans, are employed. 602.3 Heat supply. Every owner and operator of any building who rents, leases or lets one or more dwelling unit, rooming unit, dormitory or guestroom on terms, either expressed or implied, to furnish heat to the occupants thereof shall supply heat during the period from November 1 to March 31 to maintain a temperature of not less than 68°F (20°C) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms, and toilet rooms. Exceptions: 1.  When the outdoor temperature is below the winter outdoor design temperature for the locality, maintenance of the minimum room temperature shall not be required provided that the heating system is operating at its full capacity. The winter outdoor design temperature for the locality shall be as indicated in Appendix D of the International Plumbing Code. 2.  In areas where the average monthly temperature is above 30°F (-1°C) a minimum temperature of 65°F (18°C) shall be maintained. 602.4 Occupiable work spaces. Indoor occupiable work spaces shall be supplied with heat during the period from November 1 to March 31 to maintain a temperature of not less than 65°F (18°C) during the period the spaces are occupied. Exceptions: 1.  Processing, storage and operation areas that require cooling or special temperature conditions. 2.  Areas in which persons are primarily engaged in vigorous physical activities. 604.2 Service. The size and usage of appliances and equipment shall serve as a basis for determining the need for additional facilities in accordance with the National Electrical Code (NFPA 70). Dwelling units shall be served by a three-wire, 120/240 volt, single-phase electrical service having a rating of not less than 60 amperes. (Ord. of 11-4-2003, § 1) 
Secs. 7-1-127—7-1-145. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 6. - MECHANICAL CODE 
Sec. 7-1-146. - Provisions cumulative.     The provisions of this article are cumulative to the provisions of the mechanical code adopted in section 7-1-1. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1) 
Sec. 7-1-147. - Installation of equipment under combustible stairs.     No heat-producing appliances, mechanical refrigeration equipment or other equipment that would cause or spread fire shall be installed or located under stairways built in whole or in part of combustible materials. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1) 
Sec. 7-1-148. - Placement of radiators, heat producing appliances, etc.     Unless otherwise approved, no coil, radiator, heat-producing appliance or steam raiser shall be placed in an exit stairway or landing, or in an aisle of a floor area in which seating accommodations are provided, unless the same is placed in a recess formed in or by the walls or partitions and guarded by a substantial metal screen of a height of not less than six feet. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1) 
Secs. 7-1-149, 7-1-150. - Reserved. Editor's note— Sections 3 and 4 of an ordinance adopted April 3, 2001, deleted former sections 7-1-149 and 7-1-150 of the Code, which pertained to ventilation for basement and subbasement garages and recirculating systems in garages and airplane hangars, respectively, and both derived from section 1 of an ordinance adopted Jan. 5, 1993. 
Sec. 7-1-151. - Dangerous or unsafe systems, appliances or equipment—Generally. (a)  Systems, appliances or equipment covered by this article that may be found upon inspection to have become dangerous or unsafe shall be made safe as determined by the chief building official, or the use of same shall be discontinued. (b)  The term "dangerous or unsafe systems, appliances or equipment" shall include systems, appliances or equipment structurally unsafe, unstable or unsanitary, constituting a fire hazard, unsuitable or improper for the use to which they are put, constituting a hazard to health or safety because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation or obsolescence, or otherwise dangerous to life or property. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1) 
Sec. 7-1-152. - Same—Notice; compliance.     Upon receipt of information that a system, appliance or piece of equipment covered by this article is unsafe, the chief building official shall inspect the premises. If it is found that an unsafe condition exists, the chief building official shall have served on the owner, executor, administrator, agent, lessee or other persons who may have a vested or contingent interest in the same a written notice containing a description of the particulars in which the systems, appliances or equipment are unsafe, and setting a hearing date before the administrative hearing officer for appropriate disposition of the matter. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1) 
Sec. 7-1-153. - Conditioned air contracting. (a)  No person shall engage in the business of conditioned air contracting unless such person has a valid license issued to them from the State Construction Licensing Board, Division of Conditioned Air Contractors. (b)  No partnership, limited liability company, or corporation shall engage in the business of conditioned air contracting unless there is a person regularly connected with such partnership, limited liability company, or corporation actually engaged in the performance of such business on a full-time basis that has a valid license issued to them by the State Construction Industry Licensing Board, Division of Conditioned Air Contractors. (Ord. of 5-6-2003, § 6) 
Sec. 7-1-154. - Definitions.     Conditioned air contracting. The installation, repair, or service of conditioned air systems or conditioned air equipment.     Conditioned air contractor. An individual who is engaged in conditioned air contracting under express or implied contract or who bids for, offers to perform, purports to have the capacity to perform, or does perform conditioned air contracting services under express or implied contract. (Ord. of 5-6-2003, § 6) 
Sec. 7-1-155. - Conditioned air permit required.     It shall be unlawful to install, alter, or repair any heating, ventilation, air conditioning, or gas equipment or system covered under the Georgia State Mechanical or Gas Codes without first filing an application with the chief building official and obtaining a formal permit. (Ord. of 5-6-2003, § 6) 
Secs. 7-1-156—7-1-165. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 7. - PLUMBING CODE 
Sec. 7-1-166. - Provisions cumulative.     The provisions of this article are cumulative to the provisions of the plumbing code adopted in section 7-1-1. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1) 
Sec. 7-1-167. - Licensing of plumbers. (a)  License required. Before any person shall engage in the plumbing business, he shall be qualified as set forth in this chapter and a license shall be obtained from Athens-Clarke County as required. Any plumbing work done under a State of Georgia Master Plumber's License shall at all times be under the immediate supervision and control of a master or journeyman plumber. (b)  Qualifications. Whosoever desires to enter the plumbing business or offers plumbing services shall appear before the chief building official and provide proof of a plumbing license issued by the State of Georgia and a business license issued by Athens-Clarke County. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1) 
Sec. 7-1-168. - Utility contractors.     Utility contractors are authorized to do work on government-owned and/or operated sewer and/or water systems from a point five feet outside a building or structure to the public sewer and/or water system; such contractor shall be subject to the following requirements: (1)  Utility contractor shall have a business license to operate as such. (2)  They shall be required to secure a permit for sewer construction and/or repair. (3)  The permit fees for plumbing shall be as set forth in section 7-1-557 herein. (4)  All work and materials shall be in conformity with the Georgia State Plumbing Code and any other rules as may be adopted by the mayor and commission of Athens-Clarke County. (5)  Inspections of the construction shall be required and such inspections shall be made by the inspection department and/or the public utilities department. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1; Ord. of 7-2-96, § 1; Ord. of 7-6-99, § 1) 
Sec. 7-1-169. - Maintenance.     All plumbing and all parts thereof shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. All devices or safeguards which are required by this article shall be maintained in good working order. The owner, or his designated agent, shall be responsible for the maintenance of plumbing. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1) 
Sec. 7-1-170. - Violations and penalties.     Any person who violates a provision of this article or fails to comply herewith or with any of the provisions hereof or violates a detailed statement or plans submitted and approved hereunder shall be punished as provided by section 1-1-5 of this Code. Each such person, firm or corporation shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this code are committed or continued and upon conviction of any such violation such person shall be punished within the limits of and as provided by section 1-1-5 of this Code. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1) 
Sec. 7-1-171. - Requirements.     Any requirements necessary for the safety, strength or stability of an existing or proposed plumbing installation or for the safety of the occupants of a building or structure not specifically covered in this article, shall be determined by the plumbing official. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1) 
Sec. 7-1-172. - Permits and fees. (a)  Plumbing permits. It shall be unlawful to install or alter any equipment, appliance, or plumbing system covered under the Georgia State Plumbing Code without first filing an application in writing with the chief building official and obtaining a plumbing permit. (b)  Fees. No permit shall be valid until the fees prescribed in Chapter 7-1, Article 10 have been paid. No amendment to a permit shall be approved until the additional fees, if any, have been paid. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1; Ord. of 5-6-2003, § 7) 
Sec. 7-1-173. - Name, license or bond used to obtain permit fraudulently.     No person engaged in the business of plumbing shall allow his name to be used by any person directly or indirectly to obtain a permit or for the construction of any work under his name, license or bond nor shall he make any misrepresentations or omissions in his return. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1) 
Sec. 7-1-174. - Sewage disposal; proposed buildings.     Where an application is made for a permit for the construction of a building, the chief building official shall require a showing by the applicant as to the method of sewage disposal that is planned as part of the proposed construction. Where a septic tank system is planned for the disposal of liquid waste from the building or building(s) to be constructed, the applicant shall furnish the chief building official with a copy of an individual sewage disposal system construction permit or other written authorization of the [Athens-]Clarke County Health Department. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1) 
Secs. 7-1-175—7-1-224. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 8. - SWIMMING POOLS 
Sec. 7-1-225. - Code adopted.     The code adopted in 7-1-1 shall be the swimming pool code for Athens-Clarke County. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1) 
Sec. 7-1-226. - Definitions.     For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:     Residential family swimming pool: A swimming pool used or intended to be used solely by the owner, operator or lessee thereof and his family and by friends invited to use it without payment of any fee.     Swimming pool: A body of water in an artificial or semiartificial receptacle or other container, located either partly or entirely outdoors. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1) 
Sec. 7-1-227. - Exceptions.     All swimming pools operated and maintained in conjunction with or by clubs, apartments complexes, motels, hotels, community associations, public bodies, the University of Georgia or any agency thereof, fraternal orders or veterans' organizations are expressly excluded from regulations under this article. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1) 
Sec. 7-1-228. - Residential family swimming pool; application for building permit.     No person shall construct a residential family swimming pool without making a written application to the chief building official for a permit. The application shall be accompanied by plans, specifications and explanatory data. The plans shall be drawn to scale, indicating the dimensions of the pool deck, and including such other information as may be required by the chief building official. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1) 
Sec. 7-1-229. - Fences, walls, gates and latches; other protective devices or structures. (a)  Every swimming pool which has a minimum depth of 24 inches shall be completely surrounded by a fence or wall not less than four feet in height, which shall be so constructed as not to have openings, holes or gaps larger than four inches in any dimensions except for doors and gates. If a picket fence is erected or maintained, the horizontal dimension shall not exceed four inches. A dwelling house or accessory building may be used as a part of the structure. (b)  All gates or doors opening through the enclosure shall be equipped with a self-closing and self-latching device for keeping the gate or door securely closed at all times when not in actual use, except that the door of any dwelling which forms a part of the enclosure need not be so equipped. (c)  This section shall be applicable to all new residential family swimming pools hereafter constructed. This section shall apply to all existing residential family swimming pools which have a minimum depth of 24 inches of water, except that the height of the fence or wall shall be four feet. Every person in possession of land within Athens-Clarke County, either as owner, purchaser, lessee, tenant or licensee, upon which is situated a family residential swimming pool having a minimum depth of 24 inches shall provide and maintain such fence or wall as required in this section. (d)  The chief building official may make modifications in individual cases, upon a showing of good cause, with respect to the height, nature or location of the fence, wall, gates or latches, or the necessity therefor; provided, however, that the protection as sought under this section is not reduced thereby. The chief building official may permit other protective devices or structures to be used so long as the degree of protection afforded by the substitute devices or structures is not less than the protection afforded by the wall, fence, gate and latch described in this section. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1; Ord. of 9-6-2005, § 1) 
Secs. 7-1-230—7-1-444. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 9. - UNDERGROUND UTILITIES 
Sec. 7-1-445. - Definitions.     For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:     District: The area comprising the downtown area of Athens-Clarke County as located within the fire limits as defined in section 7-1-39 of this Code. The mayor and commission may designate additional areas to be covered under the provisions of this article by ordinance.     Power or utility system: All persons or entities supplying electricity, communication or similar or associated service by means of electrical materials or devices. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1; Ord. of 7-2-96, § 1; Ord. of 7-6-99, § 1) 
Sec. 7-1-446. - Findings; purpose.     The mayor and commission find that utility or power poles, overhead utility wires and associated overhead structures are hazardous to automotive and pedestrian traffic, are dangerous in severe weather, interfere with firefighting equipment, contribute to conditions of urban blight, and are detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare. It is the purpose of this article to encourage such utility companies to voluntarily place its facilities underground and to make mandatory connection therewith whenever such underground facilities are available. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1; Ord. of 7-2-96, § 1; Ord. of 7-6-99, § 1) 
Sec. 7-1-447. - Exceptions.     The mayor and commission by resolution may except the following from the provisions of this article: Any governmental facility or equipment installed under the supervision and to the satisfaction of the director of public works. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1; Ord. of 7-2-96, § 1; Ord. of 7-6-99, § 1) 
Sec. 7-1-448. - Connection to system where available; time for compliance. (a)  Whenever underground power or utility facilities are available in the district described in this article, any user, consumer, person, or entity desiring to utilize such service shall connect to the underground power or utility system within the time period herein specified and as provided hereby. (b)  The period of time for compliance shall be a period of 90 days after such underground power or utility facilities become available, unless such period is extended by the chief building official as hereinafter set forth. The chief building official may extend the time for compliance in case of emergency or other unusual circumstance or upon a showing of unusual circumstance of a nature causing extreme hardship or on account of a shortage of materials, war, restraint by public authorities, strikes, labor disturbances, civil disobedience or any other circumstances beyond the control of any person affected hereby. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1) 
Sec. 7-1-449. - Failure to make connection.     Any user, consumer, or person desiring to utilize a power or utility system who shall fail within a period of 90 days after underground power or utility facilities become available to comply with the provisions of this article with respect to connection to such underground power or utility facilities shall be punished as provided for in section 1-1-5 unless an extension has been granted as provided herein. Each day of noncompliance shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1) 
Secs. 7-1-450—7-1-554. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 10. - PERMIT FEES 
Sec. 7-1-555. - General building fees. (a)  General building fees. The following fees shall apply to construction in general and shall be computed on a valuation rounded to the nearest thousand: (1)  Where the valuation does not exceed $100.00, no fee shall be required, unless an inspection is necessary, in which case there shall be a minimum fee of $75.00. (2)  For a valuation over $100.00 up to and including $5,000.00, there shall be a minimum fee of $75.00. (3)  For a valuation over $5,000.00, there shall be a Permit Inspection Fee equal to the valuation amount that exceeds $5,000.00 multiplied by the Permit Fee Multiplier (PFM), plus the $75.00 minimum fee. (4)  The Permit Fee Multiplier shall be .0030. (5)  Valuation of construction on a square foot basis shall be as set forth in the Athens-Clarke County Building Valuation Table, which is posted in the Athens-Clarke County Building Inspection Department and hereby made a part of this ordinance by reference herein. (6)  The Athens-Clarke County Building Valuation Table, the Permit Fee Multiplier and building permit fees will be reviewed for adjustment biannually. (b)  Swimming pool permits. Permit fees for swimming pools shall be in accordance with subsection (a) hereinabove. (c)  Temporary building permits . The fee for a temporary building permit shall be $75.00. (d)  Mobile home permits: (1)  The fee for Class A mobile home permits shall be in accordance with subsection (a) hereinabove. (2)  The fee for a Class B mobile home permit shall be $75.00. (3)  Manufactured homes requiring an inspection before being relocated into or within Athens-Clarke County will be charged a fee of $75.00 for the purpose of such inspection before said manufactured home can be moved. An additional charge of $0.30 per mile will be charged for travel by Athens-Clarke County officials outside of Athens-Clarke County. (e)  Moving permits. The permit fee for the moving of any building or structure shall be $100.00. Permit fees for on-site construction shall be in accordance with subsection (a) hereinabove.     When required, a performance bond shall be filed with the permit application. (f)  Demolition permits . The permit fee for the demolition of buildings and structures shall be as follows: (1)  Per residential structure ..... $75.00 (2)  Per nonresidential structure ..... $75.00 (3)  Per structure within the Central Business Zone ..... $125.00     When required, a performance bond shall be filed with the permit application. (g)  Certificate of occupancy. The permit fees for the issuance of a certificate of occupancy shall be as follows: (1)  Per temporary certificate ..... $100.00 (2)  Per regular certificate ..... No Charge (3)  Per file search duplicate ..... 25.00 (h)  Grading certificates. The fee for a grading permit shall be $30.00. (i)  Gas permits. The permit fee for gas piping work shall be $75.00 plus $2.00 per fixture. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1; Ord. of 5-4-93, § 1; Ord. of 5-4-99, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 5-2-2000, § 2; Ord. of 4-3-2007, §§ 1—5; Ord. of 6-7-2011, §§ 1—5; Ord. of 6-4-2013, §§ 1—5) 
Sec. 7-1-556. - Electrical codes. (a)  The minimum fee for residential electrical permits shall be $75.00 per dwelling unit plus $2.00 for each circuit. (b)  The minimum fee for nonresidential electrical permits shall be $75.00 per tenant space plus $2.00 for each circuit. (c)  The fee for an electrical repair permit shall be $75.00. (d)  The fee for a service change only shall be $75.00. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1; Ord. of 5-4-93, § 2; Ord. of 4-3-2007, § 6; Ord. of 6-7-2011, § 6; Ord. of 6-4-2013, § 6) 
Sec. 7-1-557. - Plumbing codes. (a)  Residential permits . The minimum fee for residential plumbing permits shall be $75.00 per dwelling unit plus $2.00 per fixture. (b)  Nonresidential systems permit . The minimum fee for a plumbing permit for a nonresidential system shall be $75.00 per tenant unit plus $2.00 per fixture. (c)  Plumbing repair permits . The fee for plumbing repair permits shall be $75.00. (d)  Fire protection systems permits . The fee for fire protection systems shall be $75.00. (e)  Private potable water distribution systems and sanitary collection systems . There shall be a minimum fee of $75.00 for each private potable water distribution system and/or sanitary collection system for site locations. (f)  On-site stormwater systems . There shall be a fee of $75.00 for on-site stormwater systems when piped. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1; Ord. of 5-4-93, § 3; Ord. of 4-3-2007, § 7; Ord. of 6-7-2011, § 7; Ord. of 6-4-2013, § 6) 
Sec. 7-1-558. - Heating, ventilating and air conditioning fees.     The fees for heating, ventilating and air conditioning shall be as follows: (a)  Commercial and residential heating and/or cooling systems: (1)  Commercial and residential, per tenant space $75.00 plus $2.00 per drop. (2)  Freestanding $75.00 plus $2.00 each unit. (3)  Floor furnace $75.00 plus $2.00 each unit. (4)  Wall furnace $75.00 plus $2.00 each unit. (5)  Hot water or steam $75.00 plus $2.00 per radiator. (6)  Unit heaters $75.00 plus $2.00 each unit. (b)  Other: (1)  Refrigeration $75.00 plus $2.00 per ton. (2)  Exhaust fan $75.00 each unit over one HP plus $2.00 per drop. (3)  Grease/vent hoods $75.00 plus $75.00 per hood. (4)  Ductwork repair only $75.00. (5)  Incinerator $75.00 plus $75.00 per unit. (c)  Equipment repair/replacement permit fees. The permit fees for repair or replacement of any equipment listed in subsections (a) through (b) hereinabove shall be in accordance with the above fees. (d)  Fireplace and stove installation fees. Fireplace and stove installation fee shall be $75.00. (e)  Gas permit. When heating, ventilating and air conditioning work is performed and gas piping work is involved, then a gas permit shall be required. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1; Ord. of 5-4-93, § 4; Ord. of 5-6-2003, §§ 8, 9; Ord. of 4-3-2007, § 8; Ord. of 6-7-2011, § 8; Ord. of 6-4-2013, § 8) 
Sec. 7-1-559. - Special type permit fees. (a)  Variance applications to construction board of appeals. There shall be a fee of $50.00 for each variance application to the construction board of appeals. (b)  Inspections made outside normal working hours. There shall be a fee of $75.00 per hour, with a two-hour minimum charge, for any inspection that is made outside of the normal working hours of the building inspection department. Such inspections shall be made at the discretion of the chief building official. (c)  Reinspection due to failure to comply. There shall be additional fees as set forth herein below for each reinspection made due to the failure of the work to comply with the regulations prescribed by the Code of Athens-Clarke County: First trip (one-half hour minimum) ..... $35.00 Second trip ..... 50.00 Third or subsequent trips ..... 75.00 Any person aggrieved by the decision of the building official to charge a reinspection fee may appeal the decision to the administrative hearing officer pursuant to the provisions of section 1-5-1 of the Code of Athens-Clarke County. (d)  Any person who commences any work on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system before obtaining the necessary permits shall be subject to a fee of 100 percent of the usual permit fee in addition to the required permit fees. The payment of this fee shall not exempt any person from compliance with all other provisions of either this code or the technical codes nor from any penalty prescribed by law. (e)  Whenever any work for which a permit is required by this code has been commenced without first obtaining said permit, a special investigation shall be made before the permit may be issued for such work. (f)  Plan review fees . Any project subject to review for code compliance shall be charged as follows: (1)  Projects valued from $0.00 to $30,000 ..... $75.00 (2)  Projects valued $30,001.00 and up shall be equal to one-half the building permit fee as set forth in section 7-1-555(a). (g)  Plan submittal fee. Any project subject to review for code compliance shall be charged a plan submittal fee of $250.00. (h)  Secured Structure Permit. The permit fee for a secured structure permit shall be $250.00. (i)  Temporary Secured Structure Permit Pending Compliance by Demolition or Repair. The permit fee shall be $50.00. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1; Ord. of 5-4-93, §§ 5, 6; Ord. of 5-4-99, §§ 3, 4; Ord. of 10-4-2005, § 1; Ord. of 4-3-2007, § 9; Ord. of 6-2-2009, § 3; Ord. of 6-7-2011, § 9; Ord. of 6-4-2013, § 9) 
Sec. 7-1-560. - User Fees—Department of Transportation and Public Works Land Development Services.     The following fees shall be charged for departmental review and/or inspection of the following permits and plans: (1)  Land Disturbance Activity Permit: Permit for construction and stormwater management plan inspection: $240.00 per disturbed acre per month (valid for six months). See Fee Schedule Table below. a.  Permits must be renewed after six months if project is not complete. b.  Renewal Permit fees will be charged based on site activity as follows: i.  Active Grading: $40.00 per remaining disturbed acres per months remaining; ii.  Second Phase Stabilization (second Phase Erosion and Sedimentation Plan Active, paving base material installed, underground infrastructure installed): $30.00 per total project disturbed acres per months remaining; iii.  Final Stabilization (Final Phase Erosion and Sedimentation Plan Active, Paving Complete): $15.00 per total project acres per months remaining. (2)  Right-of-Way Encroachment Permit: Permit for right-of-way encroachment plan review and inspection: $60.00. (3)  Driveway permit: Permit for driveway plan review and inspection: $60.00, or $30.00 for repair work on an existing driveway within the right-of-way. (4)  Construction Plan Review: Review fee for construction plans: $360.00. Fee covers two reviews. See Fee Schedule Table below. If plans are not approvable after second review due to applicant, a re-review fee of $250.00 will be charged to cover remaining submittals. (5)  Stormwater Management Plan Review: Review fee for stormwater plans: $275.00. Fee covers two reviews. See Fee Schedule Table below. If plans are not approvable after second review due to applicant, a re-review fee of $250.00 will be charged to cover remaining submittals. (6)  Erosion and Sedimentation Control and NPDES Fees: Fee is for review of erosion and sedimentation control plans and inspections: $40.00 per disturbed acre. (7)  Re-inspection fee: Fee charged to cover administrative and inspection costs associated with re-inspection of deficient construction practices, deficient erosion and sediment control best management practices, or failed final inspections: $200.00 per inspection. (8)  Lane Closure Permit: Fee is for review and inspection of temporary lane closures within the Athens-Clarke County right-of-way: $60.00. (9)  Traffic Control Plan Review: Review fee for traffic control plans that will require road closures or other rerouting of traffic during construction: $150.00. (10)  Flood Plain Construction Permit: Fee is charged for review of plans and construction in flood plain: $60.00. (11)  Traffic Impact Analysis Report Review: Review fee for traffic impact analysis reports: $275.00. Fee covers two reviews. See Fee Schedule Table below. If report is not approvable after second review due to applicant, a re-review fee of $250.00 will be charged to cover remaining submittals. The above fees will be charged in accordance with the fee schedule in the Table below so that some of the fees will have incremental increases over three fiscal years: FEE SCHEDULE TABLE Fee Category FY2010 Fee* FY2011 Fee* FY2012 Fee* Land Disturbance Activity 6 Month Permit $80.00 per disturbed acre per month $160.00 per disturbed acre per month $240 per disturbed acre per month Right-of-Way Encroachment Permit $60.00 per permit $60.00 per permit $60.00 per permit Driveway Permit $60.00 per permit $60.00 per permit $60.00 per permit for new construction. $30.00 per permit for repairs on existing driveways. Construction Plan Review $120.00 per project for 2 reviews $240.00 per project for 2 reviews $360.00 per project for 2 reviews Stormwater Management Plan Review $91.00 per project for 2 reviews $184.00 per project for 2 reviews $275.00 per project for 2 reviews Erosion and Sedimentation Control and NPDES Fees $40.00 per disturbed acre $40.00 per disturbed acre $40.00 per disturbed acre Reinspection fee $200.00 per inspection $200.00 per inspection $200.00 per inspection Lane Closure Permit $60.00 per permit $60.00 per permit $60.00 per permit Traffic Control Plan Review $150.00 per project for 2 reviews $150.00 per project for 2 reviews $150.00 per project for 2 reviews Flood Plain Construction Permit $60.00 per project $60.00 per project $60.00 per project Traffic Impact Analysis Report Review $91.00 per project for 2 reviews $184.00 per project for 2 reviews $275.00 per project for 2 reviews  *The FY2010 fees beginning on January 1, 2010, the FY2011 fees beginning on July 1, 2010, and the full FY2012 fees beginning on July 1, 2011. (Ord. of 6-1-93, § 1; Ord. of 11-3-2009, § 2; Ord. of 10-7-2014, §§ 3, 4 ) 
Sec. 7-1-561. - Fire marshal; reinspection fee.     There shall be a fee of $30.00 on all reinspections performed by the fire marshal. (Ord. of 11-1-94, § 1) 
Secs. 7-1-562—7-1-599. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 11. - MANUFACTURED HOMES 
Sec. 7-1-600. - Scope.     These provisions shall be applicable only to manufactured homes and shall apply to the following: (a)  Construction, alteration, and repair of any foundation system for the installation of a manufactured home. (b)  Installation, addition, alteration, repair, or maintenance of any new or used manufactured home, or any service equipment necessary to connect the manufactured home to water, fuel, electrical power, and sewage systems. (c)  Alterations, additions, or repairs to existing manufactured homes. (d)  Relocation into Athens-Clarke County of any manufactured home that is not presently located within Athens-Clarke County. (e)  Relocation within Athens-Clarke County of any manufactured home presently located within Athens-Clarke County. (Ord. of 5-2-2000, § 1) 
Sec. 7-1-601. - Additions, alterations, and repairs.     Additions, alterations, or repairs to manufactured homes and their service equipment shall comply with all the requirements of the provisions for new construction, except as specifically provided in this section. Non-structural alterations and repairs to an existing manufactured home may be made with materials equivalent to those of which the manufactured home is constructed if it causes no adverse effect on any structural or fire protection component, and subject to the building official's approval. Additions shall not be structurally supported by, or attached to, the manufactured home unless engineering calculations are submitted to substantiate any proposed structural connection. Additions to a manufactured home shall conform to one of the following: (a)  Be certified under National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 (42 U.S.C. Section 401, et seq.) (b)  Be designed and constructed in conformance with the construction codes adopted by Athens-Clarke County. (c)  Minor alterations, and repairs to existing manufactured homes and their service equipment may be made in accordance with the codes in effect at the time the original installation was made subject to approval of the building official, and provided such alteration or repair will not cause the manufactured home or its service equipment to become unsafe or unsanitary. (Ord. of 5-2-2000, § 1) 
Sec. 7-1-602. - Existing homes.     Manufactured homes lawfully in existence at the time of the adoption of this article may have their use, occupancy, maintenance, and repair continued if the use, maintenance or repair does not create a hazard to life, health or property, as set forth in the Code of Athens-Clarke County. (Ord. of 5-2-2000, § 1) 
Sec. 7-1-603. - Property maintenance.     All manufactured homes and their service equipment shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. The owner or his/her designated agent shall be responsible for the maintenance of the manufactured home, accessory structures, and the associated service equipment. (Ord. of 5-2-2000, § 1) 
Sec. 7-1-604. - Location.     Manufactured homes which are to be relocated within Athens-Clarke County must comply with these provisions: (a)  A used manufactured home may be moved into or relocated within Athens-Clarke County provided the home was manufactured after June 15, 1976, and further provided one of the following criterion is met: (1)  A manufactured home not presently located within Athens-Clarke County must pass an inspection by a professional architect or engineer licensed in the State of Georgia, or by a building inspector certified by the Southern Building Code Congress. This inspection is to verify that the home is structurally sound, that the exterior is free from rot and rust and is uniform in appearance, and that all systems including smoke detectors, plumbing, electrical, heating, ventilation, and gas are in safe working condition. Proof of inspection must be provided as a sworn affidavit on a form provided by the Athens-Clarke County Building Official. The Athens-Clarke County Building Official reserves the right to perform a review inspection at no charge to the owner prior to the home being moved into Athens-Clarke County; or (2)  Said manufactured home, not presently located in Athens-Clarke County, must pass an inspection by the Athens-Clarke County Building Inspection Department prior to being relocated into Athens-Clarke County. Manufactured homes requiring an inspection before being moved into Athens-Clarke County will be charged a fee as stated in section 7-1-555(d). (3)  A manufactured home that is presently located within Athens-Clarke County must pass an inspection by the Athens-Clarke County Building Inspection Department prior to being relocated within Athens-Clarke County. Manufactured homes requiring an inspection before being relocated within Athens-Clarke County will be charged a fee as stated in section 7-1-555(d). (b)  Manufactured homes and accessory buildings shall be located on the property in accordance with the applicable codes and ordinances of Athens-Clarke County. (Ord. of 5-2-2000, § 1; Ord. of 8-3-2010, § 1) 
Sec. 7-1-605. - Permits.     The issuance of any permit required by this section shall be conditioned upon the owner of said manufactured home submitting proof to the tax commissioner of Athens-Clarke County that all state and county taxes theretofore accruing and payable with respect to said home have in fact been paid. (a)  Manufactured home location permits. No mover, hauler, person, firm, corporation, or other entity shall: (1)  Relocate an existing manufactured home to any location within Athens-Clarke County without obtaining a manufactured home location permit from the Athens-Clarke County Building Permits and Inspections Department. (2)  Relocate a manufactured home into Athens-Clarke County without obtaining a manufactured home location permit from the Athens-Clarke County Building Permits and Inspection Department. (3)  Locate any new manufactured home in Athens-Clarke County without obtaining a manufactured location permit from the Athens-Clarke County Building Permits and Inspection Department. A manufactured home located on the lot of a licensed dealer authorized to buy and sell manufactured homes is not required to obtain a manufactured home location permit. (b)  Other permits required. No person, firm, corporation, or other entity shall: (1)  Alter, remodel, repair or expand any manufactured home without obtaining permits from the Athens-Clarke County Building Permits and Inspection Department. Alteration or expansion to the structure or any system including building, electrical, plumbing, heating, ventilation, air conditioning, and gas require permits from the Athens-Clarke County Building Permits and Inspection Department. Cosmetic repairs listed in section 7-1-38(b) of this Code are exempted from permits. (2)  Building permit is required for the placement and set-up of any Class "A" manufactured home. (3)  The installation, repair, replacement, or addition to any electrical, plumbing, heating, ventilation, air conditioning, or gas piping system will require permits as described elsewhere in chapter 7 of the Code of Athens-Clarke County. (c)  Permit fees: (1)  The fee for manufactured home permits shall be in accordance with section 7-1-555(d) of the Code of Athens-Clarke County. (2)  Electrical permit fees are established in section 7-1-556 of the Code of Athens-Clarke County. (3)  Plumbing permit fees are established in section 7-1-557 of the Code of Athens-Clarke County. (4)  Heating, ventilation, air conditioning, and gas permit fees are established in section 7-1-558 of the Code of Athens-Clarke County. (Ord. of 5-2-2000, § 1) 
Sec. 7-1-606. - Inspections.     All work for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the building official. It is the responsibility of the permit applicant to cause the work to be accessible and exposed for inspection purposes. (Ord. of 5-2-2000, § 1) 
Sec. 7-1-607. - Final inspection.     When the manufactured home installation is complete, including landings, skirting, service equipment, soil erosion control, and finish grading, and the home is ready for occupancy, a final inspection shall be made. Utility service shall not be provided to any building service equipment that is regulated by this code until a final inspection is performed and approved by the building official. (Ord. of 5-2-2000, § 1) 
Sec. 7-1-608. - Footings and foundations.     Footing and foundation design and installation shall conform to the following: (a)  Class "A" manufactured homes must be placed on a permanent foundation, either slab or pier, which meets the requirements of the state building code. (b)  Class "B" manufactured homes are not required to have poured concrete or permanent foundations. Piers must be spaced per manufacturer's instructions. (Ord. of 5-2-2000, § 1) 
Sec. 7-1-609. - Skirting.     Each manufactured home requires skirting conforming to the following: (a)  Class "A" manufactured homes must have a masonry curtain wall, unpierced except for the required ventilation and access, installed so that it encloses the area under the manufactured home to ground level. (b)  Class "B" manufactured homes shall be completely skirted with either masonry material, or skirting material manufactured for this purpose, and the skirting shall reach to the ground level. (Ord. of 5-2-2000, § 1) 
Sec. 7-1-610. - Landings and steps.     For every manufactured home located in Athens-Clarke County, a landing is required for each exterior door. The minimum size of the landing is dependent upon the width of the door. The structure must include steps that lead to the ground level. Both the steps and landings must be constructed to meet the adopted building code of Athens-Clarke County. (Ord. of 5-2-2000, § 1) 
Sec. 7-1-611. - Anchorage.     All manufactured homes must be tied down per manufacturer recommendations, and the requirements listed in appendix H of the state building code. (Ord. of 5-2-2000, § 1) 
CHAPTER 7-2. - DRIVEWAYS[4] Sec. 7-2-1. Purpose. Sec. 7-2-2. Definitions. Sec. 7-2-3. Departmental roles. Sec. 7-2-4. Technical manuals. Sec. 7-2-5. General permitting requirements. Sec. 7-2-6. Permit application procedure. Sec. 7-2-7. General design requirements. Sec. 7-2-8. Application fee schedule. Sec. 7-2-9. Review and inspection process. Sec. 7-2-10. Appeals. Sec. 7-2-11. Penalties. Footnotes: --- (4) --- Editor's note— Ord. of 7-7-2009, § 1, deleted the former Ch. 7-2, §§ 7-2-1—7-2-5, and enacted a new Ch. 7-2 as set out herein. The former Ch. 7-2 pertained to driveways and derived from Ord. of 11-11-91 §§ 1—5; Ord. of 4-7-92 §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 6-1-93, § 1; Ord. of 7-2-96, § 1; Ord. of 7-6-99, § 1. 
Sec. 7-2-1. - Purpose.     The purpose of this chapter is to ensure safe and efficient vehicular access to or from the public street system to or from private property, to protect the capacity for handling peak traffic volumes of public streets, to maintain smooth traffic flow, and to maintain street and right-of-way drainage. This chapter has been established to meet the following objectives: (1)  To provide maximum safety and protection to the public through the regulation of vehicles entering and exiting public streets; (2)  To provide a uniform ordinance for the design, location, operation and construction of driveways throughout Athens-Clarke County; and (3)  To provide owners of abutting property with the maximum service feasible, consistent with the safe and efficient use of the public streets. (Ord. of 7-7-2009, § 1) 
Sec. 7-2-2. - Definitions. (a)  The word "shall" is mandatory and the word "may" is permissive. (b)  As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the definitions set out below:     Clear Sight Triangle: An area of unobstructed vision at street intersections (including alleys) or street and driveway intersections defined by lines of sight between points at a given distance from the intersection of street and/or driveway lines.     Culvert: Closed conduit used for the passage of surface drainage under the driveway(s).     Curb and gutter: Two primary styles of curb and gutter exist in Athens-Clarke County: (1)  Vertical curb and gutter-Generally 2.5 feet wide, with face of curb being two feet from edge of pavement and six inches high; (2)  Rollover curb and gutter-Low curbs with flat slopes, generally 24 inches wide reaching a height at back of curb of three inches above front edge of gutter.     Driveway angle: The angle between the driveway centerline and the edge of the roadway.     Driveway width: The narrowest distance of the driveway running parallel with the edge of pavement.     Frontage: That distance measured along the right-of-way line between successive side property lines.     Point of tangency: That point where the driveway radius and the roadway meet.     Radius: That radius corresponding to a circular design pattern, which will allow for vehicle clearance when entering or leaving a driveway.     Right-of-way: That property owned by the governmental body on which the roadway system exists and which may be accessed with the construction of driveways.     Roadway capacity: Maximum rate at which vehicles can reasonably cross a given point on a roadway during a given time under prevailing roadway, traffic and control conditions.     Rural: Roadway characterized by the provision of ditches and culverts for the passage of surface drainage.     Side property line extension: Extension from the right-of-way line of the side property line perpendicular to the highway centerline.     Urban: Roadway characterized by the provision of curb and gutter for the passage of surface drainage. (Ord. of 7-7-2009, § 1) 
Sec. 7-2-3. - Departmental roles. (1)  Public Works Inspector: The Public Works Inspector shall be responsible for enforcing all regulations set forth in this chapter and the Athens-Clarke County Department of Transportation and Public Works Technical Standards Manual. (2)  Traffic Engineer: The Traffic Engineer shall have the right to make changes to and approve all geometric designs for driveways so that they will conform with those requirements set forth in this chapter and the Athens-Clarke County Department of Transportation and Public Works Technical Standards Manual. In addition, whenever it is determined by the Traffic Engineer that indiscriminate or long stretches of paved or unpaved accesses result in undue hazard on area traffic (vehicular or pedestrian), driveways may be reduced, enlarged, altered or eliminated such that they will conform with section 7-2-7. (3)  Director of Transportation and Public Works: The Director of Transportation and Public Works or designee shall approve all materials, type and character of work, and type of construction needed for installation of required driveway, including the material, work and type of construction necessary for proper drainage of driveway and the property it serves. In addition, whenever an existing street is improved by reconstruction, relocation, widening or maintenance work, the Director of Transportation and Public Works shall be responsible for altering any existing driveways abutting the right-of-way at government expense such that every reasonable attempt is made to conform with section 7-2-7. (4)  Building Official: The chief building official described in Chapter 7-1, with the approval of the manager, may designate building inspectors or other duly authorized representatives to perform any inspections or other duties or services as may be required by this Chapter. (Ord. of 7-7-2009, § 1) 
Sec. 7-2-4. - Technical manuals. (a)  Athens-Clarke County Department of Transportation and Public Works Technical Standards Manual, as adopted by the Mayor and Commission on April 5, 1994 and revised on July 7, 2009, on file and available for public inspection in the Office of the Clerk of Commission, City Hall, Room 204, City Hall, 301 College Avenue, Athens, Georgia and in the office of the Department of Transportation and Public Works, 120 W. Dougherty Street, Athens, Georgia. (b)  Regulations for Driveway and Encroachment Control (Driveway Manual), Georgia Department of Transportation, latest edition, on file and available for public inspection in the Office of the Clerk of Commission, City Hall, Room 204, City Hall, 301 College Avenue, Athens, Georgia and in the office of the Department of Transportation and Public Works, 120 W. Dougherty Street, Athens, Georgia. (c)  Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets, American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials, latest edition, on file and available for public inspection in the Office of the Clerk of Commission, City Hall, Room 204, City Hall, 301 College Avenue, Athens, Georgia and in the office of the Department of Transportation and Public Works, 120 W. Dougherty Street, Athens, Georgia. (d)  MACORTS 2030 Long Range Transportation Plan, as adopted by the MACORTS Policy Committee on August 25, 2004, on file and available for public inspection in the Office of the Clerk of Commission, City Hall, Room 204, City Hall, 301 College Avenue, Athens, Georgia and in the office of the Department of Transportation and Public Works, 120 W. Dougherty Street, Athens, Georgia. (Ord. of 7-7-2009, § 1) 
Sec. 7-2-5. - General permitting requirements. (a)  General Requirements. (1)  The applicant applying for a driveway permit shall apply for the sole purpose of securing access to the property from a public street and not for allowance of parking, servicing vehicles, storage or merchandising of goods or for other uses within the right-of-way. (2)  Permits are required for driveways in all zoning classifications, except that a permit shall not be required for driveways constructed along an unimproved roadway. (3)  When one or more of the following conditions exists, a driveway permit is required: a.  When a previously undeveloped property is being developed; b.  When an existing development is being reconstructed or redeveloped. This condition shall not include interior changes or be applicable during the renovation of an existing single family home; c.  When property is changing from one use to another according to Title 9 (Zoning and Development Standards); d.  When an existing driveway is no longer considered adequate for property usage due to a change in the use on the property thereby causing higher than originally designed for traffic volume, or has, since installation, become a hazard to the safety of area traffic the owner/developer/contractor is required to apply for a driveway permit; e.  For non-single family residential properties, any additional structural or site improvement square footage added to an existing structure or site improvement that is greater than ten percent of the existing building square footage for structural improvements or ten percent of the existing site improvement square footage for site improvements. (4)  Upon application for a driveway permit for either a new driveway or an existing driveway, all existing driveways to be retained that are not in conformance with this ordinance and current standards shall be brought into compliance at the expense of the applicant. (b)  Applicant Requirements. (1)  The applicant shall make no revisions or additions to a driveway without obtaining a new permit. The applicant shall furnish all materials, do all work and pay all costs in connection with the construction, reconstruction and maintenance of the driveway including that portion of the driveway and any associated culvert located within the right-of-way. (2)  The applicant shall arrange for and bear the entire cost of moving poles, trees, signs, hydrants, catch basins and other existing installations, which may interfere with the proposed driveway. (3)  The applicant shall make the installation without jeopardy to or interference with vehicular traffic using the highway or pedestrian traffic using the adjacent sidewalk. Street surfaces, shoulders, sidewalks, ditches, vegetation and overhead and underground utilities, to include storm drainage improvements, that are disturbed shall be restored to equivalent or better than current standards. (Ord. of 7-7-2009, § 1; Ord. of 10-7-2014, § 1 ) 
Sec. 7-2-6. - Permit application procedure. (a)  Application for a driveway permit should be made at the Athens-Clarke County Transportation and Public Works Department Office. Application shall be made prior to any on-site construction. The application must be accompanied by a scaled drawing showing the following: (1)  Length, width and radius of all curves of the driveway; (2)  The relationship (distance and angle) of the driveway to property lines, structures and existing private roads and public highways; (3)  Location and size of any culverts; (4)  Slope of the driveway; (5)  Topography of the immediate area of the proposed driveway location; (6)  Location and structure of any retaining walls in the immediate vicinity of the proposed driveway; and (7)  Cross-section of the driveway. (b)  No permits for building construction or site work, including grading and paving, shall be issued until a site plan meeting the requirements of this Chapter has been approved by the Director of Transportation and Public Works or designee. (Ord. of 7-7-2009, § 1) 
Sec. 7-2-7. - General design requirements. (a)  The design and construction of driveways situated within the Athens-Clarke County right-of-way (ROW) shall conform to the design standards contained in the Athens-Clarke County Department of Transportation and Public Works Technical Standards Manual. (b)  Access points to the property shall be limited based on the adjacent public roadway's functional classification as identified in the MACORTS 2030 Long Range Transportation Plan and are as follows: (1)  Distance between driveways: On Urban Principal and Minor Arterial streets - 150 feet On Urban Collector streets - 100 feet On all other streets - 50 feet For single family homes in RS-5 and RS-8 zoning designations, the spacing requirements between driveways may be as close as ten feet in one direction as long as there is at least 50 feet of separation between driveways in the other direction. (2)  Distance from intersection: On Urban Principal and Minor Arterial streets - 150 feet On Urban Collector streets - 100 feet On all other streets - 50 feet A request for driveway spacing less than that defined above may be considered by the Director of Transportation and Public Works if safety is not impacted. The process for this request is identified in section 7-2-10. (c)  The driveway shall be located and its dimensions restricted so that the entire design is contained within the property to be served, unless it is a shared driveway. (d)  The minimum distance from the side property line that a driveway may be located is five feet, unless it is a shared access drive with the adjoining property. This distance is measured from the side property line or property line extension, along the edge of pavement to the beginning of the driveway point of tangency or taper. (e)  When property is a corner lot, the driveway shall not provide direct access into the intersection, but shall be located away from the intersection, as set forth in subsection (b) above. (f)  Driveways shall not encroach upon areas of rights-of-way deemed necessary for effective traffic control, highway signs or signals. (g)  The number of driveways permitted to access a property is defined in Table 1 of this chapter and shall not vary unless the Traffic Engineer deems it necessary that the number allowed be altered while providing reasonable service to the property without jeopardizing safety, convenience and maintenance of the highway. (h)  Design requirements for urban driveways shall apply when the adjacent roadway is characterized by the provision of curb and gutter for the passage of surface drainage. (i)  Design requirements for rural driveways shall apply when the roadway is characterized by the provision of ditches and culverts for the passage of surface drainage. In these cases, the driveway apron may be constructed of either concrete or asphalt materials. (j)  When, in the judgment of the Traffic Engineer, it is necessary for safety purposes, a driveway may be deemed as only an entrance or exit. (k)  No landscaping, fences, terraces or other natural or artificial features adjacent to any street shall be of a nature impairing visibility from or of approaching vehicular traffic where such visibility is important to safety nor shall such features in any way create potential hazards to pedestrians. (l)  A driveway shall be located and designed such that adequate sight distance is allowed in either direction. At all driveways a clear sight triangle shall be enforced on both sides of the driveway to prevent off-street parking, landscaping or other material obstructions from blocking the driver's view. The dimensions of this clear sight triangular area to be maintained for each side of the driveway shall be 35 feet by 25 feet and defined as: 35 feet along the property line from the intersecting point of the driveway centerline and the right-of-way or property line, and 25 feet along the driveway centerline from the intersecting point of the driveway centerline and the right-of-way or property line towards the interior of the property. In addition, at all intersections a clear sight triangle shall be enforced on the property frontage along the roadway based on specific site conditions including right-of-way widths, pavement widths and topography. Further information on this subject is contained in the Athens-Clarke County Department of Transportation and Public Works Technical Standards Manual. The Transportation and Public Works Director or their designee shall have the authority to adjust these distances if in their opinion such action is necessary for the protection of traffic and/or the basis of site conditions. (m)  On roadways maintained by the Unified Government, the need for the applicant to provide dedicated right-turn and/or left-turn lanes will follow the standards contained in the Georgia Department of Transportation's (GDOT) Regulations for Driveway and Encroachment Control Manual (Driveway Manual). TABLE 1 DRIVEWAY ALLOCATION   Single & Two Family Residence on a Single Lot   One Two-way Driveway One Two-way Divided Driveway Two One-way Driveways Two Two-way Driveways Three Two-way Driveways Two One-way Multiple Lane Driveways One One-way Driveway Single & Two Family Residence X X   Single Business   One Two-way Driveway One Two-way Divided Driveway Two One-way Driveways Two Two-way Driveways Three Two-way Driveways Two One-way Multiple Lane Driveways One One-way Driveway No more than a combined 1500 vehicles entering and exiting per weekday X X X No less than a combined 1501 vehicles entering and exiting per weekday X X X X Corner Lots—Per Frontage X X   Multiple Businesses on Commercial Tracts   One Two-way Driveway One Two-way Divided Driveway Two One-way Driveways Two Two-way Driveways Three Two-way Driveways Two One-way Multiple Lane Driveways One One-way Driveway 0-300 Linear Feet of Frontage X X X 300-1000 Linear Feet of Frontage X X X X 1000-2000 Linear Feet of Frontage X X X X X 2000-3000 Linear Feet of Frontage X X X X X X 3000 Linear Feet of Frontage and Up X X X X X X  (Ord. of 7-7-2009, § 1; Ord. of 10-7-2014, § 2 ) 
Sec. 7-2-8. - Application fee schedule.     The applicant shall pay a non-refundable fee at the time of making the application for a Driveway Permit as provided in Section 7-1-560. (Ord. of 7-7-2009, § 1) 
Sec. 7-2-9. - Review and inspection process. (a)  The Transportation and Public Works Department reserves the right to make inspections to ensure compliance with this chapter and applicable standards at any time during the construction of the driveway and before a Certificate of Occupancy or a Certificate of Completion has been issued. (b)  When it is determined by the Traffic Engineer that the access conditions may result in safety or operational hazards to area traffic (vehicular or pedestrian), existing driveways may be reduced, enlarged, altered or eliminated at the discretion of the Transportation and Public Works Director. (c)  Whenever an existing street is improved by reconstruction, relocation, widening or maintenance work, Transportation and Public Works Department shall be responsible for altering any existing driveways abutting the right-of-way at government expense such that every reasonable attempt is made to conform with the standards. (d)  The Building Official or designee shall withhold the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy or Certificate of Completion upon the request of the Transportation and Public Works Director or designee until on-site inspection by the Public Works Inspector, Traffic Engineer, or Director of Transportation and Public Works determines that all requirements of this chapter and/or other conditions associated with the driveway permit have been met. (Ord. of 7-7-2009, § 1) 
Sec. 7-2-10. - Appeals. (a)  After reviewing a driveway design, the Transportation and Public Works Director or designee may: (1)  Approve design as submitted; or (2)  Approve design with corrections so as to conform the design to the requirements of this Chapter; or (3)  Approve design with variations from the requirements of this Chapter, provided that roadway drainage can still be designed without adversely affecting private properties and driveway design with variations will not adversely affect public safety. (b)  If the applicant disagrees with the final decision of the Transportation and Public Works Director or designee, the applicant shall have the right to appeal such decision in writing to the Hearings Board created under the Zoning Code. The appeal shall be made by the applicant within five business days of the final decision and filed with the Athens-Clarke County Planning Department. Procedures for administrative hearings as provided in Section 9-4-10(C), (D) and (F) of the Athens-Clarke County Code shall govern appeals made pursuant to this paragraph. The decision of the Hearings Board shall be the final decision of the Unified Government of Athens-Clarke County. (Ord. of 7-7-2009, § 1) 
Sec. 7-2-11. - Penalties.     The violation of any provision of this Chapter shall be an offense. Any person, firm, corporation, agent or employee thereof who violates any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be punished as provided in Section 1-1-5 of this Code. Each day that a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. of 7-7-2009, § 1) 
CHAPTER 7-3. - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS Article 1. In General Sec. 7-3-1. Throwing paper, organic waste, grass cuttings, trash on street. Sec. 7-3-2. Throwing, etc., tree limbs or leaves on streets. Sec. 7-3-3. Draining waste liquid. Sec. 7-3-4. Permitting accumulation of rock, rubbish, earth, etc., resulting from construction or excavation. Sec. 7-3-5. Cellar doors, etc. Sec. 7-3-6. Defacing sidewalks. Sec. 7-3-7. Disturbing stone survey monuments. Sec. 7-3-8. Trees or shrubbery hanging over sidewalks. Sec. 7-3-9. Interfering with streets or shade trees. Sec. 7-3-10. Exposure of utility pipes above surface of street. Sec. 7-3-11. Lowering street curbing generally. Sec. 7-3-12. Designation of street and house numbers. Secs. 7-3-13—7-1-30. Reserved. Article 2. Excavations Sec. 7-3-31. Permits issued to plumbers and public utilities. Sec. 7-3-32. Rules and regulations by director of public works. Sec. 7-3-33. Inspection, etc., of work. Sec. 7-3-34. Revocation of permit. Sec. 7-3-35. Paving cut charges. Article 3. Road Rights-of-Way Sec. 7-3-36. Dedication of road rights-of-way. Sec. 7-3-37. Utility installation. Sec. 7-3-38. Permit required. 
ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 7-3-1. - Throwing paper, organic waste, grass cuttings, trash on street. (a)  Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to throw paper, organic waste, grass cuttings, or any other trash or garbage onto another person's property, or on any of the streets, sidewalks, and rights-of-way, or any public or semipublic parking facility within Athens-Clarke County. (b)  Penalty. There shall be a fine of not less than $100.00 or equivalent hours of community service for violation of paragraph (a) above. (Ord. of 1-5-93 § 1) 
Sec. 7-3-2. - Throwing, etc., tree limbs or leaves on streets.     It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, place or otherwise cause to be placed any tree limbs or leaves in or on any public street inside the curbline or on the sidewalks in Athens-Clarke County. (Ord. of 1-5-93 § 1) 
Sec. 7-3-3. - Draining waste liquid.     It shall be unlawful for any person to allow any water containing objectionable material, such as sewage, waste milk and other organic material, wastewater from car washes, as well as any drainage that is objectionable, to drain from his place of business on any Athens-Clarke County street or any part thereof, without having special permission from the director of public works. (Ord. of 1-5-93 § 1) 
Sec. 7-3-4. - Permitting accumulation of rock, rubbish, earth, etc., resulting from construction or excavation.     No person engaging in construction work, excavation, the building trades or work of any kind on public or private property shall, during the progress or at any stage of such work, permit or allow rock, rubbish, excess earth or other debris resulting from such work to accumulate on the sidewalks, streets, public ways or other property of Athens-Clarke County. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1) 
Sec. 7-3-5. - Cellar doors, etc. (a)  Obstruction of sidewalk of business street. No cellar door shall be erected by any person which shall obstruct more than four feet of the sidewalk of any business street of Athens-Clarke County. (b)  Allowed open only when in use. All cellar doors shall be kept closed at night and during the day, except when in actual use. (c)  Construction and arrangement generally. Within the fire limits of Athens-Clarke County all cellar doors, coal chutes, ventilators or other openings on the sidewalks shall be constructed of wrought iron or steel of sufficient strength to support with safety pedestrians or other loads likely to be placed upon them and the shutters of such doors shall be so arranged as to leave the doors in an upright position when open, so as to warn pedestrians in passing by. (d)  Completion of work by municipality upon refusal or failure of property holder. If any property holder shall fail or refuse to comply with the provisions of subsection (c), the work may be done by the director of public works and upon the completion of such work an accurate account of the cost of the work upon the sidewalk abutting upon each lot shall be returned by the director of public works to the Athens-Clarke County Marshal and the same shall be collected in the manner prescribed by law. (e)  Doors required to be kept in good order. Cellar doors shall be kept in good operating order. The director of public works shall notify the owner of any building with a cellar door in bad condition to repair it within ten days. If not repaired in that time, the director of public works shall cause the necessary repairs to be made at the owner's expense. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1) 
Sec. 7-3-6. - Defacing sidewalks.     It shall be unlawful for any person to deface any public sidewalks in Athens-Clarke County by painting any signs thereon, whether for commercial advertising or other purposes or by making or painting or otherwise defacing the sidewalks in any manner or for any purpose whatsoever. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1) 
Sec. 7-3-7. - Disturbing stone survey monuments.     Any person or persons who shall interfere with or disturb in any manner the stone monuments used in the survey of Athens-Clarke County and to be used in the future for reference points, without written consent of the director of public works, shall be punished as prescribed in section 1-1-5. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1) 
Sec. 7-3-8. - Trees or shrubbery hanging over sidewalks.     All persons having trees or shrubbery with limbs or foliage hanging over the sidewalk shall have them cut to maintain a minimum clearance of eight feet above the sidewalk. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1) 
Sec. 7-3-9. - Interfering with streets or shade trees.     Except as provided in the preceding section, no person shall in any manner interfere with the streets without consent of the mayor and commission nor shall any person move, cut down, trim or injure any shade tree on the sidewalks or streets without consent of the mayor and commission. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1; Ord. of 7-2-96, § 1; Ord. of 7-6-99, § 1) 
Sec. 7-3-10. - Exposure of utility pipes above surface of street.     It shall be the duty of all water companies, gas companies or other companies, or persons who have service pipes or mains in the streets to see that the same are kept below the surface of the streets. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1) 
Sec. 7-3-11. - Lowering street curbing generally. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person other than the public works department to lower street curbing on any of the public streets within Athens-Clarke County or to alter the grade of any gutter or to fill any gutter with pavement, asphalt or any other material. (b)  Whenever the lowering of any street curbing adjacent to any public street within Athens-Clarke County shall be authorized by any present or future ordinance, it shall be the responsibility of the property owner whose property abuts on the curb to be lowered to make application to the director of public works for the lowering of the curb and to pay to the director of public works concurrently with the making of such application the estimated cost of the lowering of the curb as estimated by the director of public works. Thereafter, it shall be the duty of the public works department to lower such curb or to approve and supervise the lowering of the curb by a private contractor. (c)  The method of lowering curbing to be followed by the public works department shall be uniform for any single type of curbing throughout Athens-Clarke County. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1) 
Sec. 7-3-12. - Designation of street and house numbers. (a)  Generally. In general, the designation of street and house numbers shall conform to the following provisions: (1)  Street numbers for dwelling units and places of business on all public and private streets shall be assigned by the Athens-Clarke County Planning Department in accordance with its administrative procedures. (2)  The planning department shall keep a record of all numbers assigned under this section. (3)  In administratively assigning numbers under this section, the planning department shall utilize a standard system of numbering buildings that generally provides for sequential numbering with numbers increasing as one travels away from the intersection of Broad Street and Lumpkin Street with odd numbers being on the left side of the street and even numbers being on the right side of the street as one moves away from that intersection. (b)  Posting of designated street address. Posting of designated street addresses shall conform to the following provisions: (1)  The owner, occupant or person in charge of any house or building to which a number has been assigned will be notified in writing by the planning department of the number assigned to the same. (2)  Within 15 days after the receipt of such written notification, the owner, occupant or person in charge of a house or building to which a number has been assigned shall affix the number in a conspicuous manner in a conspicuous place. (3)  It shall be the duty of such owner, occupant or person in charge thereof, upon affixing the new number, to remove any different number which might be mistaken for or confused with the number assigned to such structure by the planning department. (4)  Each principal building shall display the number assigned to the frontage on which the front entrance is located. In case a principal building is occupied by more than one business or family dwelling unit, each separate front entrance may display a separate number. (5)  Numerals indicating the official numbers for each principal building or each front entrance to such building shall meet a minimum of one (1) of the following requirements: a.  Numerals shall be a minimum of two (2) inches if posted on a mailbox located along a public right-of-way in front of the principal structure to be identified. b.  Numerals shall be a minimum of four (4) inches if located on a principal structure within 50 feet of the public right-of-way. The numeral size shall be increased one (1) inch in size for each additional 50-foot increment of distance between the public right-of-way on which the principal structure fronts and the principal structure itself. It is the intent of this regulation that numerals indicating the official numbers shall be posted in such a manner as to be clearly legible and distinguishable from the street on which the property is located. (c)  New structures. The assignment of address numbers to new structures shall conform to the following: (1)  Numbers will be assigned to each proposed lot or tract on the surveyors' copies of final subdivision plats by the Athens-Clarke County Planning Department. (2)  No building permit shall be issued for any principal building until the owner or developer has procured from the planning department of Athens-Clarke County the official number of the premises. Final approval for a certificate of occupancy of any principal building erected or repaired shall be withheld until permanent and proper numbers have been displayed in accordance with the requirements of subsection (b) of this section. (d)  Penalties for violations. In the event that the owner, occupant or person in charge of any house or building refuses to comply with the terms of this section by failing to affix the number assigned within 15 days after notification, or by failing within such period of 15 days to remove any old numbers affixed to such house, or house entrance, or elsewhere, which may be confused with the number assigned thereto, then he or she shall be punished as provided for in section 1-1-5 of this Code. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1; Ord. of 2-7-95, §§ 1—5) 
Secs. 7-3-13—7-3-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 2. - EXCAVATIONS 
Sec. 7-3-31. - Permits issued to plumbers and public utilities.     The director of public works is hereby authorized to issue permits for digging into and opening the streets of Athens-Clarke County to plumbers doing business in Athens-Clarke County and to public utilities upon application therefor whenever in his opinion such opening of the streets is necessary. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1) 
Sec. 7-3-32. - Rules and regulations by director of public works.     The director of public works shall prescribe rules and regulations to be followed by persons digging into and opening the streets of Athens-Clarke County pursuant to permits as provided for in this article. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1) 
Sec. 7-3-33. - Inspection, etc., of work.     Any work done by a permit holder pursuant to a permit granted under this article shall be subject to inspection by the director of public works and in compliance with such rules and regulations as may from time to time be prescribed by the director of public works. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1) 
Sec. 7-3-34. - Revocation of permit.     The director of public works shall revoke any permit granted pursuant to section 7-3-31 if the permit holder shall fail or refuse to comply with the rules and regulations prescribed by the director of public works provided for in this article. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1) 
Sec. 7-3-35. - Paving cut charges.     Paving cut charges are as follows: (1)  Paving cut charges shall be a minimum of $275.00 and bull head shall cost a minimum of $100.00, plus such additional amounts as the director of public works shall determine, which shall reflect the cost of labor, equipment and other materials required for such work. (2)  Paving cut charges within the downtown areas or fire zone shall be determined at a minimum rate by the director of public works as based upon the actual cost or the individual cut, taking into consideration the cost of labor, equipment and other materials required for such work. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1) 
ARTICLE 3. - ROAD RIGHTS-OF-WAY 
Sec. 7-3-36. - Dedication of road rights-of-way.     The following procedure shall be utilized in preparation for the submittal of road right-of-way deeds to Athens-Clarke County for acceptance: (1)  At least two weeks prior to completing his improvements, the subdivider shall request the director of public works to provide him with a list of items that shall be completed in order to prepare the right-of-way deed for acceptance. (2)  The director of public works or his designee shall provide the subdivider with a list that shall include all construction deficiencies that remain, together with information that may be necessary on signs, street light poles, an acceptable stand of grass, the right-of-way deed, the maintenance bond (or a letter of credit), and consistencies with approved final plat. (3)  After satisfactorily completing all construction deficiencies, the subdivider shall transmit all required documents directly to the director of public works. After review and acceptance by the director of public works, such director shall then provide a report to the clerk of commission which shall be read into the minutes of the next mayor and commission meeting. (Ord. of 1-12-93, § 1; Ord. of 7-2-96, § 1; Ord. of 7-6-99, § 1) 
Sec. 7-3-37. - Utility installation. (a)  Any person desiring to make a utility facility installation of the right-of-way of any property in Athens-Clarke County in which Athens-Clarke County has jurisdiction or desiring a pavement cut for the installation of utilities shall first receive written permission from the manager or his designee. (b)  The manager or his designee shall promulgate policies and rules applicable to the installation of utilities. (Ord. of 1-12-93, § 1) 
Sec. 7-3-38. - Permit required. (a)  It shall be a violation of this section to perform or cause to be performed any work, or to place or cause to be placed any item(s), within a road right-of-way without a valid right-of-way encroachment permit, issued by the Director of the Athens-Clarke County Transportation and Public Works Department or his/her designee, except as otherwise provided herein. (b)  The following types of activities require a right-of-way encroachment permit: 1.  Any activity that is a potential threat to public safety, 2.  Temporary or permanent obstruction of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, 3.  Installation, removal, or alteration of any roadway infrastructure, 4.  Installation or maintenance of any utility infrastructure, 5.  Excavation of any kind for any purpose, 6.  Placement of any kind of construction material, object, structure, or debris, either temporary or permanent. (c)  The following types of activities may be performed without a right-of-way encroachment permit: 1.  Planting and maintenance of plant material and vegetation, including grass, in areas where such materials are traditionally placed. 2.  Placement and maintenance of mailboxes in areas where mailboxes are traditionally placed in accordance with applicable United States law and regulation. (d)  The following are types of activities expressly prohibited within the right-of-way and for which no permit will be issued: 1.  Installation and operation of any irrigation system, 2.  Parking or placement of dumpsters, 3.  Placement of fences and walls, 4.  Placement of signs, except as permitted by section 7-4-6 of this Code, 5.  Placement of any structure not part of the public infrastructure, 6.  Placement of any temporary storage unit or structure, 7.  Filling in any street gutter with concrete, asphalt, debris, or any other material, 8.  Removal or alteration of any existing structure within the right-of-way, 9.  Vending or street sales unless in accordance with Ordinance Section 6-6-6 through 6-6-15 of the Code of Athens-Clarke County, 10.  Sidewalk cafes unless permitted in accordance with Chapter 6-10 of the Code of Athens-Clarke County. (e)  The Director of the Athens-Clarke County Transportation and Public Works Department or his/her designee will determine on a case-by-case basis in accordance with applicable ordinances and laws which specific activities require a right-of-way encroachment permit and which activities are prohibited within the right-of-way. (f)  Applicants for right-of-way encroachment permits shall pay a non-refundable application fee at the time of making application as provided in Section 7-1-560 of the Code of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia. (g)  In addition to such application fee, at the discretion of the Director of the Athens-Clarke County Transportation and Public Works Department or his/her designee, a bond, or certification of satisfactory contractor's liability insurance, or both may be required from the applicant before a right-of-way encroachment permit will be issued. 1.  When required, the liability limits of contractor's insurance will be determined by the Director of the Athens-Clarke County Transportation and Public Works Department or his/her designee, with a minimum policy limit of $1,000,000.00. The Unified Government of Athens-Clarke County shall be named as the loss payee (or additional insured) on such policy. 2.  When required, the amount of bond shall be determined by the Director of the Athens-Clarke County Transportation and Public Works Department or his/her designee, with a minimum bond in the amount of 150 percent of the estimated cost of the work. A cost estimate certified by a professional engineer licensed by the State of Georgia shall be provided by the applicant when bond is required. (h)  All work shall be performed in compliance with the terms, conditions and specifications of a valid right-of-way encroachment permit, the current edition of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, and the current edition of the Athens-Clarke County Transportation and Public Works Department Technical Standards . Copies of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices and the Athens-Clarke County Transportation and Public Works Department Technical Standards are available for public inspection in the offices of the Athens-Clarke County Transportation and Public Works Department, 120 W Dougherty St, Athens, Georgia 30601. (i)  Violations . Any action or inaction in violation of any provision of this section may be subject to enforcement action. These actions include, but are not limited to, any one or several of the following, and none of these actions shall be a prerequisite to taking any of the others: 1.  Citation . A citation may be issued to the alleged violator requiring such person to appear in the Municipal Court of Athens-Clarke County to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished pursuant to Section 1-1-5 of this Code. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur may constitute a separate offense. 2.  Stop work order. A stop work order may be issued and shall be served upon the applicant or responsible person. A stop work order shall be effective immediately and shall mean that all work must stop unless the work pertains to correcting the violation. A stop work order shall remain in effect until released in writing by the Transportation and Public Works Director or his/her designee. Failure to abide by a stop work order is a violation of the Code of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia. 3.  Bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that the permitted work does not comply with the approved permit and applicable standards, a written notice to comply shall be served upon the applicant or other responsible person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance, and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the work is not brought into compliance within the time specified, the applicant shall be deemed in violation of this section and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited said performance bond. 4.  Withhold certificate of occupancy. In those instances where the permitted work within the right-of-way is associated with the improvement of private property for which a building permit has been issued, the Transportation and Public Works Director or his/her designee may request that the Athens-Clarke County Building Permits and Inspections Department refuse to issue a Certificate of Occupancy for the building or any other improvements until the work within the right-of-way has been brought into compliance. 5.  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The Transportation and Public Works Director or his/her designee may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing work within the right-of-way. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has corrected the violations and brought the work into compliance. 6.  Removal . Removal of any item placed or work performed in violation of the provisions of this section. ( Ord. of 11-4-2014, § 1 ) 
CHAPTER 7-4. - SIGNS[5] Sec. 7-4-1. Short title. Sec. 7-4-2. Objectives and purposes. Sec. 7-4-3. Definitions. Sec. 7-4-4. General provisions. Sec. 7-4-5. Exempt signs. Sec. 7-4-6. Prohibited signs. Sec. 7-4-7. Signs allowed without a permit in zoning districts. Sec. 7-4-8. Nonconforming signs. Sec. 7-4-9. General provisions for enforcement. Sec. 7-4-10. Temporary special event signs. Sec. 7-4-11. Permanent signs in residential districts. Sec. 7-4-12. Permanent signs in government, parks districts. Sec. 7-4-13. Permanent signs in commercial-office and institutional districts. Sec. 7-4-14. Permanent signs for group developments in commercial-office and institutional districts. Sec. 7-4-15. Permanent signs in employment-office district. Sec. 7-4-16. Permanent signs in commercial-general districts. Sec. 7-4-17. Permanent signs in commercial neighborhood and commercial rural districts. Sec. 7-4-18. Permanent signs in commercial downtown district. Sec. 7-4-19. Permanent signs in industrial and employment-industrial districts. Sec. 7-4-20. Specific provisions for off-site signs and for signs in historic district or historic landmark. Sec. 7-4-21. Variances to sign requirements. Sec. 7-4-22. Permits. Sec. 7-4-23. Amendments to chapter. Sec. 7-4-24. Severability clause. Appendix A. C-N and C-R Zoned Properties Using CN (Restrictive) Standards Appendix B. C-G Zoned Properties Using C-N Standards Appendix C. Commercial-General (C-G) Zoned Properties Allowing Billboards Footnotes: --- (5) --- Editor's note— An ordinance of April 3, 2007, § 1, amended the Code by repealing former ch. 7-4, §§ 7-4-1—7-4-20 and 7-4-50—7-4-61, in its entirety, and adding a new ch. 7-4. Former ch. 7-4 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from ordinances of October 4, 1994; July 2, 1996; July 6, 1999; December 5, 2000; November 6, 2001; and October 5, 2004. 
Sec. 7-4-1. - Short title.     This chapter shall hereafter be known and cited as the "Athens-Clarke County Sign Ordinance." (Ord. of 4-3-2007, § 1) 
Sec. 7-4-2. - Objectives and purposes.     The objective of this chapter is to establish requirements for the placement, installation and maintenance of signs in order to preserve and protect the health, safety, welfare and general well being of the community's citizens. As the regulations of the placement, construction and maintenance of buildings and structures through zoning is a valid use of the police power, so too is the regulation of the placement, installation and maintenance of signs, since such signs in the literal sense must ordinarily be considered structures, and in a practical sense are capable of producing many of the same nuisances as are produced by buildings. The regulation of the placement, installation and maintenance of signs is further justified by the sign's innate scheme and primary purpose to draw mental attention to its content, potentially to the detriment of sound driving practices and the safety of the motoring public to whom a majority of the signs are oriented. Therefore, it is the intent of this chapter to regulate the size and location of signs such that their purpose can be served without unduly interfering with motorists and causing unsafe conditions. However, it is not the intent of this chapter that all signs be built to the maximum size. Athens-Clarke County encourages use of the minimum signage necessary to meet the purposes need.     Further, recognizing that the aesthetic, cultural and historic qualities of Athens-Clarke County are unique and, therefore, vital to the community's interest and its moniker as the "Classic City," it is the objective of this chapter to ensure compatibility to the aforementioned themes and to ensure that these qualities are not compromised.     Further, it is an objective of this chapter to protect and preserve the aesthetic qualities of the community by regulating the number, size, placement, type, installation and maintenance of signs. The fact that signs are intended to command visual contact grants to signs a proportionately greater role than other structures in determining the overall aesthetic quality of the community. Furthermore, automatic changeable copy signs have an even greater visual impact upon the community than other less visually intrusive signs and cause greater impairment of the aesthetic quality of the community than other types of lighted signs. The aesthetic impact of signs is an economic fact that can bear heavily upon the enjoyment and value of property; therefore, the regulation of signs is validly justified on the basis of conserving the value of property and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the community. It is contended that it is not irrational for a community's citizens to plan their physical surroundings in such a way that unsightliness is minimized.     Further, it is an objective of this chapter to maintain content-neutrality in its signage regulations, and to denote the classification and categorization of sign types by their function. It is the intent of this chapter to expressly allow noncommercial copy to be substituted for commercial copy on permanent sign structures.     In addition, it is declared that the regulation of signs within Athens-Clarke County is necessary and in the public interest: (1)  To protect property values within Athens-Clarke County. (2)  To protect the motoring public from damage or injury caused or partially attributable to distractions or obstructions from improperly designed or situated signs. (3)  To promote the economic well-being of Athens-Clarke County by creating a favorable physical image. (4)  To improve the legibility and effectiveness of commercial and governmental signs. (5)  To afford the business community and citizens opportunity to advertise and promote products and services or messages without discrimination. (6)  To create and maintain high quality commercial districts. (7)  To eliminate the clutter of excess signage. (8)  To protect the right of citizens to enjoy Athens-Clarke County's natural scenic beauty. (9)  To protect and enhance the unique aesthetic, cultural and historic attractions to tourists and thereby promote and stimulate business. (10)  To regulate the construction, erection, maintenance and size of outdoor signs that may constitute a direct danger to pedestrians and property, especially during periods of high winds. (11)  To protect the aircraft approaches to the local airport(s). (12)  To balance the right of persons to convey their messages through signs and the right of the public to be protected against the unrestricted proliferation of signs. (13)  To classify and categorize sign types by their function. (14)  To expressly allow the substitution of noncommercial copy for commercial copy. (15)  To preserve and promote the public health, safety and welfare in Athens-Clarke County. (Ord. of 4-3-2007, § 1) 
Sec. 7-4-3. - Definitions.     Words used in the singular shall include the plural; and the plural the singular; and the words used in the present tense shall include the future tense.     Words not defined here shall be construed to have their common dictionary definition unless otherwise defined in the zoning ordinance of Athens-Clarke County.     The word "shall" is mandatory, not discretionary. The word "may" is permissive.     The word "lot" includes the words "piece," "plot" and "parcel."     The words "zone," "zoning district" and "district" have the same meaning.     The phrase "used for" shall include the phrases "arranged for," "designed for," "intended for," "maintained for," and "occupied for."     The word "structure" shall include the words "building" and "sign."     The word "he" shall include the word "she."     Abandoned or discontinued sign or sign structure: A sign or sign structure shall be considered abandoned or discontinued when its owner fails to operate or maintain a sign for a period of six months or longer. The following conditions shall be considered as the failure to operate or maintain a sign: (1)  A sign displaying advertising for a product or service which is no longer available or displaying advertising for a business which is no longer licensed; or (2)  A sign which is blank.     Architectural feature: Any major window, door, column, cornice, etc., which constitutes a part of the building proper.     Artwork: A two- or three-dimensional representation of a creative idea that is expressed in a form and manner as to provide aesthetic enjoyment for the viewer rather than to specifically convey the name of the business or a commercial message about the products or services offered on the property upon which the artwork is displayed.     Awning: A structure projecting from and supported by the exterior wall of a building constructed of rigid or nonrigid materials such as cloth, plastic or metal.     Backlit awning/canopy: A structure projecting from and supported by the exterior wall of a building constructed of materials such as cloth, plastic or metal with characters, letters, figures, etc., illuminated by electric lights, luminous tubes or other lighting method as part of the sign structure. This type of structure will be considered a wall sign for regulation purposes.     Banner: A temporary sign or string of one or more signs, usually made of cloth or other lightweight material, which is used to attract attention, whether or not imprinted with words or characters, including but not limited to balloons and pennants. Flags shall not be considered banners.     Beneficial use: Person or persons deriving the proceeds or other advantages from the erection or operation of a sign.     Billboard: An off-site, permanent, freestanding or wall sign that exceeds 16 square feet in size.     Canopy: A nonretractable structure, other than an awning, made of cloth, metal or other material, with frames attached to the building and/or carried by a frame supported by the ground.     Changeable copy sign, automatic: A sign whereon provision is made for letters or characters to be placed in or upon the surface area automatically to provide a message or picture; e.g., reader boards, marquees, electronic message boards or other signs which change messages automatically.     Changeable copy sign, manual: A sign whereon provision is made for letters or characters to be placed in or upon the surface area manually to provide a message or picture; e.g., reader boards, marquees or other signs requiring the manual changing of messages.     Construction sign: A temporary, non-illuminated on-premise sign that functions solely to identify ongoing construction activity during the time that a building permit is active and prior to completion of the work for which the permit was issued, containing sign copy that is limited to the ongoing construction activity and identifying the contractor and/or any subcontractor engaged to perform construction activity on the site.     Directional sign, on-site: See "on-site directional sign."     Eaves: The lowest horizontal line of a sloping roof.     Election sign: A temporary non-illuminated sign erected or displayed for the purpose of expressing support for or opposition to a candidate or stating a position regarding an issue upon which the voters of the Athens-Clarke County shall vote.     Erect: To build, paint, construct, attach, hang, suspend, place or affix.     Extended advertising space: The area extending beyond the standard face of the billboard.     Facade: The entire building front including the parapet.     Face or facing: The surface or plane of the sign upon, against or through which a message is displayed or illustrated. See "sign face."     Flag: Any fabric, or bunting containing distinct colors, patterns or symbols, used as an ornamental flag or as a symbol of government, political subdivision, corporation or business or other entity. See also "ornamental flag."     Flashing sign: A sign, the illumination of which is not kept constant in intensity or color at all times when in use, and which exhibits marked changes in lighting effects. Illuminated signs that necessarily function to display only the time, temperature, or date, not more frequently than once per minute, shall not be considered as flashing signs.     Free expression sign: A non-illuminated temporary freestanding sign or temporary banner not exceeding four square feet in sign area and four feet in height above the ground level, communicating information or views on matters of public policy concern or containing any other noncommercial message, which is otherwise lawful.     Freestanding sign: See "ground sign."     Ground sign: A sign which is permanently affixed to the ground and which is not dependent on a building for support.     Group commercial sign: A ground sign for a group commercial development, including a multiple use identification sign.     Group development: Two or more uses occupying the same parcel, or where two or more uses function as a single complex by virtue of having common access, parking, traffic or design orientation. All uses located in such a group development, even if they occupy separate buildings or are developed on outlot parcels, will be considered part of the group development and must abide by the provisions of this chapter.     Holiday and seasonal decorations: Decorations that pertain to a legal or other recognized holiday or to a season of the year, that are displayed for 60 days or less during a calendar year.     Illegal sign: An illegal sign is a sign that was not lawfully placed and maintained under the provisions governing such sign at the time of placement.     Illuminated sign: Any sign that has characters, letters, figures, designs or outline illuminated by electric lights or luminous tubes as a part of the sign proper or by accessory flood or spot lights.     Incombustible material: Any material which will not ignite at or below a temperature of 1,200 degrees Fahrenheit and will not continue to burn or glow at that temperature.     Lot frontage: The distance for which any property line and right-of-way line are coincident.     Machinery and equipment signs: Signs incorporated into machinery or equipment by a manufacturer or distributor, that function only to identify or advertise the product or service dispensed by the machine or equipment, such as signs customarily affixed to vending machines, newspaper racks, telephone booths, and gasoline pumps.     Marquee: Any permanent roof-like structure projecting beyond a building or extending along and projecting beyond the wall of the building, generally designed and constructed to provide protection from the weather.     Marquee sign: Any sign attached to a marquee.     Memorial sign or tablet: A sign set into a masonry wall or a bronze or similar tablet not exceeding eight square feet that functions solely to identify the name of the building or the date of its erection.     Multiple use: A development containing two or more businesses occupying one or more buildings on a single parcel of land.     Multiple use identification sign: A sign that functions to identify the name of the group development and that may also function to identify the tenants.     Nonconforming sign: Any sign which was erected legally prior to the adoption of this chapter, but which does not conform to any one or more of the requirements of this chapter.     Off-site directional sign: A permanent off-site sign not exceeding 16 square feet in size facing a major collector or arterial street that functions solely to provide directions to a licensed business located: (1)  On a local or minor collector street; and (2)  Within one-half mile of the major collector or arterial street.     Off-site sign: A permanent advertising device that exceeds 16 square feet in size and that functions to display commercial advertising for goods, products, services, or facilities or displays information not related to the site on which it is located.     On-site directional sign: A noncommercial on-site sign that functions solely to provide direction or information to pedestrian or vehicular traffic that is related or reasonably necessary to the movement of pedestrian or vehicular traffic on the premises, and not displaying a commercial message, e.g., "entrance," "exit," "caution," "no parking," "one way only," "no trespassing," "handicapped parking," and the like.     On-site sign: An advertising device relating in its subject matter to the property on which it is located or to products, accommodations, services, activities on the property, or noncommercial messages.     Ornamental flag: Any fabric or similar material containing patterns, drawings or symbols used for decorative purposes and designed to be flown as a flag.     Parapet: The extension of a false front or wall above a roofline.     Pennant: Pieces of cloth or plastic joined together uniform or varying in size, color and/or design suspended from a structure to the ground or additional structure.     Permanent sign: Any sign which, when installed, is intended for permanent use. For the purposes of this chapter any sign with an intended use in excess of 12 months from the date of installation shall be deemed a permanent sign.     Person: Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, organization or entity of any kind.     Portable sign: Any sign that is manifestly designed to be transported, including by trailer or on its own wheels, even though the wheels of such sign may be removed and the remaining chassis or support constructed without wheels is converted to an "A" or "T" frame sign or attached temporarily or permanently to the ground.     Principal use: The use which constitutes the primary activity, function or purpose to which a parcel of land or building is put.     Projecting sign: Any sign, other than a "wall sign," which projects from and is supported by a building and projects more than 12 inches.     Real estate sign: A temporary, non-illuminated sign that functions solely to advertise the sale, rental or lease of the premises or part of the premises on which the sign is displayed temporarily.     Right-of-way, existing: A strip of land over which Athens-Clarke County has a right, by ownership or easement, to construct a public street, sidewalk or use for public utilities.     Right-of-way, future: Proposed or potential rights-of-way that need protection from future development so as to allow the widening of a road without destroying the principle building or use of the property. The widths of such future rights-of-way shall be determined by either the Transportation Plan or an approved right-of-way plan. If not indicated on either one, widths shall be determined by Code Section 9-26-3.     Roof line: The highest continuous horizontal line of a roof. On a sloping roof, the roofline is the principal ridgeline, or the highest line common to one (1) or more principal slopes of roof. On a flat roof, the roofline is the highest continuous line of the roof or parapet, whichever is higher.     Roof sign: A sign that is erected, constructed, or maintained above the roof of any building.     Shopping center: A group of commercial establishments planned, developed, managed as a unit; related in location, size, and type of shops to the trade area that the unit serves; and providing on-site parking in definite relationship to the types and sizes of stores.     Sight triangle: View across the triangle formed by joining points measured along the property line from the intersection of two streets along both the street right-of-way lines measured from the intersection of the street and the alley or driveway. This area shall be kept clear of all obstruction in order to protect sight distance of motorists. See definition as defined in the driveway ordinance.     Sign: Any object, device, fixture, display, placard, or structure, or part thereof, using graphics, symbols, and/or written copy, visible from the public street, that is used to convey a specific message or to advertise, identity, direct, or attract attention to a business, service, institution, organization, person, idea, product, service, event or location by any means. Any sign provided for in any zoning district may contain non-commercial messages, in lieu of any other copy. The term "sign" includes sign structure. The following shall not be considered signs subject to the regulations of this chapter: artwork, holiday or seasonal decorations, cemetery markers, machinery or equipment signs, or memorial signs or tablets.     Sign copy: All words, letters, numbers, figures, characters, art work, symbols, or insignia that are used on a display surface area.     Sign face: The surface or plane of the sign upon, against, or through which a message is displayed or illustrated including the advertising surface and any framing, trim, or molding.     Sign owner: The owner of the sign.     Sign structure: Any portion of a freestanding base, supports, uprights, or braces the primary purpose of which is to support a sign(s) and excluding those portions of any such structure the primary purpose of which is to serve an architectural function (i.e., building wall, freestanding wall, entrance wall, fence, gate, etc.).     Signable area, wall signs: The area of the façade of the building facing the right-of-way up to the roofline for one-story buildings and up to the second story for multi-story buildings. Where the ground level of a multi-story building is at an elevation that is below the crown of the adjoining roadway from which a sign is designed to be viewed, the signable area for the wall sign may be up to an additional height above the first story of the multi-story building measured by the differential of the ground level of the building and the crown of the adjoining roadway that is perpendicular to the location of the center point of the location of the sign face; however, in no event shall the signable area be above the roofline.     Snipe sign (bandit sign): Any sign tacked, nailed, posted, pasted, glued or otherwise attached to trees, poles, stakes, or fences, with the message appearing thereon not applicable to the present use of the premises upon which the sign is located.     Special event sign: A content-neutral sign providing notice of, or direction to, an event, gathering, assembly or meeting that is open to the public at large.     Statutory sign: A sign required by any statute or regulation of the State of Georgia or the United States.     Streamer. Any long, narrow flag, banner, tinsel or roping that is hung or strung from any structure to another structure or to the ground.     Temporary sign: A sign intended for a use not permanent in nature. For the purposes of this Chapter, a sign with an intended use of one year or less shall be deemed a temporary sign.     Time and temperature sign: A device which functions only to display the current time and temperature at intervals no more frequently than once per minute and which contains no other messages. Time and temperature signs are regulated and permitted within the zoning districts in which they are allowed.     Traffic control device sign: Any sign located within the right-of-way that functions as a traffic control device and that is described and identified in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD) and approved by the Federal Highway Administrator as the National Standard.     Vehicle sign: Any sign or signs where the total sign area covers more than ten square feet of the vehicle.     Vehicle sign, illegal: A vehicle sign, when the vehicle is not "regularly used in the conduct of the business or activity" advertised on the vehicle, and (a) is visible from a street right-of-way within one hundred feet of the vehicle, and (b) is parked for more than two consecutive hours within one hundred feet of any street right-of-way. A vehicle shall not be considered "regularly used in the conduct of the business or activity" if the vehicle is used primarily (i) for advertising, or (ii) for the purpose of advertising, or (iii) for the purpose of providing transportation for owners or employees of the business or activity advertised on the vehicle.     Wall: An upright structure of wood, stone, etc., serving to enclose, divide, define or protect.     Wall, freestanding: A wall independent of a principal structure.     Wall sign: Any sign painted on or attached flat and parallel to the exterior surface of a freestanding wall or building and that projects not more than 12 inches from that wall or surface.     Warning sign or safety sign: A sign that functions solely to provide warning of a dangerous condition or situation that might not be readily apparent or that poses a threat of serious injury (e.g., gas line, high voltage, condemned building, etc.) or that provides warning of a violation of law (e.g., no trespassing, no hunting allowed, etc.).     Window sign, permanent: Signs permanently attached to the window glass of a structure and oriented towards the outside.     Window sign, temporary: Signs temporarily attached to the window glass of a structure and oriented towards the outside.     Zoning district: Any geographic area defined by the Official Athens-Clarke County Zoning Map for the purpose of regulating use. The official Zoning Map as adopted by the Mayor and Commission shall be the final authority as to the current zoning status of any property. (Ord. of 4-3-2007, § 1; Ord. of 4-7-09, § 1) 
Sec. 7-4-4. - General provisions. (a)  Compliance. It is unlawful for any person to place, erect, locate, or allow any sign within Athens-Clarke County that does not comply with the provisions of this chapter. The construction components of all signs shall also comply with the Standard Building Code and for electric signs the National Electrical Codes as adopted. (b)  Permit required. Except for a permanent sign exempted from permitting in this chapter, it is unlawful for any person to erect, repair, alter, replace or relocate within Athens-Clarke County any permanent sign without first obtaining a sign permit from the Director of Building Inspections as provided for in section 7-4-22 and paying the required permit fee for the same. Those temporary signs that require a permit may not be erected without first obtaining a permit from the Director of Building Inspections as provided for in section 7-4-22 and paying the required permit fee. (c)  Responsibility for interpretation. The Planning Director shall be responsible for the interpretation of the requirements, standards, definitions, or any other provision of this chapter. Upon written request for an interpretation, the Planning Director shall respond in writing within ten business days. Any appeal of the Planning Director's written interpretation or failure to provide a written interpretation shall be subject to the appeal procedure described herein and in this code. (d)  Reserved. (e)  Sign maintenance. Any signs not meeting the following provisions shall be repaired or removed in accordance with the specifications of this chapter. (1)  The area around the sign on private property on which the sign is erected shall be maintained clear of brush, trees, and other obstacles so as to make signs readily visible. (2)  All burned-out bulbs or damaged panels must be replaced. (3)  All sign copy shall be maintained securely to the face, and all missing copy must be replaced. (4)  All signs shall be designed, constructed, installed and maintained in compliance with applicable building and electrical codes and in accordance with any applicable state law governing sign placement and sign characteristics. (f)  Owner responsibility. It shall be the responsibility of the sign owner to maintain and insure conformance to the provisions of this chapter. (g)  Reserved. (h)  Reserved. (i)  Clearance over sidewalks or driveway/parking areas. No sign projecting over a driveway and/or parking area shall have less than 14 feet of clearance. No sign projecting over a sidewalk shall have less than nine feet of clearance. (j)  Reserved. (k)  Changeable copy signs, manual. Only one changeable copy sign will be allowed per site. (l)  Reserved. (m)  Reserved. (n)  Wall signs. Wall signs may not extend above the roofline. (o)  Sign spacing and setback. Signs shall be spaced and setback as indicated in Table I: District Requirements for Permanent Signs.   Figure 1 (p)  Sign height. The height requirement for all freestanding signs shall conform to district requirements in table I. This height shall be measured from the grade at the edge of the adjacent right-of-way or the grade of the sign site if such grade is above the grade at the edge of the street right-of-way to the uppermost part of the sign face, base or structure. If the sign is located below the grade at the edge of the right-of-way, sign height shall be measured from the edge of the right-of-way to the uppermost part of the sign face, base or structure.   Figure 2 (q)  Sight triangle. In any zone of Athens-Clarke County, no sign or sign structure, excluding any ground sign mounting pole not to exceed 12 inches in diameter, shall be erected, placed or maintained as an obstruction to vision between the height of two and one-half (2 1/2) feet and 10 feet within the area of the corner triangle as specified in Title 7, Chapter 2, of this Code.   Figure 3   Figure 4   Figure 5 (r)  Sign face area. Sign face area shall constitute the entire face of the sign including the advertising surface and any framing, trim, or molding.   Figure 6   Figure 7   Figure 8   Figure 9 (s)  Multiface signs. For purposes of determining the total sign square footage allowed for multiface signs, the total number of faces shall be divided by two and then added together and applied against the total square footage allowed. For example, only one face of a two-faced and/or double-faced sign shall be applied to the total square footage allowed (2 faces/2 = 1 face; therefore, only one face is applied against the total sign square footage). Odd-number-faced signs will be rounded up; e.g., a three-faced sign shall be handled thus: 3 faces/2 = 1.5 faces, which shall be rounded to two faces.   Figure 10 (t)  Sign structures. Sign structures shall be measured as the area around and/or enclosing the sign face, including embellishments such as pole covers or decorative roofing. The area of such structures shall be calculated as the smallest, regular, geometric figure(s) needed to circumscribe the sign structure minus the dimension calculated as the sign face. The area of a sign structure shall not exceed twice the maximum square footage allowed for the sign face.   Figure 11 (u)  Content neutrality as to sign message (viewpoint). Notwithstanding anything in this chapter or code to the contrary, no sign or sign structure shall be subject to any limitation based upon the content (viewpoint) of the message contained on such sign or displayed on such sign structure. (v)  Substitution of noncommercial speech for commercial speech. Notwithstanding anything contained in this chapter or code to the contrary, any permanent sign structure erected pursuant to the provisions of this chapter or code or otherwise lawfully existing with a commercial message may, at the option of the owner, contain a noncommercial message unrelated to the business located on the premises where the sign is erected. The noncommercial message may occupy the entire sign face or any portion thereof. The sign face may be changed from commercial to noncommercial messages, or from one noncommercial message to another, as frequently as desired by the owner of the sign structure, provided that the sign structure is not a prohibited sign or sign-type and provided that the size, height, setback and other dimensional criteria contained in this chapter and code have been satisfied. (Ord. of 4-3-2007, § 1) 
Sec. 7-4-5. - Exempt signs.     This chapter does not pertain to: (1)  A statutory sign. (2)  A traffic control device sign. (3)  A sign located entirely inside the premises of a building or enclosed space, other than a window sign. (4)  A sign not visible from a public street, sidewalk or right-of-way, except that the foregoing does not exempt a sign for a commercial use that is visible from an abutting residential use. (5)  A sign on a vehicle, other than a prohibited vehicle sign. (Ord. of 4-3-2007, § 1) 
Sec. 7-4-6. - Prohibited signs.     The following signs are not permitted in any zoning district: (1)  Signs imitating traffic or emergency signals. No sign shall be permitted which imitates an official traffic sign or signal, or contains words or symbols displayed in a manner which might mislead or confuse drivers of vehicles, or which displays intermittent lights resembling the color, size, shapes, or order of lights customarily used in traffic signals or on emergency vehicles or on law enforcement vehicles, except as part of a permitted private or public traffic-control sign. (2)  Signs or devices employing confusing, distracting, or intense illumination when visible from the public right-of-way. No sign or device shall be permitted which utilizes intense flashing (strobe type) lights, spot lights, floodlights, search lights, flashing or blinking lights, or any type of pulsating or moving light which may foreseeably impair the vision, cause glare, or may foreseeably interfere with a driver's operation of a motor vehicle or aircraft. (3)  Signs employing confusing or distracting motion. No sign shall be permitted which employs motion in such a manner as to obstruct or interfere with a driver's view of approaching, merging, or intersecting traffic; or a traffic signal, device or sign; or which would otherwise interfere with a driver's operation of a motor vehicle. (4)  Abandoned or discontinued sign or sign structure. (5)  Signs that project into or over a public right-of-way. No sign shall be allowed to project in or over a public right-of-way except for signs in the commercial downtown district and then only if the sign does not prevent safe vehicular and pedestrian passage along the public rights-of-way or sidewalks. Notwithstanding any provisions in this chapter concerning location of signs, signs shall be permitted in the future right-of-way only if the applicant acknowledges in writing that Athens-Clarke County shall not be financially responsible for any sign erected within the future right-of-way and acknowledges that the applicant waives all claims to compensation on the part of the sign owner should the acquisition of the future right-of-way become necessary to Athens-Clarke County. (6)  Snipe signs (bandit signs). (7)  Signs preventing free ingress or egress. No sign of any kind shall be attached so as to prevent free ingress or egress to or from any door, window or fire escape. (8)  Roof signs. (9)  Signs emitting or utilizing sound. Signs which emit or utilize in any manner any sound capable of being detected from the public right-of-way by a person with normal hearing. (10)  Signs requiring removal of trees from the public right-of-way. Signs, excluding traffic control devices and statutory signs, that require the removal of any tree from the public right-of-way. (11)  Signs attached or affixed to bus shelters or bus benches. Signs attached or affixed to bus shelters or bus benches, with the exception of adopt-a-stop signs that are two square feet or less in size that function solely to identify the sponsor of a bus stop or shelter. (12)  Non-shielded illuminated signs affecting pilot visibility or creating aircraft hazard. Non-shielded illuminated signs that affect pilot visibility or are determined to create an aircraft hazard in the transition zone of the local airport(s). (13)  Portable signs. (14)  Cold-air/helium-filled devices. Cold-air/helium-filled devices that exceed five (5) feet at any measurement. (15)  Illegal vehicle sign. (16)  Pennants and streamers. Pennants and streamers, except when they are used for a temporary occasion. (17)  Automatic changeable copy signs. (18)  Signs without permission of property owner. Any sign placed or erected on property without permission of the owner of the property. (19)  Signs tacked, painted, posted, marked or otherwise affixed to trees, rocks, utility poles or other similar structures or natural features. (Ord. of 4-3-2007, § 1; Ord. of 4-7-2009, § 2) 
Sec. 7-4-7. - Signs allowed without a permit in zoning districts.     A permit is not required for the following sign types, and such signs shall not be considered in determining the allowable number or size of signs on a zoning lot; provided, however, that they must comply with all other applicable sections of this chapter. The erection of any sign not listed in this section shall require a permit. (1)  Warning signs and safety signs. Warning signs and safety signs not exceeding four square feet in sign area. (2)  Temporary real estate signs. Temporary real estate signs not exceeding 32 square feet and eight feet in height in all zones except residential zones. Temporary real estate signs shall not exceed six square feet in area and four feet in height in residential zones unless the parcel exceeds three acres in size and is not located in a final recorded subdivision, in which case they shall not exceed 32 square feet. Temporary real estate signs shall be removed within ten days after the subject lot or building is sold or leased. (3)  Professional nameplates. Professional nameplates not exceeding two square feet in sign area where allowed in the zoning ordinance. (4)  Residential nameplates. Residential nameplates not exceeding one square foot in sign area. (5)  Flags. All flags shall be displayed on purpose-built, professionally fabricated flagpoles, which may be vertical or mast-arm flagpoles. In non-residential districts flagpoles shall not exceed the allowed height provided for a structure or building in the applicable zoning district, or 50 feet, whichever is greater. Flagpoles in residential districts shall not exceed 25 feet in height, or the height of the primary structure on the lot, whichever is less. In addition the following regulations shall apply: a.  The maximum dimensions of any flag shall be proportional to the flagpole height. The hoist side of the flag shall not exceed 20 percent of the vertical height of the flagpole, subject to the following limitations: Pole Height Maximum Flag Size Up to 29 feet 30 square feet 30 to 50 feet 60 square feet  Each lot or parcel shall have a maximum of two flagpoles. b.  A maximum of two flags shall be allowed per pole. c.  A vertical flagpole must be setback from all property boundaries a distance at least equal to the height of the flagpole. d.  Flags and flagpoles shall be maintained in good repair, and to the extent applicable shall be in compliance with the building code. Flagpoles with broken halyards shall not be used and flags that are torn shall not be displayed. (6)  Reserved. (7)  Reserved. (8)  Reserved. (9)  Reserved. (10)  Temporary window signs. Signs located on the inside of windows intended for the purpose of viewing from outside the premises, provided that such signs do not exceed 25 percent of the window space, are not permanently attached, and are constructed of such materials that clearly indicates that they are temporary. (11)  Reserved. (12)  Signs attached to bus shelters or bus benches. Signs on bus shelters or bus benches shall be allowed as flat signs not to exceed six square feet in sign area per sign face with a total of no more than one sign per bus stop. (13)  Election signs. For each parcel, one election sign for each candidate and each issue may be displayed. An election sign may be displayed as an attached sign or as a freestanding sign. On parcels that are in residential use, the election sign shall not exceed four square feet in sign area; and, if the election sign is displayed as a freestanding sign on the parcel, the election sign shall not exceed four feet in height. On parcels that are in nonresidential use, the election sign shall not exceed 32 square feet in sign area; and, if the election sign is displayed as a freestanding sign on the parcel, the election sign (i)  Shall be set back at least five feet from all property lines; and (ii)  Shall not exceed eight feet in height. Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary and in accordance with O.G.C.A. section 16-7-58(a)(2), there is no restriction on the length of time a political campaign sign may be displayed or the number of signs which may be displayed on private property for which permission has been granted. (14)  Temporary free expression signs. Temporary free expression signs, not located within the public right-of-way and placed no closer than ten feet to the back of the curb of a public roadway; the sign or banner shall not exceed four square feet in sign area and it shall not exceed four feet in height. (15)  Temporary construction signs. Temporary construction signs not exceeding 32 square feet in sign area, and eight feet in height in all zones except residential zones. Temporary construction signs shall not exceed six square feet in sign area and four feet in height in residential zones unless the parcel exceeds three acres in size and is not located in a final recorded subdivision, in which case they shall not exceed 32 square feet. Temporary construction signs shall be removed within ten days after the construction is completed. (16)  Helium/cold-air-filled devices. Helium/cold-air-filled devices that do not exceed 36 inches at any measurement. (17)  On-site directional signs. On-site directional signs not exceeding four square feet in sign area. (Ord. of 4-3-2007, § 1; Ord. of 4-7-2009, § 3) 
Sec. 7-4-8. - Nonconforming signs.     Subject to the following conditions, nonconforming permanent signs may be continued in operation and maintenance. Such signs shall not be: (1)  Changed or replaced with another nonconforming sign except where changed conditions beyond the control of the owner render the sign nonconforming or warrant the sign's repair; except that the substitution or interchange of sign face or sign copy, poster panels, painted boards or dismountable material of the same size existing prior to replacement shall be permitted; (2)  Enlarged, extended, constructed, moved, or structurally altered except to bring the sign into conformance with all provisions of this chapter; (3)  Moved or placed within a sight triangle; (4)  Placed in any way that obstructs access to or denies use of required parking; or (5)  Placed in any way that interferes with passage through any driveway. (6)  The above prohibitions shall not prevent repairing or restoring to a safe condition any part of a sign or sign structure or normal maintenance operations. (Ord. of 4-3-2007, § 1) 
Sec. 7-4-9. - General provisions for enforcement. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to direct, order, or instigate placing of signs in the public right-of-way, except as may be authorized or required by law. Furthermore, in the prosecution for the violation of this prohibition against signs in the public right-of-way, the fact that a person, a product, or a place of business is advertised on a sign shall be prima facie evidence that the person advertised, or the proprietor of the product advertised, or the proprietor of the place of business advertised, as the case may be, was the person directing the placement of the sign in question. In addition, signs illegally existing on the public right-of-way may be removed by the building official or designee and impounded. All signs impounded may be reclaimed by paying an impoundment fee of $30.00 per sign to the Building Inspection Department. Signs not reclaimed within 30 days may be disposed of. (b)  Any person who erects or maintains a sign on private property or a sign in the public right-of-way in violation of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in section 1-1-5 of this code. However, the punishment for a conviction of this chapter shall not include imprisonment, but shall only include fines. (Ord. of 4-3-2007, § 1) 
Sec. 7-4-10. - Temporary special event signs.     Temporary special event signs in the form of temporary wall signs, banner signs, inflatable signs, streamers and/or pennants may be displayed upon securing a temporary special event sign permit under the following conditions: (1)  Zoning districts. Temporary special event signs shall be permitted to businesses located on an individual lot of record located in C-D, C-G, C-R, C-N, C-O, I, E-I, E-O, and RM-1, RM-2 and RM-3 Zoning Districts. (2)  Duration. A temporary special event sign may be displayed at an eligible business for a period not to exceed 15 consecutive days. No more than four temporary special event sign permits may be issued for any one business in each calendar year; a temporary special event permit shall not be issued more frequently than once every three months; and the total number of calendar days that a business may display a temporary special event sign is 60 calendar days. (3)  Display of sign permit. The sign permit shall be maintained on the premises for inspection for the duration of the display of the temporary special event sign. (4)  Size. The maximum permitted sign area per face shall not exceed the lesser of: (i)  Fifty square feet or (ii)  The maximum square footage allowed for the respective sign type for a permanent sign for the zoning district. (5)  Location restrictions. Temporary special event signs shall not be located in or over a public right-of-way, and shall not extend over a driveway unless at least 16 feet above the driveway surface. (Ord. of 4-3-2007, § 1; Ord. of 4-7-2009, § 4, 5) 
Sec. 7-4-11. - Permanent signs in residential districts.     Permanent wall signs and ground signs in the AR, RS-40, RS-25, RS-15, RS-8, RS-5, RM-1, RM-2, and RM-3 Districts that are not otherwise allowed without a permit pursuant to the provisions of section 7-4-7 are subject to the following limitations and shall require a sign permit: AR District: (a)  Wall signs. Wall signs shall be allowed subject to the following limitations: (1)  Maximum number. Two wall signs shall be allowed. (2)  Maximum size. The maximum size for a wall sign shall be 32 square feet. (3)  Maximum height. The maximum height shall not exceed the top of the signable area. (b)  Ground signs. Ground signs shall be subject to the following limitations: (1)  Maximum number. One ground sign shall be allowed. (2)  Maximum size. The maximum size for a ground sign shall not exceed 32 square feet. (3)  Maximum height. The maximum height of a ground sign shall not exceed eight feet. (4)  Minimum setbacks. The ground sign shall be setback a minimum of five feet from the front and side property lines. (c)  Table I requirements. These permanent signs shall conform to the provisions set forth in table I (district requirements for permanent signs). RS-40, RS-25, RS-15, RS-8, and RS-5 Districts: (a)  Wall signs. Wall signs shall be allowed for subdivision entrances subject to the following limitations: (1)  Maximum number. Two signs, either wall signs or ground signs, shall be allowed per subdivision entrance. (2)  Maximum size. The maximum size for a wall sign for a subdivision entrance is 32 square feet. (3)  Maximum height. The maximum height shall not exceed the top of the signable area. (b)  Ground signs. Ground signs shall be allowed for subdivision entrances subject to the following limitations: (1)  Maximum number. Two signs, either ground signs or wall signs, shall be allowed per subdivision entrance. (2)  Maximum size. The maximum size of a ground sign for a subdivision entrance shall not exceed 32 square feet. (3)  Maximum height. The maximum height of a ground sign for a subdivision entrance shall not exceed eight feet. (4)  Minimum setbacks. A ground sign for a subdivision entrance shall be setback a minimum of five feet from the front and side property lines. (c)  Table I requirements. These permanent signs shall conform to the provisions set forth in Table I (district requirements for permanent signs). RM-1, RM-2, and RM-3 Districts: (a)  Wall signs. Wall signs shall be allowed for entrances subject to the following limitations: (1)  Maximum number. Two signs, either wall signs or ground signs, per entrance shall be allowed, but not to exceed more than two wall signs per street frontage. (2)  Maximum size. The maximum size for a wall sign shall be 32 square feet. (3)  Maximum height. The maximum height shall not exceed the top of the signable area. (b)  Ground signs. Ground signs shall be subject to the following limitations: (1)  Maximum number. Two signs, either ground signs or wall signs, per entrance shall be allowed, but not to exceed more than two ground signs per street frontage. (2)  Maximum size. The maximum size of a ground sign per entrance shall not exceed 32 square feet. (3)  Maximum height. The maximum height of a ground sign per entrance shall not exceed eight feet. (4)  Minimum setbacks. A ground sign shall be setback a minimum of five feet from the front and side property lines. (c)  Table I requirements. These permanent signs shall conform to the provisions set forth in Table I (district requirements for permanent signs). (Ord. of 4-3-2007, § 1) 
Sec. 7-4-12. - Permanent signs in government, parks districts.     Permanent wall signs and ground signs in the G, P (government, parks) district that are not otherwise allowed without a permit pursuant to the provisions of section 7-4-7 are subject to the following limitations and shall require a sign permit: (a)  Wall signs. Wall signs shall be allowed subject to the following limitations: (1)  Maximum number. None, but wall signs are subject to the maximum aggregate size limitations for all wall signage. (2)  Maximum size. The maximum aggregate size for all wall signage is 20 percent of the total wall area. (3)  Maximum height. The maximum height shall not exceed the top of the signable area. (b)  Ground signs. Ground signs shall be subject to the following limitations: (1)  Maximum number. One ground sign shall be allowed per entrance. (2)  Maximum size. The size of a ground sign shall not exceed 32 square feet. (3)  Maximum height. The height of a ground sign shall not exceed eight feet. (4)  Minimum setbacks. The ground sign shall be setback five feet from the front and side property lines. (c)  Directory signs. In addition to the wall signs and ground signs that are allowed, an internally located directory sign within a multi-building or multi-use development and visible from a public way is allowed, subject to the following limitations: (1)  Maximum number. One directory sign. (2)  Maximum size. The size of a directory sign shall not exceed eight square feet. (3)  Maximum height. The height of a directory sign shall not exceed eight feet. (4)  Minimum setback. The directory sign shall be setback ten feet from the curb or out of the right-of-way, whichever is greater. (d)  Table I requirements. These permanent signs shall conform to the provisions set forth in Table I (district requirements for permanent signs). (Ord. of 4-3-2007, § 1) 
Sec. 7-4-13. - Permanent signs in commercial-office and institutional districts.     Permanent wall signs and ground signs in the C-O (Commercial-Office) and IN (Institutional) districts that are not otherwise allowed without a permit pursuant to the provisions of section 7-4-7 are subject to the following limitations and shall require a sign permit: (a)  Wall signs. Wall signs shall be allowed subject to the following limitations: (1)  Maximum number. No more than two wall signs shall be allowed for each business, subject to the maximum aggregate of four wall and ground signs. (2)  Maximum size. The maximum size for a wall sign is 32 square feet. For window signs, however, the maximum size is 32 square feet or 25 percent of the total window area, whichever is less. (3)  Maximum height. The maximum height shall not exceed the top of the signable area. (b)  Projecting signs. Projecting signs shall be allowed subject to the following limitations: (1)  Maximum number. No more than one projecting sign shall be allowed for each business or tenant. (2)  Maximum size. The maximum size of a projecting sign shall not exceed 12 square feet. (3)  Maximum elevation. A projecting sign shall not extend above the second story of the building. (c)  Ground signs. Ground signs shall be subject to the following limitations: (1)  Maximum number. One ground sign shall be allowed per street frontage, subject to the maximum aggregate of four wall and ground signs. (2)  Maximum size. The size of a ground sign shall not exceed 32 square feet. (3)  Maximum height. The height of a ground sign shall not exceed eight feet. (4)  Minimum setbacks. The ground sign shall be setback five feet from the front property line. (d)  Table I requirements. These permanent signs shall conform to the provisions set forth in Table I (district requirements for permanent signs). (Ord. of 4-3-2007, § 1; Ord. of 4-7-2009, §§ 6—8) 
Sec. 7-4-14. - Permanent signs for group developments in commercial-office and institutional districts.     Permanent wall signs and ground signs for group developments in C-O (Commercial-Office)and IN (Institutional) districts that are not otherwise allowed without a permit pursuant to the provisions of section 7-4-7 are subject to the following limitations and shall require a sign permit: (a)  Wall signs. Wall signs shall be allowed subject to the following limitations: (1)  Maximum number. No limitation on number, but only aggregate size limitation for wall signage and separate size limitation for additional wall signs allowed for each tenant or office in a group office development. (2)  Maximum size. The maximum size for group development wall signage is 32 square feet. For window signs, however, the maximum size is 32 square feet or 25 percent of the total aggregate window area, whichever is less. In addition to this wall signage, each tenant in a group development is allowed one wall sign not to exceed four square feet. The maximum aggregate size for wall signs is 64 square feet. (3)  Maximum height. The maximum height shall not exceed the top of the signable area. (b)  Projecting signs. Projecting signs shall be allowed subject to the following limitations: (1)  Maximum number. No more than one projecting sign shall be allowed for each business or tenant. (2)  Maximum size. The maximum size of a projecting sign shall not exceed 12 square feet. (3)  Maximum elevation. A projecting sign shall not extend above the second story of the building. (c)  Ground signs. Ground signs shall be subject to the following limitations: (1)  Maximum number. One ground sign shall be allowed per entrance; in addition, for offices developed on outlot parcels but part of the group development by virtue of shared parking and access, two ground signs shall be allowed but no more than one ground sign along the same street frontage or side of building. (2)  Maximum size. The size of a ground sign for an entrance shall not exceed 32 square feet; however, ground signs on outlot parcels shall not exceed 32 square feet in size. The maximum aggregate size for ground signs is 64 square feet. (3)  Maximum height. The height of a ground sign for an entrance shall not exceed eight feet; however, ground signs for offices developed on outlot parcels shall not exceed four feet in height. (4)  Minimum setbacks. The ground sign shall be setback five feet from all property lines. (d)  Table I requirements. These permanent signs shall conform to the provisions set forth in Table I (district requirements for permanent signs). (Ord. of 4-3-2007, § 1; Ord. of 4-7-2009, §§ 9—11) Editor's note— Ord. of 4-7-2009, § 9, changed the title of § 7-4-14 from Permanent signs for group office developments in commercial-office districts to Permanent signs for group developments in commercial-office and institutional districts. 
Sec. 7-4-15. - Permanent signs in employment-office districts.     Permanent wall signs and ground signs in the E-O (Employment-Office) districts that are not otherwise allowed without a permit pursuant to the provisions of section 7-4-7 are subject to the following limitations and shall require a sign permit: (a)  Wall signs. Wall signs shall be allowed subject to the following limitations: (1)  Maximum number. No more than one wall sign per entrance. (2)  Maximum aggregate size. The aggregate size of wall signage shall not exceed 50 square-feet or 25 percent of the total wall area, whichever is less. (3)  Maximum height. The maximum height shall not exceed the top of the signable area. (b)  Ground signs. Ground signs, other than a group sign, shall be allowed subject to the following limitations: (1)  Maximum number. No more than one ground sign per entrance. (2)  Maximum size. The size of a ground sign shall not exceed 50 square feet. (3)  Maximum height. The height of a ground sign shall not exceed eight feet. (4)  Minimum setbacks. The ground sign shall be setback a minimum of five feet from any lot line. (c)  Group signs. In addition to other permanent signs that are allowed, each group development shall be allowed a group sign subject to the following limitations: (1)  Maximum number. No more than one group commercial ground sign shall be allowed per street frontage. (2)  Maximum area. The maximum sign area shall be limited to 32 square feet per tenant and shall not exceed an aggregate size in excess of 120 square feet. (3)  Maximum height. In E-O Districts, the maximum height shall not exceed 20 feet. (4)  Minimum setbacks. The sign shall be setback five feet from all lot lines. (d)  Table I requirements. These permanent signs shall conform to the provisions set forth in Table I (district requirements for permanent signs). (Ord. of 4-3-2007, § 1; Ord. of 4-7-2009, §§ 12—14) 
Sec. 7-4-16. - Permanent signs in commercial-general districts.     Permanent wall signs and ground signs in the C-G (Commercial-General) district that are not otherwise allowed without a permit pursuant to the provisions of section 7-4-7 are subject to the following limitations and shall require a sign permit: (a)  Wall signs. Wall signs shall be allowed subject to the following limitations: (1)  Maximum number. None but wall signs are limited to aggregate size limitations. (2)  Maximum size. The maximum size of a wall sign shall not exceed 25 percent of the total wall area. (3)  Maximum height. The maximum height shall not exceed the top of the signable area. (b)  Projecting signs. Projecting signs shall be allowed subject to the following limitations: (1)  Maximum number. No more than one projecting sign shall be allowed for each business or tenant. (2)  Maximum size. The maximum size of a projecting sign shall not exceed 12 square feet. (3)  Maximum elevation. A projecting sign shall not extend above the second story of the building. (c)  Ground signs. Ground signs, other than group commercial signs, shall be allowed subject to the following limitations: (1)  Maximum number. One ground sign shall be allowed for a parcel where the road frontage is 180 feet or less; two ground signs shall be allowed for a parcel where the road frontage is between 181 feet and 240 feet; three ground signs shall be allowed for a parcel where the road frontage is between 241 feet and 300 feet; and four ground signs shall be allowed for a parcel where the road frontage is greater than 300 feet. (2)  Maximum size. The size of a ground sign shall not exceed 64 square feet. However, if the road frontage exceeds 240 linear feet, one ground sign may be up to 100 square feet. (3)  Maximum height. The height of a ground sign shall not exceed 20 feet for signs up to 64 square feet in size. Signs greater than 64 square feet but not exceeding 100 square feet in area shall not exceed 30 feet in height. (4)  Minimum setbacks. The ground sign shall be setback five feet from front property line and by its height from all side property lines. (d)  Group signs. In addition to other permanent signs that are allowed, each group development shall be allowed a group sign subject to the following limitations: (1)  Maximum number. No more than one group ground sign shall be allowed per street frontage. (2)  Maximum area. The maximum sign area shall be limited to 32 square feet per tenant and shall not exceed an aggregate size in excess of 300 square feet. (3)  Maximum height. The maximum height shall not exceed 30 feet. (4)  Minimum setbacks. The sign shall be setback five feet from all lot lines. (e)  Table I requirements. These permanent signs shall conform to the provisions set forth in Table I (district requirements for permanent signs). (Ord. of 4-3-2007, § 1, ; Ord. of 4-7-2009, §§ 15—18) Editor's note— Ord. of 4-7-2009, § 15, changed the title of § 7-4-16 from Permanent signs in commercial-general and commercial-rural districts to Permanent signs in commercial-general districts. 
Sec. 7-4-17. - Permanent signs in commercial-neighborhood and commercial-rural districts.     Permanent wall signs and ground signs in the C-N (Commercial-Neighborhood) and C-R (Commercial-Rural) districts that are not otherwise allowed without a permit pursuant to the provisions of section 7-4-7 are subject to the following limitations and shall require a sign permit: (a)  Wall signs. Wall signs shall be allowed subject to the following limitations: (1)  Maximum number. No more than three wall signs shall be allowed for each business or tenant; however, there shall be no more than one awning/canopy sign. (2)  Maximum size. The maximum size for a wall sign is 50 square feet, but if there is more than one wall sign, then the maximum size of the second, and/or third wall signs shall not exceed 32 square feet and the maximum aggregate signage for all wall and ground signs is 114 square feet. However, if the wall sign fronts on a street listed in Appendix A, the maximum size for a wall sign is 32 square feet and the maximum aggregate signage for all wall and ground signs is 75 square feet. For window signs, however, the maximum size is 32 square feet or 25 percent of the window area, whichever is less. (3)  Maximum height. The maximum height shall not exceed the top of the signable area. (b)  Projecting signs. Projecting signs shall be allowed subject to the following limitations: (1)  Maximum number. No more than one projecting sign shall be allowed for each business or tenant. (2)  Maximum size. The maximum size of a projecting sign shall not exceed 12 square feet. (3)  Maximum elevation. A projecting sign shall not extend above the second story of the building. (c)  Ground signs. Ground signs, other than group signs, shall be allowed subject to the following limitations: (1)  Maximum number. One ground sign shall be allowed per street frontage. (2)  Maximum size. The size of a ground sign shall not exceed 50 square feet subject to the maximum aggregate size for all ground and wall signs of 114 square feet. However if the ground sign fronts on a street listed in Appendix A, the maximum size for the ground sign is 32 square feet and the maximum aggregate for all ground and wall signs is 75 square feet. (3)  Maximum height. The height of a ground sign shall not exceed 15 feet. (4)  Minimum setbacks. The ground sign shall be setback five feet from all front and side property lines. (d)  Group signs. In addition to other permanent signs that are allowed, each group development shall be allowed a group sign subject to the following limitations: (1)  Maximum number. No more than one group commercial ground sign shall be allowed per street frontage. (2)  Maximum area. The maximum sign area shall be limited to 32 square feet per tenant and shall not exceed an aggregate size in excess of 120 square feet. (3)  Maximum height. The maximum height shall not exceed 20 feet. (4)  Minimum setbacks. The sign shall be setback five feet from all lot lines. (e)  Table I requirements. These permanent signs shall conform to the provisions set forth in Table I (district requirements for permanent signs). (Ord. of 4-3-2007, § 1; Ord. of 4-7-2009, §§ 19—23) Editor's note— Ord. of 4-7-2009, § 19, changed the title of § 7-4-17 from Permanent signs in commercial-neighborhood districts to Permanent signs in commercial neighborhood and commercial rural districts. 
Sec. 7-4-18. - Permanent signs in commercial downtown districts.     Permanent wall signs and ground signs in the C-D (Commercial-Downtown) Districts that are not otherwise allowed without a permit pursuant to the provisions of section 7-4-7 are subject to the following limitations and shall require a sign permit: (a)  Wall signs. Wall signs shall be allowed subject to the following limitations: (1)  Maximum number. No more than one sign shall be allowed per business. (2)  Maximum size. The total wall signage shall not exceed 20 percent of the ground floor facade. (3)  Maximum height. The maximum height shall not exceed the top of the signable area. (b)  Projecting signs. Projecting signs shall be allowed subject to the following limitations: (1)  Maximum number. No more than one projecting sign shall be allowed for each business or tenant. (2)  Maximum size. The maximum size of a projecting sign shall not exceed 12 square feet. (3)  Maximum projection. The projecting sign shall not project more than four feet or two-thirds the width of the sidewalk, whichever is less. (4)  Maximum elevation. A projecting sign shall not extend above the second story of the building. (c)  Ground signs. Ground signs, other than group signs, shall be allowed subject to the following limitations: (1)  Maximum number. One ground sign shall be allowed per road frontage. (2)  Maximum size. The size of a ground sign shall not exceed 64 square feet; however, where the road frontage exceeds 240 linear feet, the ground sign may be up to 70 square feet in maximum size. (3)  Maximum height. The height of a ground sign shall not exceed 20 feet. (d)  Group signs. In addition to other permanent signs that are allowed, each group development shall be allowed group signs subject to the following limitations: (1)  Maximum number. No more than one group ground or wall sign shall be allowed per street frontage. (2)  Maximum area. The maximum sign area for a ground sign shall be limited to 32 square feet per tenant and shall not exceed an aggregate size in excess of 120 square feet. The maximum sign area for a wall sign shall be limited to five percent of the first floor front façade, but not to exceed 50 square feet. (3)  Maximum height. The maximum height shall not exceed 20 feet for a ground sign. A wall sign shall not exceed the signable area. (4)  Minimum setbacks. The ground sign shall be setback five feet from all lot lines. (e)  Table I requirements. These permanent signs shall conform to the provisions set forth in Table I (district requirements for permanent signs). (Ord. of 4-3-2007, § 1; Ord. of 4-7-2009, §§ 24, 25) 
Sec. 7-4-19. - Permanent signs in industrial and employment-industrial districts.     Permanent wall signs and ground signs in the I (Industrial) and E-I (Employment-Industrial) Districts that are not otherwise allowed without a permit pursuant to the provisions of section 7-4-7 are subject to the following limitations and shall require a sign permit: (a)  Wall signs. Wall signs shall be allowed subject to the following limitations: (1)  Maximum number. No more than two wall signs shall be allowed per business or tenant per street frontage. (2)  Maximum Aggregate Size. The aggregate size of wall signage for any business shall not exceed 25 percent of the wall area. (3)  Maximum height. The maximum height shall not exceed the top of the signable area. (b)  Ground signs. Ground signs shall be allowed subject to the following limitations: (1)  Maximum number. No more than two ground signs shall be allowed per parcel. (2)  Maximum size. The size of a ground sign shall not exceed one square-foot for each three feet of frontage per parcel, subject to a maximum of no more than 300 square feet in any event. (3)  Maximum height. The height of the first ground sign shall not exceed 30 feet. The height of a second ground sign shall not exceed 12 feet. (4)  Minimum setbacks. The ground sign shall be setback a minimum of five feet from all front and side property lines. (c)  Table I requirements. These permanent signs shall conform to the provisions set forth in Table I (district requirements for permanent signs). (Ord. of 4-3-2007, § 1) 
Sec. 7-4-20. - Specific provisions for off-site signs and for signs in historic district or historic landmark. (a)  Billboard. In addition to the general provisions set forth in this chapter, billboards shall be subject to the following specific provisions: (1)  The total number of billboard faces allowed under this chapter shall not exceed the total number of billboard faces and structures in existence as of September 4, 2018, as shown by the planning department inventory. In addition thereto, billboard permits issued on or before September 4, 2018, and constructed prior to the expiration of such permits shall be counted in the total number of billboard faces permitted. A new billboard face may be erected only if an existing billboard face is removed. Replacement billboard faces shall be the same square footage or smaller than the face(s) being removed. In addition, replacement billboard faces/structures may be erected only in accordance with provisions (2) through (8) listed below. (2)  Billboards shall only be permitted in C-G, C-R, I, E-I and E-O zoning districts of Athens-Clarke County (only if the C-G property has frontage on a street listed in Appendix C, Commercial-General (C-G) Zoned Properties Allowing Billboards). (3)  No billboard base, face or structure shall be located closer than 1,000 feet from any other billboard base, face, or structure located on the same side of the street measured linearly along the right-of-way. Distances shall be measured from the nearest point of any part of the billboard to the nearest point of any other part of a billboard. (4)  No more than 12 billboard faces per linear mile, no more than six faces visible in any one direction, and no more than eight billboard structures shall be allowed. Billboards located at intersections will be counted on each street in which the face is visible for a distance of one block or 400 feet, whichever is less. Official state highway mile markers, when available, shall be used in determining the number of sites per mile. Where official state highway mile markers are not available, distances shall be measured from City Hall, 301 College Avenue. (5)  No billboard base, face or structure shall be located within 150 feet of a residential zoning district, public park, public playground, school ground, cemetery, church, airport clear zone, or scenic area as designated by the mayor and commission as measured from the nearest point of any part of the billboard to the district, area boundary, or property line, measured linearly along the road. Nor should any part of a billboard face, base or structure be located closer than 50 feet from any lot line of a residential zoning district, public park, public playground, school ground, cemetery, church, airport clear zone, or scenic area as designated by the mayor and commission. (6)  All parts of a billboard face, base and structure shall be set back a minimum of five feet from the side and rear property lines. (7)  No more than two faces shall be displayed per billboard site to any direction of traffic flow with a total square footage not to exceed 600 square feet per side plus extended advertising space not to exceed 50 square feet per face nor extend more than three feet above the height of the face of the billboard. (8)  No billboard shall be greater than 40 feet in height (excluding the extended advertising space). This height shall be measured from the grade at the right-of-way boundary line or the grade of the billboard site if such grade is higher than the grade at the boundary line of the street right-of-way to the uppermost part of the billboard face, base or structure. If the sign is located below the grade at the boundary line of the street right-of-way, sign height shall be measured from the edge of the right-of-way to the uppermost part of the billboard face, base or structure. Measurement of Height from Grade (b)  Special provisions for off-site directional signs. (1)  Off-site directional signs shall only be permitted in C-G, C-R, AR, E-O, I, and E-I zoning districts, as defined in the official zoning map, and only businesses which are located on local and minor collector streets shall be permitted to use an off-site directional sign. Such directional sign(s) shall only be permitted on major collectors and arterial streets. (2)  Off-site directional signs shall have a maximum of 16 square feet of area per face, with a maximum of two back-to-back faces and a maximum height of eight feet. Businesses eligible to erect an off-site directional sign may erect two such signs, provided that there is a minimum one-quarter mile between them as measured along the right-of-way. (3)  Three or more businesses may advertise on one off-site directional sign, provided the sign meets the following requirements: a.  The total square footage shall not exceed 64 square feet. An additional 24 square feet will be allowed for group identification. b.  Each business sign shall be limited in size based on the number of existing businesses in an identifiable group/location. (For example, if an identifiable group/location has ten businesses, then each business sign would be limited to 6.4 square feet. This would hold true even if an existing business did not want to be listed on the sign at the time of sign construction.) In no instance shall a business be allowed more than 16 square feet of sign space. c.  The maximum height for this type of directional sign shall be 15 feet. d.  No more than one sign with multiple businesses shall be located on a single parcel. (4)  Reserved. (5)  Off-site directional signs shall be set back a minimum of five feet from the side and rear property lines. Distances shall be measured from the nearest portion of the sign to the property line. No more than two off-site directional signs shall be allowed per parcel. No two off-site directional signs shall be any closer to any other off-site directional signs than one-quarter mile. (c)  Signs located in historic districts or historic landmark. The following regulations shall apply when the proposed sign is located at a contributing building within a historic district or in front of a locally-designated historic landmark: (1)  In addition to an application for a sign permit, an application for a certificate of appropriateness for a sign must be filed for decision by the Historic Preservation Commission. At the election of the applicant, the application for the certificate of appropriateness may be submitted either prior to, or contemporaneous with, the processing of the application for a sign permit; however, the sign permit itself will not issue until the applicant secures a certificate of appropriateness. If the applicant elects to secure the certificate of appropriateness first before the processing of the application for a sign permit, then the processing of the sign permit application shall commence upon the submission of the certificate of appropriateness to the building official by the applicant and the 45-day time period set forth in section 7-4-22(d)(2) shall commence at that time. In making its decision to approve or deny the certificate of appropriateness for a sign, the Historic Preservation Commission shall apply the following criteria: a.  The sign(s) shall comply with the sign type, number, size, height and setback standards for the underlying zoning district. b.  The design of the sign shall be compatible with the design of the property, building or site upon which it is to be located. c.  The sign's material shall be compatible with the period and style of the property, building or site. d.  The sign's location shall not obscure any significant architectural features of the building or site. e.  For the Downtown Local Historic District, the sign shall be in compliance with any applicable sign design guidelines. f.  The content of the message shall not be considered. (2)  Whenever a certificate of appropriateness is required for a sign, the certificate shall be granted or denied within 45 days from the filing of the initial complete application. If the certificate is not granted or denied within that time period, the applicant may proceed as if the certificate had been granted. (3)  An appeal from any decision made on the issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness shall follow the appeals procedure in chapter 8-5. (4)  Any sign permit and sign permit application under this section shall be subject to all other requirements for the issuance of permits under section 7-4-22. (Ord. of 4-3-2007, § 1; Ord. of 11-6-2018(2), § 1 ) 
Sec. 7-4-21. - Variances to sign requirements. (a)  After denial of a sign permit by the building official, a property owner or sign contractor may either appeal the decision pursuant to section 7-4-22(e) or apply to the Hearings Board established under the zoning code for a variance by filing an application on a form to be obtained from the Planning Department. The variance request must be filed within ten calendar days after the denial of the sign permit. The variance request must be set for hearing within 45 calendar days of the filing of the complete written variance application. (b)  The Hearings Board is authorized to grant such variance from the strict application of the requirements of this chapter related to sign setback, sign height, sign placement, and/or sign type (but only insofar as to whether the sign is a wall sign or freestanding sign) when due to special conditions a literal enforcement of the provisions of this chapter will, in an individual case, result in unusual hardship, so the spirit of this chapter shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. A variance to sign setback, height, placement or type may be granted in an individual case of unusual hardship upon a finding by the Hearings Board that the following conditions exist: (1)  There exist extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the property in question resulting from its size, shape, or topography which are not applicable to other lands or structures in the area; (2)  A literal interpretation of the provisions of this chapter would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other similar properties; (3)  Granting the variance requested will not confer upon the property of the applicant any significant privileges which are denied to other similar properties; (4)  The requested variance will be in harmony with the purpose and intent of this chapter and will not be injurious to the neighborhood or to the general welfare and safety; (5)  The special circumstances are not the result of actions of the applicant; (6)  The variance, if granted, will represent the minimum variance that will afford relief from the identified hardship and will represent the least deviation possible from the zoning regulation and from the comprehensive plan; and (7)  The variance is not a request to increase the allowable square footage of sign area, to increase the total number of signs allowed, or to increase the maximum allowable total sign square footage allowed per site. (c)  Appeals from the decision of the Hearings Board shall follow the appeals procedure set forth in the zoning code for appeals from decisions of the Hearings Board. (Ord. of 4-3-2007, § 1; Ord. of 4-7-2009, § 26) 
Sec. 7-4-22. - Permits. (a)  Permits required. Except for signs exempted from permitting under this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to erect, repair, alter, replace or relocate within Athens-Clarke County any sign, as defined in this chapter, without first obtaining a sign permit from the Director of Building Inspections and making payment scheduled for the same. This requirement does not include routine maintenance of a sign or change of message on a lawfully erected sign. All signs shall, in addition, be subject to the applicable provisions of the building code and the electrical code and any permit fees required thereunder. A permit shall be required for each incidence of temporary sign usage.     In addition, all applications for sign permits must be submitted by an individual(s) with 51 or more percent ownership in fee simple of subject property or his legal agent in writing over the owner's signature.     Notwithstanding any provisions in this chapter concerning the location of signs, signs shall be permitted in the future right-of-way only if the applicant acknowledges in writing that: (1)  Athens-Clarke County shall not be financially responsible for any sign erected within the future right-of-way; and (2)  The applicant waives all claims to compensation on the part of the sign owner should the acquisition of the future right-of-way become necessary by Athens-Clarke County. (b)  Illuminated graphic/approved by electrical inspector. The application for a permit for any sign in which electrical wiring and connections are to be used shall be submitted to the electrical inspector. The electrical inspector shall examine the plans and specifications respecting all wiring and connections to determine if the same complies with the electrical code of Athens-Clarke County and he shall approve the permit within the time limit for the sign permit approval if the plans and specifications comply with the Code. All illuminated signs shall conform to any nationally-recognized testing laboratory (NRTL) standard. (c)  Application for sign permit. Applications for sign permits shall be made upon application forms provided by the building official and shall contain or have attached thereto the following information: (1)  Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant; (2)  Address of building, structure, or lot to which or upon which the sign is to be attached or erected; (3)  Position of the sign in relation to nearby buildings, structures, or property lines; (4)  One accurate scale drawing of the plans, specifications, and method of construction and attachment to the building or ground for the sign, as well as a scale drawing of the site showing drives, structures, all existing ground and wall signs, including their size(s) and height(s) and any other limiting site features; (5)  Name or person, firm, corporation, or association erecting the structure; (6)  Any electrical permit required and issued for said sign; (7)  Application for a certificate of appropriateness where applicable; and (8)  Authorization by owner, if applicable, or by owner's authorized agent. (d)  Permit issued if application is in order; time for consideration. (1)  It shall be the duty of the building official, upon the filing of an application for a sign permit, to examine such plans and specifications and other data and the premises upon which it is proposed to erect the sign, and if it shall appear that the proposed structure is in compliance with all the requirements of this chapter, upon final inspection of the sign all applications meeting the requirements of this chapter shall be granted. If an application fails to meet the requirements of this chapter, the denial shall be in writing and shall identify the requirements that are not met by the application. Any application rejected for incompleteness shall identify the reasons further action cannot be taken. If the work authorized under a sign permit has not been started within six months after date of issuance, the permit shall become null and void and a new permit shall be required. (2)  All sign permit applications shall be granted, denied or rejected for incompleteness within 45 days of the building official's actual receipt of a completed application and the payment of the permit fee. The building official or designee shall give notice to the applicant of the decision by hand delivery or by mailing a notice to the address on the permit application on or before the 45 th day after receipt of the completed application and payment. If mailed, the notice shall be deemed to have been given upon the date of mailing in conformity with this section. If the building official fails to act by granting, denying or rejecting the application within the 45-business day period, the permit shall be deemed to have been denied. (e)  Vouchers for billboards. Upon proof of ownership of a billboard face or structure and upon proof of removal of such billboard face or structure, the billboard owner will receive a voucher permitting said billboard owner to replace such billboard face or structure in accordance with all applicable provisions of this Chapter. A voucher shall become void one (1) year after its issuance or upon issuance of a permit to construct a replacement billboard face or structure, whichever occurs first. Upon issuance of a permit to construct a replacement billboard face or structure, the person or entity receiving the permit must completely construct the billboard within six (6) months of issuance or said permit shall become void. (f)  Appeal. A person whose permit application has been denied may appeal the decision to the Administrative Hearing Officer in writing within ten days of the date of the denial pursuant to the provisions of section 1-5-1. The appeal hearing must be set to occur within 45 calendar days of the filing of the written appeal. (g)  Permit fees . The permit fee for signs shall be based on the cost of administering the sign permit program, inspecting signs and enforcing the sign regulations as established by the Mayor and Commission by resolution. The permit fee for each permanent sign shall be $75.00 plus $10.00 per $1,000.00 of the total cost of each sign. The fee for each temporary sign shall be $30.00. The money collected from these permit fees shall be kept in a fund to be used for sign inspection, regulation, and enforcement. (Ord. of 4-3-2007, § 1; Ord. of 4-7-2009, § 27; Ord. of 6-4-2013, § 10; Ord. of 11-6-2018(2), § 2 ) 
Sec. 7-4-23. - Amendments to chapter.     No amendment shall become effective until it has been proposed by or shall first have been submitted to the planning commission for review and recommendation. (Ord. of 4-3-2007, § 1) 
Sec. 7-4-24. - Severability clause. (a)  Generally. If any part, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term, or word of this chapter is declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, the declaration of such unconstitutionality shall not affect any other part, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term, or word of this chapter. (b)  Severability where less speech results. Without diminishing or limiting in any way the declaration of severability set forth above in subsection (a), or elsewhere in this chapter, this code, or any adopting ordinance, if any part, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term, or word of this chapter is declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, the declaration of such unconstitutionality shall not affect any other part, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term, or word of this chapter, even if such severability would result in a situation where there would be less speech, whether by subjecting previously exempt signs to permitting or otherwise. (c)  Severability of provisions pertaining to prohibited signs. Without diminishing or limiting in any way the declaration of severability set forth above in subsection (a), or elsewhere in this chapter, this code, or any adopting ordinance, if any part, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term, or word of this division or any other law is declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, the declaration of such unconstitutionality shall not affect any other part, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term, or word of this chapter that pertains to prohibited signs, including specifically those signs and sign-types prohibited and not allowed under section 7-4-6 of this chapter. Furthermore, if any part, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term, or word of section 7-4-6 is declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, the declaration of such unconstitutionality shall not affect any other part, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term, or word of section 7-4-6. (d)  Severability of prohibition and limitations on off-site signs and billboards. If any part, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term, or word of this chapter and/or any other code provisions and/or laws are declared invalid or unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, the declaration of such unconstitutionality shall not affect the prohibition and limitation on off-site signs and billboards as contained herein. (Ord. of 4-3-2007, § 1) TABLE I FOR ATHENS-CLARKE COUNTY SIGN REGULATIONS Sign-Type Allowed Total No. of Sign-Types Allowed Maximum Allowable Sq. Ft. of Sign Area Maximum Height Minimum Setbacks; Other AR districts. See sec. 7-4-11 Wall sign 2 32 sf. Top of signable area N/A Ground sign 1 32 sf. 8 ft. 5 ft. from front property line 5 ft. from side property lines RS-5, RS-8, RS-15, RS-25, RS-40 districts. See sec. 7-4-11 Wall sign at entrance 2 per entrance No more than 2 total signs per entrance 32 sf. Top of signable area N/A Wall sign for nonresidential use 2 32 sf. Top of signable area N/A Ground sign at entrance 2 per entrance No more than 2 total signs per entrance 32 sf. 8 ft. 5 ft. from front property line 5 ft. from side property lines Ground sign for nonresidential use 2 32 sf. 8 ft. 5 ft. from front property line 5 ft. from side property lines RM-1, RM-2, RM-3 districts. See sec. 7-4-11 Wall sign at entrance 2 per entrance, but not to exceed 2 per street frontage 32 sf. Top of signable area N/A Wall sign for nonresidential use (other than entrance) 2 32 sf. Top of signable area N/A Ground sign at entrance 2 per entrance, but not to exceed 2 per street frontage 32 sf. 8 ft. 5 ft. from front property line 5 ft. from side property lines Ground sign for nonresidential use (other than entrance) 2 32 sf. 8 ft. 5 ft. from front property line 5 ft. from side property lines G, P districts. See sec. 7-4-12 Wall sign 2 per site entrance 20% of wall area Top of signable area N/A Ground sign 1 per entrance 32 sf. 8 ft. 5 ft. from front property line 5 ft. from side property lines Internal directory sign 1 8 sf. 8 ft. 10 ft. from curb 10 ft. from right-of-way C-O, IN districts. See sec. 7-4-13 Wall sign 2 per business No more than 1 canopy/awning sign for each business subject to maximum 4 wall and ground sign aggregate 32 sf. If wall sign is a window sign, the size is limited to the lesser of: (a) 32 sf. or (b) 25% of window area Top of signable area N/A Projecting sign 1 for each business 12 sf. Not above second story Must be at least 9 feet above a sidewalk. Must not project beyond the lesser of: (a) 4 feet from building or (b) 2/3 width of sidewalk. Ground sign 1 per street frontage subject to maximum 4 wall and ground sign aggregate 32 sf. 8 ft. 5 ft. from all property lines Group developments in C-O, IN districts. See sec. 7-4-14 Wall sign 1 per entrance, but no window sign. 32 sf. Maximum aggregate 64 sf. Top of signable area N/A Wall sign (other than at entrance) 1 wall sign per business subject to maximum aggregate size for wall signs 4 sf. Maximum aggregate 64 sf. Top of signable area N/A Projecting sign 1 for each business 12 sf. Not above second story N/A Ground sign (at entrance) 1 32 sf. subject to maximum aggregate 64 sq. ft. for ground signs 8 ft. N/A Ground sign (at an outlot parcel) 2, but no more than 1 for street frontage 32 sf. subject to maximum aggregate 64 sq. ft. for ground signs 4 ft. 5 ft. from any property line E-O districts. See section 7-4-15 Wall sign 1 per entrance 25% of wall area but not to exceed 50 sf. Top of signable area N/A Ground sign 1 per entrance 50 sf. 8 ft. 5 ft. from any lot line Ground sign: Group commercial sign 1 per street frontage 32 sf. per business or tenant, but not to exceed an aggregate of 120 sf. 20 ft. 5 ft. from any lot line C-N and C-R Districts. See section 7-4-17 Wall sign (not facing a street listed in Appendix A) 3 per each business 50 sf. for first wall sign 32 sf. for second and third wall signs. However, if any wall sign is a window sign, the size is limited to the lesser of: (a) 32 sf. or (b) 25% of window area. Aggregate size limitation of 114 sf. for all ground and wall signs. Top of signable area N/A Wall sign (facing a street listed in Appendix A) 3 per each business 32 sf. However, if any wall sign is a window sign, the size is limited to the lesser of: (a) 32 sf. or (b) 25% of window area. 75 aggregate sf. limitation for all wall and ground signs. Top of signable area N/A Projecting sign 1 for each business 12 sf. Not above second story Must be at least 9 feet above a sidewalk. Must not project beyond the lesser of: (a) 4 feet from building or (b) 2/3 width of sidewalk. Ground sign (not facing a street listed in Appendix A) 1 per street frontage 50 sf. for first ground sign 32 sf. for any additional ground sign Aggregate size limitation of 114 sf. for all ground and wall signs 15 feet 5 ft. from all property lines Ground sign (facing a street listed in Appendix A) 1 per street frontage 32 sf. for first ground sign 32 sf. for any additional ground sign Aggregate size limitation of 75 sf. for all ground and wall signs 15 feet 5 ft. from all property lines Ground sign: Group sign 1 per street frontage 32 sf. per business, but not to exceed an aggregate of 120 sf. 20 ft. 5 ft. from all property lines C-G district. See sec. 7-4-16 Wall sign N/A, but wall signs are subject to aggregate limit on all wall signage; 75% of wall area must be sign free 25% of aggregate wall area for all wall signage Top of signable area N/A Wall signs (in C-G zones and facing streets listed in Appendix B) Subject to C-N sign standards. Subject to C-N sign standards. Top of signable area N/A Projecting sign 1 for each business or tenant 12 sf. Not above second story Must be at least 9 feet above a sidewalk. Must not project beyond the lesser of: (a) 4 feet from building or (b) 2/3 width of sidewalk. Ground sign 1 for parcel with frontage of 180 linear ft. or less 2 for parcels with frontage of between 181-240 linear ft., inclusive 3 for parcels with frontage of between 241-300 linear ft., inclusive 4 for parcels with frontage of more than 300 linear ft. 64 sf. However, if the road frontage exceeds 240 linear feet, one ground sign may be up to 100 sf. in size and 30 feet in height. 20 feet However, if the road frontage exceeds 240 linear feet, one ground sign may be up to 100 sf. in size and 30 feet in height. A ground sign shall be set back from all side property lines by its height. A ground sign shall be set back 5 ft. from front property line. Ground signs (in C-G zones and facing streets listed in Appendix B) Subject to C-N sign standards Subject to C-N sign standards 15 feet 5 ft. from front property line 5 ft. from side property lines Ground sign: Group commercial sign 1 per street frontage 300 sf. 30 ft. 5 ft. from all property lines C-D districts. See sec. 7-4-18 Wall sign 1 for each business or tenant 20% of the ground floor facade Top of signable area N/A Projecting sign 1 for each business or tenant 12 sf. Not above second story Must be at least 9 feet above a sidewalk. Must not project beyond the lesser of: (a) 4 feet from building or (b) 2/3 width of sidewalk. Ground sign 1 per street frontage 64 sf. 70 sf. if road frontage exceeds 240 linear feet 20 ft. A ground sign shall be set back from all side property lines by its height. Group sign 1 ground or wall sign per street frontage 32 sf. per tenant, but not to exceed an aggregate of 120 sf. for ground signs; 5% of first floor front facade, but not to exceed 50 sq. ft. for wall signs. 20 ft. for ground sign; Not above signable area for wall sign 5 ft. from all property lines for ground sign; N/A for wall sign I and E-I Districts. See section 7-4-19 Wall sign 2 per business or tenant per street frontage Aggregate size limitation for all wall signs shall not exceed 25% of wall area. Top of signable area N/A Ground sign 2 per parcel 1 sf. for each 3 linear feet of frontage per parcel, subject to a maximum size of no more than 300 sf. in any event 30 feet for one ground sign 12 feet for second ground sign 5 ft. from front property line 5 ft. from side property lines    (Ord. of 4-3-2007, § 1; Ord. of 4-7-2009, § 28) 
APPENDIX A. - C-N AND C-R ZONED PROPERTIES USING C-N (RESTRICTIVE) STANDARDS     Properties that are zoned C-N (commercial-neighborhood) and C-R (commercial-rural) and front the following streets shall follow the C-N (restrictive) standards: Street name Barrington Dr. Barnett Shoals Rd. Berlin St. Boulevard Cedar Shoals Dr. Chase St. Gaines School Rd. Hancock Ave. Henderson Ext. Lumpkin St. N & S Martin Luther King Dr. Meigs St. Milledge Ave. N & S Nacoochee Ave. Nellie B Ave. North Ave. Norwood Cir. Oglethorpe Ave. Park Ave. Peter St. Pope St. Prince Ave. Satula Ave. Third St. Vine St. Whitehead Rd. Yonah Ave. (Ord. of 4-3-2007, § 1; Ord. of 4-7-2009, § 29) Editor's note— Ord. of 4-7-2009, § 29 changed the title of Appendix A from C-N zoned properties using C-N-1 (restrictive) standards to C-N and C-R zoned properties using C-N (restrictive) standards. 
APPENDIX B. - C-G ZONED PROPERTIES USING C-N STANDARDS     Properties that are zoned C-G (commercial-general) and front the following streets shall follow the C-N sign standards: Street name Alps Rd. Arrowhead Rd. Baldwin St. Barber St. Barnett Shoals Rd. Baxter St. Berry Dr. Billups N St. Bloomfield St. Bobbin Mill Rd. Boulevard Bray St. Briarcliff Rd. Brooklyn Rd. Brookwood Dr. Calhoun Dr. Carr St. Chase N St. Chase S St. Cherokee Rd. Church N St. Church S St. Cleveland Ave. Coile Dr. College Station Rd. Custom Pl. Dearing Ext. Dearing St. Donna St. East Meadow Dr. Elbert St. Epps Bridge Rd. Fairfield Cir. Fourth St. Fowler Dr. Gaines School Rd. Georgia Dr. Gilmer St. Glenhaven Ave. Grove St. Hale Dr. Hancock W Ave. Harris N St. Harris S St. Hawthorne Ave. Hobson Ave. Honeysuckle Ln. Hoyt St. Inglewood Ave. Ivy Ct. Jennings Mill Rd. Johnson Dr. Julious Dr. King Ave. Lumpkin N St. Lumpkin S St. Mary Ann Cir. Mellwood Dr. Milledge Ave. N & S Milledge Cir. Miller St. Mimosa Dr. Minor St. Nellie B Ave. North Ave. Oglethorpe Ave. Old Broad W St. Old Commerce Rd. Old Epps Bridge Rd. Old Monroe Hwy. Paris St. Park Ave. Peabody St. Peter S St. Pope N St. Poplar S St. Produce Ln Reese St. Riverhill Dr. Rocksprings N St. Satula Ave. Spring Valley Rd. Springtree Rd. Sunnyhill Dr. Sycamore Dr. Timothy Rd. Townon Dr. Whitehead Rd. Wynburn Ave. (Ord. of 4-3-2007, § 1) 
APPENDIX C. - COMMERCIAL-GENERAL (C-G) ZONED PROPERTIES ALLOWING BILLBOARDS     Properties that are zoned commercial-general (C-G) and front on the following streets may allow billboards, provided that all the other general and specific provisions as outlined in this chapter have been met. Street name Atlanta Hwy. Athens Perimeter Broad St. Classic Rd. Commerce Rd. Conway Dr. Crane Dr. Dakota Dr. Danielsville Rd. Hull Rd. Huntington Rd. Hwy. 29 N Jefferson Rd. Jimmie Daniel Rd. Lexington Rd. Macon Hwy. Mill Ctr. Blvd. Mitchell Bridge Rd. Monroe Hwy. Newton Bridge Rd. Oak St. Oconee St. Old Hull Rd. Winston Dr. Winterville Rd. (Ord. of 4-3-2007, § 1) 
CHAPTER 7-5. - APPLICATION OF CODES TO EXISTING HISTORIC OR LANDMARK MUSEUM BUILDINGS Sec. 7-5-1. Intent and purpose. Sec. 7-5-2. Definitions. Sec. 7-5-3. Conditions for application. Sec. 7-5-4. Hazardous conditions. Sec. 7-5-5. Additions to existing building. Sec. 7-5-6. Minor alterations and new mechanical systems. Sec. 7-5-7. Continued use. Sec. 7-5-8. Change in use. Sec. 7-5-9. Changes in use of a portion of a building. Sec. 7-5-10. Floor loading. Sec. 7-5-11. Documentation. Sec. 7-5-12. Compliance alternatives. Sec. 7-5-13. Appeals. Sec. 7-5-14. Landmark museum buildings. Sec. 7-5-15. Historic buildings. 
Sec. 7-5-1. - Intent and purposes. (a)  It is the purpose of this chapter to encourage the sensitive rehabilitation, restoration, stabilization, or preservation of existing buildings throughout Athens-Clarke County and to encourage the preservation of buildings and structures deemed to be historic in total or in part; provided, however, such rehabilitation and preservation efforts should provide for the upgrading of the safety features of the building or structure to provide a practical level of safety to the public and surrounding property. It is the further purpose of this chapter to provide guidance regarding acceptable alternative solutions and to stimulate enforcement authorities to utilize alternative compliance concepts whenever practical to permit the continued use of existing buildings and structures without overly restrictive financial burdens on owners or occupants. (b)  The provisions of this chapter shall not be applicable to new construction, except as specifically provided herein. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1) 
Sec. 7-5-2. - Definitions.     The following definitions shall apply to the enforcement and implementation of this chapter:     Building system: Any utility, mechanical, electrical, structural, engross, or fire protection/safety system.     Enforcement authority: The chief building official, or his designee, and the fire marshal.     Existing building or structure: Any completed building or structure which has been placed in service for a minimum of five years.     Historic building: Any building so designated by the State Historic Preservation Officer as individually significant or as contributing to the historic character of a historic district, pursuant to the rules and regulations adopted by the Board of Natural Resources or as so designated pursuant to the provisions of article 2 of chapter 10 of title 44 of the O.C.G.A., the Georgia Historic Preservation Act.     Landmark museum building: A historic building or structure used as an exhibit of the building or structure itself, and which exhibits a high degree of architectural integrity, and which is open to the public not less than 12 days per year; however, additional uses, original or ancillary, to the use as a museum shall be permitted within the same building subject to the provisions of paragraph (3) of subsection (b) of Code section 25-2-13 of the O.C.G.A. Landmark museum buildings shall be so designated by the State Historic Preservation Officer pursuant to rules and regulations adopted by the Board of Natural Resources. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1) 
Sec. 7-5-3. - Conditions for application.     The provisions of this chapter authorize the enforcement authority to permit the repair, alteration, addition, or change of use or occupancy of existing buildings without total compliance with any rule, regulation, code, or standard for new construction requirements under the following general conditions: (1)  All noted conditions hazardous to life, based on the provisions of applicable state and local standards or codes for existing buildings, and outlined in section 7-5-4 shall be corrected to a reasonable and realistic degree as set forth in this chapter; (2)  The existing building becomes the minimum performance standard; and (3)  The degree of compliance of the building after changes must not be below that existing before the changes. Nothing in this chapter will require or prohibit compliance with requirements more stringent than those provided in this chapter. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1) 
Sec. 7-5-4. - Hazardous conditions.     With reference to existing buildings, authorized enforcement authorities should assure that any of the conditions or defects described in this section are identified and corrected as deemed appropriate by the enforcement authority having jurisdiction and through the utilization of appropriate compliance alternatives: (1)  Structural. Any building or structure or portion thereof which is in imminent danger of collapse because of, but not limited to, the following factors: a.  Dilapidation, deterioration or decay; b.  Faulty structural design or construction; c.  The removal, movement, or instability of any portion of the ground necessary for the purpose of supporting such building; or (2)  Number of exits. Less than two approved independent, remote and properly protected exitways serving every story of a building, except where a single exitway is permitted by the applicable state or local fire or building code or life safety code; (3)  Capacity of exits. Any required door, aisle, passageway, stairway, or other means of egress which is not of sufficient capacity to provide for the population of the portions of the building served and which is not so arranged as to provide safe and adequate means of egress to a place of safety; and (4)  Mechanical systems. Utilities and mechanical systems not in conformance with the codes in effect at the time of construction of a building which create a serious threat of fire or threatens the safety of the occupants of the building. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1) 
Sec. 7-5-5. - Additions to existing building.     Additions to an existing building shall comply with the applicable requirements of state and local laws, rules, regulations, codes and standards for new construction. Such additions shall not impose loads either vertical or horizontal which would cause the existing building to be subjected to stresses exceeding those permitted under new construction. If the existing building does not comply with the standards provided in this chapter and the authorized enforcement authority finds that the addition adversely affects the performance of the total building, the authorized enforcement authority may require: (1)  The new addition to be separated from the existing structure by at least a two-hour fire wall with openings therein properly protected; or (2)  The installation of an approved automatic fire suppression system; or (3)  Other remedies which may be deemed appropriate by the enforcement authority. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1) 
Sec. 7-5-6. - Minor alterations and new mechanical systems.     Minor alterations or repairs to an existing building which do not adversely affect the performance or safety of the building may be made with the same or like materials. Existing buildings which, in part or as a whole, exceed the requirements of any applicable construction or fire safety code may, in the course of compliance with this chapter, have reduced or removed, in part or total, features not required by such code for new construction, provided, however, that such features were not a condition of prior approval. Existing buildings and structures which, in part or as a whole, do not meet the requirements of the applicable code for new construction may be altered or repaired without further compliance to any such code by utilizing the provisions of this chapter, provided their present degree of compliance to any applicable construction of fire safety code is not reduced. Any new mechanical systems installed in an existing building shall conform to applicable codes for new construction to the fullest extent practical as approved by the authorized enforcement authorities. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1) 
Sec. 7-5-7. - Continued use.     The legal use and occupancy of any building or structure may be continued without change, except as may be provided otherwise by this chapter or as may be legally provided for by any applicable state or local law, rule, regulation, code or standard. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1) 
Sec. 7-5-8. - Change in use. (a)  A total change in the use or occupancy of any existing building which would cause a greater hazard to the public shall not be made unless such building is made to comply with the requirements of the applicable state and local rules, regulations, codes, and standards for the new use or occupancy; provided, however, the compliance alternative provisions of this chapter may be utilized by authorized enforcement authorities where total or strict compliance with applicable state or local rules, regulations, codes or standards is not practical. (b)  When the proposed use is of equal or lesser hazard as determined by an authorized enforcement authority, further compliance with any code for new construction is not required unless otherwise provided in this chapter. Alterations or repairs to an existing building or structure which do not adversely affect the performance of the building may be made with like materials. Any proposed change to the existing building or change in type of contents of the existing building shall not increase the fire hazard to adjacent buildings or structures. If the fire hazard to adjacent buildings or structures is increased, then requirements of applicable construction of fire safety codes for exterior walls shall apply. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1) 
Sec. 7-5-9. - Changes in use of a portion of a building. (a)  If a portion of a building is changed to a new use or occupancy and that portion is separated from the remainder of the building with vertical or horizontal fire separations complying with applicable state or local rules, regulations, codes, or standards or with compliance alternatives, then the portion changed shall be made to comply to the applicable requirements for the new use or occupancy to the extent noted in section 7-5-8. (b)  If a portion of the building is changed to a new use or occupancy and that portion is not separated from the remainder of the building as noted in subsection (a) hereinabove, then the provisions of the applicable state and local rules, regulations, codes, and standards applying to each use or occupancy of the building shall apply to the entire building to the extent noted in section 7-5-8; provided, however, if there are conflicting provisions in requirements for the various uses or occupancies, the authorized enforcement authority shall apply the strictest requirements. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1) 
Sec. 7-5-10. - Floor loading.     Any proposed change in the use or occupancy of an existing building or portion thereof which could increase the floor loading should be investigated by a Georgia-registered professional engineer to determine the adequacy of the existing floor system to support the increased loads. If the existing floor system is found to be inadequate, it should be modified to support the increased loads or the proposed allowable floor loading shall be reduced by and posted by the appropriate enforcement authority. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1) 
Sec. 7-5-11. - Documentation.     Whenever action is taken on an existing building to repair, make alterations, or change the use of occupancy of an existing structure and when such action proposes the use of compliance alternatives, the authorized enforcement authority shall ensure that at least one copy of the accepted compliance alternative approved, including applicable plans, test data, or other data submitted for evaluation, be maintained on file in the office of the chief building official. If such structure also falls under the jurisdiction of a state level enforcement authority, at least one copy of same material shall be maintained on file with that authority. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1) 
Sec. 7-5-12. - Compliance alternatives.     The following subsections (1) through (5) contain generally acceptable compliance alternatives illustrating principles which shall be applied to the rehabilitation of existing buildings by enforcement authorities in Athens-Clarke County. It is recognized for purposes of this chapter that all building systems interact with each other; therefore, any consideration of compliance alternatives should take into account all existing and proposed conditions to determine their acceptability. The compliance alternatives are not all-inclusive and do not preclude consideration and approval of other alternatives by any enforcement authority. (1)  Compliance alternatives for an inadequate number of exits include, but are not limited to, the following: a.  Provide connecting fire-exit balconies acceptable to the enforcement authority between buildings; b.  Provide alternative exits or egress facilities leading to safety outside the building or to a place of safe refuge in the building or an adjoining building as acceptable to the enforcement authority; c.  Provide an exterior fire escape or escapes as acceptable to the enforcement authority where the providing of enclosed interior or enclosed exterior stairs is not practical; or d.  Install early fire warning and fire suppression systems. (2)  Compliance alternatives for excessive travel distances to an approved exit include, but are not limited to, the following: a.  Install an approved smoke detection system throughout the building; b.  Install an approved completely automatic fire suppression system; c.  Subdivide the exit travel route with smoke-top doors acceptable to the enforcement authority; d.  Increase the fire resistance rating of corridor walls and doors; or e.  Provide additional approved means of escape. (3)  Compliance alternatives for unenclosed or improperly enclosed exit stairways or vertical shafts include, but are not limited to, the following: a.  Improve enclosure of exit stairway; b.  Add a partial fire suppression system; c.  Add a sprinkler draft curtain; or d.  Add a smoke detection system. (4)  Compliance alternatives for inadequate or a total lack of fire partitions or fire separation walls shall be as set forth in subsection (3) hereinabove. (5)  Compliance alternatives for a lack of required protection of openings in exterior walls where a fire exposure is a risk include, but are not limited to, the following: a.  Improve fire resistance of existing openings and protect them with fire-related windows or doors as appropriate; b.  Seal the openings with fire-related construction as approved by the enforcement authority; or c.  Install an approved fire suppression system. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1) 
Sec. 7-5-13. - Appeals.     Should a party not agree with a decision of the enforcement authority or should an enforcement authority desire a ruling, an appeal may be made to the hearings board as provided for in this Code. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1; Ord. of 12-5-2000, § 1) 
Sec. 7-5-14. - Landmark museum buildings. (a)  The provisions of this subsection relating to landmark museum buildings shall apply only to those portions of such buildings which meet all the requirements of landmark museum buildings, except as otherwise provided in subsections (b) and (c) of this section. Subsection (b) and (c) of this section shall, unless otherwise provided, preempt all laws, regulations, or rules governing reconstruction, alteration, repair, or maintenance of landmark museum buildings. (b)  A landmark museum building shall be subject to the following provisions: (1)  Repairs, maintenance, and restoration shall be allowed without conformity to any building or fire safety related code, standard, rule, or regulation, provided the building is brought into and remains in full compliance with this section; (2)  In case of fire or other casualty to a landmark museum building, it may be rebuilt, in total or in part, using such techniques and materials as are necessary to restore it to the condition prior to the fire or casualty and use as a totally preserved building; or (3)  If a historic building or structure, as a result of proposed work or changes in use, would become eligible and would be so certified as a landmark museum building, and the State Historic Preservation Officer so certifies and such is submitted to the local fire and building code official with the construction or building permit application, then the work may proceed under the provisions of this section. (c)  All landmark museum buildings shall comply with the following requirements: (1)  Every landmark museum building shall have portable fire extinguishers as deemed appropriate by the local fire authority having jurisdiction based on the applicable state or local fire safety codes or regulations. (2)  All landmark museum buildings which contain residential units shall have electrically powered smoke or products of combustion detectors installed within each living unit between living and sleeping areas. Such detectors shall be continuously powered by the building's electrical system. When activated, the detector shall initiate an alarm which is audible in the sleeping rooms of that living unit. These unit detectors shall be required in addition to any other protective system that may be installed in the building. (3)  For all landmark museum buildings, except those protected by a total automatic fire suppression system and one- and two-family dwellings, approved automatic fire warning protection shall be provided as follows: Install at least one listed smoke or products of combustion detector for every 1,200 square feet of floor area per floor or story. In addition, all lobbies, common corridors, hallways, and ways of exit access shall be provided with listed smoke or products of combustion detectors not more than 30 feet apart. Detectors shall be so connected as to sound an alarm audible throughout the structure or building. With respect to buildings which are totally protected by an automatic fire suppression system, activation of the sprinkler system shall sound an alarm throughout the structure or building. (4)  Smoke or products of combustion detectors shall be listed by a nationally recognized testing laboratory. (5)  All multistory landmark museum buildings, except one- and two-family dwellings, with occupancy above or below the street or grade level, shall have manual fire alarm pull stations in the natural path of egress. The activation of a manual pull station shall cause the building fire warning system to sound. (6)  Approved exit signs shall be located where designated by the authority having jurisdiction in accordance with the applicable code, standard, rule, or regulation. (7)  Except for one- and two-family dwellings, every landmark museum building occupied after daylight, or which has occupied areas subject to being totally darkened during daylight hours due to a power failure or failure of the electrical system, shall be equipped with approved emergency lighting meeting the provisions of the applicable code, standard, rule, or regulation. (8)  Occupant loading of landmark museum buildings or structures shall be limited by either the actual structural floor load capacity or by the limitations of means of egress or by a combination of factors. Actual floor load capacity shall be determined by a Georgia-registered professional engineer. Such floor load shall be posted at a conspicuous location. The building owner shall submit evidence of this certification and related computations to the enforcement authority having jurisdiction upon request. Where one or more floors of a landmark museum building have only one means of egress, the occupant load shall be computed and occupancy limited as determined by the fire marshal. (9)  The electrical, heating and mechanical systems of landmark museum buildings shall be inspected and any conditions that create a threat of fire or a threat of life shall be corrected in accordance with applicable standards to the extent deemed necessary by the authority having jurisdiction. (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1) 
Sec. 7-5-15. - Historic buildings. (a)  Historic buildings not classified as landmark museum buildings shall meet the requirements of applicable building and fire safety laws, ordinances, codes, standards, rules, or regulations as they pertain to existing buildings. If a historic building or structure is damaged from fire or other casualty, it may be restored to the condition prior to the fire or casualty using techniques and methods consistent with its original construction, or it shall meet the requirements for new construction of the applicable codes, standards, rules or regulations, provided these requirements do not significantly compromise the features for which the building was considered historically significant. (b)  As to any buildings or structures in Athens-Clarke County which have been designated as historic buildings or structures by the mayor and commission or lawfully constituted designated officer, the appropriate enforcement authority, in granting or denying a variance, shall consider the intent of this chapter, with special attention to section 7-5-14 of this chapter, article 3 of chapter 2 of title 8 of the O.C.G.A., "The Uniform Act for Application of Building and Fire Related Codes to Existing Buildings, article 2 of chapter 10 of title 44 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Historic Preservation Act," and the Secretary of Interior's "Standards for Preservation Projects." (Ord. of 1-5-93, § 1; Ord. of 7-2-96, § 1; Ord. of 7-6-99, § 1) 